PAPERS RELATING TO THE
FOREIGN RELATIONS OF THE
See PE FLV ao

1926

VOLUME I

(IN TWO VOLUMES)

 

DEPARTMENT OF STATE
WASHINGTON

Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States,
1926,

Volume I
United States Government Printing Office
Washington
U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
This ebook was generated on May 26, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition
The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked
on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the
United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and
more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the
full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other
reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including
bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the
ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet
connectivity.
In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity
with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is
representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For
readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing
document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are
persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the
subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use
page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page
number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.
The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-
free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email
history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.
To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative
in general, visit our ebooks homepage , and follow us on Twitter at
@HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState .
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Contents
Message of the president of the United States to Congress,
December 7, 1926
List of Papers
General:
Proposal of the United States to adhere, with
reservations, to the protocol of the Permanent Court of
International Justice (Documents 1-34)
Participation of the United States in the work of the
Preparatory 
Commission 
for 
the 
Disarmament
Conference (Documents 35-90)
Discontinuance of the office of American Unofficial
Observer, Reparation Commission (Documents 91-96)
Proposed disposition of property held by the Alien
Property Custodian (Documents 97-111)
Submission to the Senate of the international
convention relating to the regulation of aerial
navigation, done at Paris, October 13, 1919 (Documents
112-112)
Convention between the United States and other powers
revising the international sanitary convention of
January 17, 1912, signed June 21, 1926 (Documents
113-119)
Preliminary Conference on Oil Pollution of Navigable
Waters, Washington, June 8–16, 1926 (Documents 120-
120)

Sympathetic attitude of the United States toward efforts
by the League of Nations for the suppression of slavery
(Documents 121-124)
Statement to certain foreign Governments regarding
efforts of the United States to control the production of
and traffic in narcotic drugs (Documents 125-125)
Efforts by the United States to prevent the injection of
political questions into the proceedings of the Bolívar
Congress at Panama (Documents 126-137)
Tacna-Arica arbitration: termination of the plebiscite
(Documents 138-335)
Renewal of good offices by the United States in regard
to the Tacna-Arica controversy and rejection by Peru of
the proposed settlement (Documents 336-362)
Boundary disputes
Bolivia and Paraguay (Documents 363-366)
Colombia and Peru (Documents 367-376)
Costa Rica and Panama (Documents 377-378)
Dominican Republic and Haiti (Documents
379-383)
Privileges and immunities of persons belonging to
foreign diplomatic missions in the United States
(Documents 384-386)
Rulings by the Department of State with regard to
presumption of expatriation of naturalized citizens in
certain cases (Documents 387-389)

Reply by the Department of State to questionnaires on
international law submitted by the League of Nations
(Documents 390-390)
Afghanistan:
Proposal for the establishment of diplomatic and
consular representation between the United States and
Afghanistan (Documents 391-392)
Argentina:
Request to the Argentine Government that American
arms manufacturers be given the same consideration as
those of other nations (Documents 393-396)
Bolivia:
Representations by the United States to Bolivia
regarding petroleum concessions containing clauses
discriminating against American citizens (Documents
397-401)
Boundary dispute with Paraguay. (See under General.)
Brazil:
Proposed treaty of friendship, commerce and consular
rights between the United States and Brazil (Documents
402-403)
Renewal of contract for American Naval Mission to
Brazil, signed November 6, 1922 (Documents 404-406)
Proposals to stimulate the production of rubber in the
Amazon Valley (Documents 407-410)
Canada:

Approval by the United States of proposal by the
British Government for the appointment of a Canadian
Minister at Washington (Documents 411-414)
Continued protests by the Canadian Government
against increased diversion of the waters of the Great
Lakes (Documents 415-422)
China:
Civil war in North China: International naval
demonstration at Taku; overthrow of the Provisional
Government of Tuan Chi-jui (Documents 423-455)
Invasion of the Yangtze Valley by the Southern
Nationalist forces and measures taken for the protection
of American interests (Documents 456-531)
Decision of the United States to await developments
before recognizing any faction claiming to act with
authority for China (Documents 532-549)
Protection of American missionary interests endangered
by antiforeign movement in South China (Documents
550-580)
Policy of the United States with respect to protection of
American interests during Chinese boycotts and strikes
at Canton and Tientsin (Documents 581-603)
Forced levies upon American business in China
(Documents 604-605)
Continuation of the embargo on shipments of arms to
China (Documents 606-610)
Recommendation of the Minister in China that
American troops stationed at Tientsin be withdrawn

(Documents 611-612)
The Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff
(Documents 613-651)
Efforts of the United States and other powers to meet
situation created by imposition in China of taxes in
conflict with treaty provisions (Documents 652-723)
Protests by the United States and other powers against
Chinese financial measures diverting revenues from
payment of foreign loans in default (Documents 724-
741)
Disinclination of the United States to intervene to
prevent paralyzing of Chinese customs service at
Hankow by strike (Documents 742-743)
The Commission on Extraterritoriality in China,
provided for by Resolution V of the Washington
Conference (Documents 744-758)
Abrogation by China of the Sino-Belgian Treaty of
November 2, 1865 (Documents 759-773)
Chinese protest against the adherence of certain powers
to the Nine-Power Treaty concerning China, signed
February 6, 1922 (Documents 774-793)
Rendition of the Shanghai Mixed Court to the Kiangsu
Provincial Government (Documents 794-808)
Continued support by the United States to the Federal
Telegraph Company in efforts to obtain execution of its
contract with the Chinese Government (Documents
809-842)

Disapproval by the Department of State of proposed
grant of oil monopoly by the Canton Government to the
Standard Oil Company (Documents 843-850)
Attitude of the United States toward the demand of the
Chinese Government for the recall of the Soviet
Ambassador in China (Documents 851-853)
Right of American citizens to bring suits in Chinese
courts against the Government of China (Documents
854-854)
Status of persons of Chinese race in China claiming
American citizenship (Documents 855-858)
Index

Message of the president of the United States to
Congress, December 7, 1926
MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESS: In reporting to the Congress the state of the Union, I find
it impossible to characterize it other than one of general peace and
prosperity. In some quarters our diplomacy is vexed with difficult and as yet
unsolved problems, but nowhere are we met with armed conflict. If some
occupations and areas are not flourishing, in none does there remain any
acute chronic depression. What the country requires is not so much new
policies as a steady continuation of those which are already being crowned
with such abundant success. It can not be too often repeated that in common
with all the world we are engaged in liquidating the war.
In the present short session no great amount of new legislation is possible,
but in order to comprehend what is most desirable some survey of our
general situation is necessary. A large amount of time is consumed in the
passage of appropriation bills. If each Congress in its opening session
would make appropriations to continue for two years, very much time
would be saved which could either be devoted to a consideration of the
general needs of the country or would result in decreasing the work of
legislation.
ECONOMY
Our present state of prosperity has been greatly promoted by three
important causes, one of which is economy, resulting in reduction and
reform in national taxation. Another is the elimination of many kinds of
waste. The third is a general raising of the standards of efficiency. This
combination has brought the perfectly astonishing result of a reduction in
the index price of commodities and an increase in the index rate of wages.
We have secured a lowering of the cost to produce and a raising of the
ability to consume. Prosperity resulting from these causes rests on the
securest of all foundations. It gathers strength from its own progress.
In promoting this progress the chief part which the National Government
plays lies in the field of economy. Whatever doubts may have been

entertained as to the necessity of this policy and the beneficial results which
would accrue from it to all the people of the Nation, its wisdom must now
be considered thoroughly demonstrated. It may not have appeared to be a
novel or perhaps brilliant conception, but it has turned out to be
preeminently sound. It has not failed to work. It has surely brought results.
It does not have to be excused as a temporary expedient adopted as the
lesser evil to remedy some abuse, it is not a palliative seeking to treat
symptoms, but a major operation for the eradication at the source of a large
number of social diseases.
Nothing is easier than the expenditure of public money. It does not appear
to belong to anybody. The temptation is overwhelming to bestow it on
somebody. But the results of extravagance are ruinous. The property of the
country, like the freedom of the country, belongs to the people of the
country. They have not empowered their Government to take a dollar of it
except for a necessary public purpose. But if the Constitution conferred
such right, sound economics would forbid it. Nothing is more destructive of
the progress of the Nation than Government extravagance. It means an
increase in the burden of taxation, dissipation of the returns from enterprise,
a decrease in the real value of wages, with ultimate stagnation and decay.
The whole theory of our institutions is based on the liberty and
independence of the individual. He is dependent on himself for support and
therefore entitled to the rewards of his own industry. He is not to be
deprived of what he earns that others may be benefited by what they do not
earn. What he saves through his private effort is not to be wasted by
Government extravagance.
Our national activities have become so vast that it is necessary to scrutinize
each item of public expenditure if we are to apply the principle of economy.
At the last session we made an immediate increase in the annual budget of
more than $100,000,000 in benefits conferred on the veterans of three wars,
public buildings, and river and harbor improvement. Many projects are
being broached requiring further large outlays. I am convinced that it would
be greatly for the welfare of the country if we avoid at the present session
all commitments except those of the most pressing nature. From a reduction
of the debt and taxes will accrue a wider benefit to all the people of this
country than from embarking on any new enterprise. When our war debt is

decreased we shall have resources for expansion. Until that is accomplished
we should confine ourselves to expenditures of the most urgent necessity.
The Department of Commerce has performed a most important function in
making plans and securing support of all kinds of national enterprise for the
elimination of waste. Efficiency has been greatly promoted through good
management and the constantly increasing cooperation of the wage earners
throughout the whole realm of private business. It is my opinion that this
whole development has been predicated on the foundation of a protective
tariff.
 
TAX REDUCTION
As a result of economy of administration by the Executive and of
appropriation by the Congress, the end of this fiscal year will leave a
surplus in the Treasury estimated at $383,000,000. Unless otherwise
ordered, such surplus is used for the retirement of the war debt. A bond
which can be retired to-day for 100 cents will cost the people 104¼ cents to
retire a year from now. While I favor a speedy reduction of the debt as
already required by law and in accordance with the promises made to the
holders of our Liberty bonds when they were issued, there is no reason why
a balanced portion of surplus revenue should not be applied to a reduction
of taxation. It can not be repeated too often that the enormous revenues of
this Nation could not be collected without becoming a charge on all the
people whether or not they directly pay taxes. Everyone who is paying for
the bare necessities of food and shelter and clothing, without considering
the better things of life, is indirectly paying a national tax. The nearly
20,000,000 owners of securities, the additional scores of millions of holders
of insurance policies and depositors in savings banks, are all paying a
national tax. Millions of individuals and corporations are making a direct
contribution to the National Treasury which runs from 1½ to 25 per cent of
their income, besides a number of special requirements, like automobile and
admission taxes. Whenever the state of the Treasury will permit, I believe in
a reduction of taxation. I think the taxpayers are entitled to it. But I am not
advocating tax reduction merely for the benefit of the taxpayer; I am
advocating it for the benefit of the country.

If it appeared feasible, I should welcome permanent tax reduction at this
time. The estimated surplus, however, for June 30, 1928, is not much larger
than is required in a going business of nearly $4,000,000,000. We have had
but a few months’ experience under the present revenue act and shall need
to know what is developed by the returns of income produced under it,
which are not required to be made until about the time this session
terminates, and what the economic probabilities of the country are in the
latter part of 1927, before we can reach any justifiable conclusion as to
permanent tax reduction. Moreover the present surplus results from many
nonrecurrent items. Meantime, it is possible to grant some real relief by a
simple measure making reductions in the payments which accrue on the
15th of March and June, 1927. I am very strongly of the conviction that this
is so much a purely business matter that it ought not to be dealt with in a
partisan spirit. The Congress has already set the notable example of treating
tax problems without much reference to party, which might well be
continued. What I desire to advocate most earnestly is relief for the country
from unnecessary tax burdens. We can not secure that if we stop to engage
in a partisan controversy. As I do not think any change in the special taxes,
or any permanent reduction is practical, I therefore urge both parties of the
House Ways and Means Committee to agree on a bill granting the
temporary relief which I have indicated. Such a reduction would directly
affect millions of taxpayers, release large sums for investment in new
enterprise, stimulating industrial production and agricultural consumption,
and indirectly benefiting every family in the whole country. These are my
convictions stated with full knowledge that it is for the Congress to decide
whether they judge it best to make such a reduction or leave the surplus for
the present year to be applied to retirement of the war debt. That also is
eventually tax reduction.
PROTECTIVE TARIFF
It is estimated that customs receipts for the present fiscal year will exceed
$615,000,000, the largest which were ever secured from that source. The
value of our imports for the last fiscal year was $4,466,000,000, an increase
of more than 71 per cent since the present tariff law went into effect. Of
these imports about 65 per cent, or, roughly, $2,900,000,000, came in free
of duty, which means that the United States affords a duty-free market to

other countries almost equal in value to the total imports of Germany and
greatly exceeding the total imports of France. We have admitted a greater
volume of free imports than any other country except England.
We are, therefore, levying duties on about $1,550,000,000 of imports.
Nearly half of this, or $700,000,000, is subject to duties for the protection
of agriculture and have their origin in countries other than Europe. They
substantially increased the prices received by our farmers for their produce.
About $300,000,000 more is represented by luxuries such as costly rugs,
furs, precious stones, etc. This leaves only about $550,000,000 of our
imports under a schedule of duties which is in general under consideration
when there is discussion of lowering the tariff. While the duties on this
small portion, representing only about 12 per cent of our imports,
undoubtedly represent the difference between a fair degree of prosperity or
marked depression to many of our industries and the difference between
good pay and steady work or wide unemployment to many of our wage
earners, it is impossible to conceive how other countries or our own
importers could be greatly benefited if these duties are reduced. Those who
are starting an agitation for a reduction of tariff duties, partly at least for the
benefit of those to whom money has been lent abroad, ought to know that
there does not seem to be a very large field within the area of our imports in
which probable reductions would be advantageous to foreign goods. Those
who wish to benefit foreign producers are much more likely to secure that
result by continuing the present enormous purchasing power which comes
from our prosperity that has increased our imports over 71 per cent in four
years than from any advantages that are likely to accrue from a general
tariff reduction.
AGRICULTURE
The important place which agriculture holds in the economic and social life
of the Nation can not be overestimated. The National Government is
justified in putting forth every effort to make the open country a desirable
place to live. No condition meets this requirement which fails to supply a
fair return on labor expended and capital invested. While some localities
and some particular crops furnish exceptions, in general agriculture is
continuing to make progress in recovering from the depression of 1921 and

1922. Animal products and food products are in a more encouraging
position, while cotton, due to the high prices of past years supplemented by
ideal weather conditions, has been stimulated to a point of temporary
overproduction. Acting on the request of the cotton-growing interests, I
appointed a committee to assist in carrying out their plans. As a result of
this cooperation sufficient funds have been pledged to finance the storage
and carrying of 4,000,000 bales of cotton. Whether those who own the
cotton are willing to put a part of their stock into this plan depends on
themselves. The Federal Government has cooperated in providing ample
facilities. No method of meeting the situation would be adequate which
does not contemplate a reduction of about one-third in the acreage for the
coming year. The responsibility for making the plan effective lies with those
who own and finance cotton and cotton lands.
The Department of Agriculture estimates the net income of agriculture for
the year 1920–21 at only $375,000,000; for 1924–25, $2,656,000,000; for
1925–26, $2,757,000,000. This increase has been brought about in part by
the method already referred to, of Federal tax reduction, the elimination of
waste, and increased efficiency in industry. The wide gap that existed a few
years ago between the index price of agricultural products and the index
price of other products has been gradually closing up, though the recent
depression in cotton has somewhat enlarged it. Agriculture had on the
whole been going higher while industry had been going lower. Industrial
and commercial activities, being carried on for the most part by
corporations, are taxed at a much higher rate than farming, which is carried
on by individuals. This will inevitably make industrial commodity costs
high while war taxation lasts. It is because of this circumstance that national
tax reduction has a very large indirect benefit upon the farmer, though it can
not relieve him from the very great burden of the local taxes which he pays
directly. We have practically relieved the farmer of any Federal income tax.
There is agreement on all sides that some portions of our agricultural
industry have lagged behind other industries in recovery from the war and
that further improvement in methods of marketing of agricultural products
is most desirable. There is belief also that the Federal Government can
further contribute to these ends beyond the many helpful measures taken

during the last five years through the different acts of Congress for
advancing the interests of the farmers.
The packers and stockyards act,
Establishing of the intermediate credit banks for agricultural
purposes,
The Purnell Act for agricultural research,
The Capper-Volstead Cooperative Marketing Act,
The cooperative marketing act of 1926,
Amendments to the warehousing act,
The enlargement of the activities of the Department of
Agriculture,
Enlargement of the scope of loans by the Farm Loan Board,
The tariff on agricultural products,
The large Federal expenditure in improvement of waterways and
highways,
The reduction of Federal taxes,
in all comprise a great series of governmental actions in the advancement of
the special interest of agriculture.
In determination of what further measures may be undertaken it seems to
me there are certain pitfalls which must be avoided and our test in avoiding
them should be to avoid disaster to the farmer himself.
Acting upon my recommendation, the Congress has ordered the Interstate
Commerce Commission to investigate the freight-rate structure, directing
that such changes shall be made in freight rates as will promote freedom of
movement of agricultural products. Railroad consolidation which I am

advocating would also result in a situation where rates could be made more
advantageous for farm produce, as has recently been done in the revision of
rates on fertilizers in the South. Additional benefit will accrue from the
development of our inland waterways. The Mississippi River system carries
a commerce of over 50,000,000 tons at a saving of nearly $18,000,000
annually. The Inland Waterways Corporation operates boats on 2,500 miles
of navigable streams and through its relation with 165 railroads carries
freight into and out of 45 States of the Union. During the past six months it
has handled over 1,000,000 bushels of grain monthly and by its lower
freight rates has raised the price of such grain to the farmer probably 2½
cents to 3 cents a bushel. The highway system on which the Federal
Government expends about $85,000,000 a year is of vital importance to the
rural regions.
The advantages to be derived from a more comprehensive and less
expensive system of transportation for agriculture ought to be supplemented
by provision for an adequate supply of fertilizer at a lower cost than it is at
present obtainable. This advantage we are attempting to secure by the
proposed development at Muscle Shoals, and there are promising
experiments being made in synthetic chemistry for the production of
nitrates.
A survey should be made of the relation of Government grazing lands to the
livestock industry. Additional legislation is desirable more definitely to
establish the place of grazing in the administration of the national forests,
properly subordinated to their functions of producing timber and conserving
the water supply. Over 180,000,000 acres of grazing lands are still pastured
as commons in the public domain with little or no regulation. This has made
their use so uncertain that it has contributed greatly to the instability of the
livestock industry. Very little of this land is suited to settlement or private
ownership. Some plan ought to be adopted for its use in grazing,
corresponding broadly to that already successfully applied to the national
forests.
The development of sound and strong cooperative associations is of
fundamental importance to our agriculture. It is encouraging to note,
therefore, that a vigorous and healthy growth in the cooperative movement

is continuing. Cooperative associations reporting to the Department of
Agriculture at the end of 1925 had on their membership rolls a total of
2,700,000 producers. Their total business in 1925 amounted to
approximately $2,400,000,000, compared with $635,800,000 in 1915.
Legislative action to assist cooperative associations and supplement their
efforts was passed at the last session of Congress. Important credit measures
were also provided by Congress in 1923 which have been of inestimable
value to the cooperative associations. Although the Federal credit agencies
have served agriculture well, I think it may be possible to broaden and
strengthen the service of these institutions.
Attention is again directed to the surplus problem of agriculture by the
present cotton situation. Surpluses often affect prices of various farm
commodities in a disastrous manner, and the problem urgently demands a
solution. Discussions both in and out of Congress during the past few years
have given us a better understanding of the subject, and it is my hope that
out of the various proposals made the basis will be found for a sound and
effective solution upon which agreement can be reached. In my opinion
cooperative marketing associations will be important aids to the ultimate
solution of the problem. It may well be, however, that additional measures
will be needed to supplement their efforts. I believe all will agree that such
measures should not conflict with the best interests of the cooperatives, but
rather assist and strengthen them. In working out this problem to any sound
conclusion it is necessary to avoid putting the Government into the business
of production or marketing or attempting to enact legislation for the purpose
of price fixing. The farmer does not favor any attempted remedies that
partake of these elements. He has a sincere and candid desire for assistance.
If matched by an equally sincere and candid consideration of the different
remedies proposed, a sound measure of relief ought to result. It is
unfortunate that no general agreement has been reached by the various
agricultural interests upon any of the proposed remedies. Out of the
discussion of various proposals which can be had before the Committees of
Agriculture some measure ought to be perfected which would be generally
satisfactory.
Due to the emergency arising from a heavy tropical storm in southern
Florida, I authorized the Secretary of Agriculture to use certain funds in

anticipation of legislation to enable the farmers in that region to plant their
crops. The department will present a bill ratifying the loans which were
made for this purpose.
Federal legislation has been adopted authorizing the cooperation of the
Government with States and private owners in the protection of forest lands
from fire. This preventive measure is of such great importance that I have
recommended for it an increased appropriation.
Another preventive measure of great economic and sanitary importance is
the eradication of tuberculosis in cattle. Active work is now in progress in
one-fourth of the counties of the United States to secure this result. Over
12,000,000 cattle have been under treatment, and the average degree of
infection has fallen from 4.9 per cent to 2.8 per cent. The Federal
Government is making substantial expenditures for this purpose.
Serious damage is threatened to the corn crop by the European corn borer.
Since 1917 it has spread from eastern New England westward into Indiana
and now covers about 100,000 square miles. It is one of the most
formidable pests because it spreads rapidly and is exceedingly difficult of
control. It has assumed a menace that is of national magnitude and warrants
the Federal Government in extending its cooperation to the State and local
agencies which are attempting to prevent its further spread and secure its
eradication.
The whole question of agriculture needs most careful consideration. In the
past few years the Government has given this subject more attention than
any other and has held more consultations in relation to it than on any other
subject. While the Government is not to be blamed for failure to perform
the impossible, the agricultural regions are entitled to know that they have
its constant solicitude and sympathy. Many of the farmers are burdened
with debts and taxes which they are unable to carry. We are expending in
this country many millions of dollars each year to increase farm production.
We ought now to put more emphasis on the question of farm marketing. If a
sound solution of a permanent nature can be found for this problem, the
Congress ought not to hesitate to adopt it.
DEVELOPMENT OF WATER RESOURCES

In previous messages I have referred to the national importance of the
proper development of our water resources. The great projects of extension
of the Mississippi system, the protection and development of the lower
Colorado River, are before Congress, and I have previously commented
upon them. I favor the necessary legislation to expedite these projects.
Engineering studies are being made for connecting the Great Lakes with the
North Atlantic, either through an all-American canal or by way of the St.
Lawrence River. These reports will undoubtedly be before the Congress
during its present session. It is unnecessary to dwell upon the great
importance of such a waterway not only to our mid-continental basin but to
the commerce and development of practically the whole Nation. Our river
and harbor improvement should be continued in accordance with the
present policy. Expenditure of this character is compatible with economy; it
is in the nature of capital investment. Work should proceed on the basic
trunk lines if this work is to be a success. If the country will be content to
be moderate and patient and permit improvements to be made where they
will do the greatest general good, rather than insisting on expenditures at
this time on secondary projects, our internal waterways can be made a
success. If proposed legislation results in a gross manifestation of local
jealousies and selfishness, this program can not be carried out. Ultimately
we can take care of extensions, but our first effort should be confined to the
main arteries.
Our inland commerce has been put to great inconvenience and expense by
reason of the lowering of the water level of the Great Lakes. This is an
international problem on which competent engineers are making reports.
Out of their study it is expected that a feasible method will be developed for
raising the level to provide relief for our commerce and supply water for
drainage. Whenever a practical plan is presented it ought to be speedily
adopted.
RECLAMATION
It is increasingly evident that the Federal Government must in the future
take a leading part in the impounding of water for conservation with
incidental power for the development of the irrigable lands of the arid
region. The unused waters of the West are found mainly in large rivers.

Works to store and distribute these have such magnitude and cost that they
are not attractive to private enterprise. Water is the irreplaceable natural
resource. Its precipitation can not be increased. Its storage on the higher
reaches of streams, to meet growing needs, to be used repeatedly as it flows
toward the seas, is a practical and prudent business policy.
The United States promises to follow the course of older irrigation
countries, where recent important irrigation developments have been carried
out as national undertakings. It is gratifying, therefore, that conditions on
Federal reclamation projects have become satisfactory. The gross value of
crops grown with water from project works increased from $110,000,000 in
1924 to $131,000,000 in 1925. The adjustments made last year by Congress
relieved irrigators from paying construction costs on unprofitable land, and
by so doing inspired new hope and confidence in ability to meet the
payments required. Construction payments by water users last year were the
largest in the history of the bureau.
The anticipated reclamation fund will be fully absorbed for a number of
years in the completion of old projects and the construction of projects
inaugurated in the past three years. We should, however, continue to
investigate and study the possibilities of a carefully planned development of
promising projects, logically of governmental concern because of their
physical magnitude, immense cost, and the interstate and international
problems involved. Only in this way may we be fully prepared to meet
intelligently the needs of our fast-growing population in the years to come.
TRANSPORTATION
It would be difficult to conceive of any modern activity which contributes
more to the necessities and conveniences of life than transportation.
Without it our present agricultural production and practically all of our
commerce would be completely prostrated. One of the large contributing
causes to the present highly satisfactory state of our economic condition is
the prompt and dependable service, surpassing all our previous records,
rendered by the railroads. This power has been fostered by the spirit of
cooperation between Federal and State regulatory commissions. To render
this service more efficient and effective and to promote a more scientific
regulation, the process of valuing railroad properties should be simplified

and the primary valuations should be completed as rapidly as possible. The
problem of rate reduction would be much simplified by a process of
railroad consolidations. This principle has already been adopted as Federal
law. Experience has shown that a more effective method must be provided.
Studies have already been made and legislation introduced seeking to
promote this end. It would be of great advantage if it could be taken up at
once and speedily enacted. The railroad systems of the country and the
convenience of all the people are waiting on this important decision.
MERCHANT MARINE
It is axiomatic that no agricultural and industrial country can get the full
benefit of its own advantages without a merchant marine. We have been
proceeding under the act of Congress that contemplates the establishment of
trade routes to be ultimately transferred to private ownership and operation.
Due to temporary conditions abroad and at home we have a large demand
just now for certain types of freight vessels. Some suggestion has been
made for new construction. I do not feel that we are yet warranted in
entering that field. Such ships as we might build could not be sold after they
are launched for anywhere near what they would cost. We have expended
over $250,000,000 out of the public Treasury in recent years to make up the
losses of operation, not counting depreciation or any cost whatever of our
capital investment. The great need of our merchant marine is not for more
ships but for more freight. Our merchants are altogether too indifferent
about using American ships for the transportation of goods which they send
abroad or bring home. Some of our vessels necessarily need repairs, which
should be made. I do not believe that the operation of our fleet is as
economical and efficient as it could be made if placed under a single
responsible head, leaving the Shipping Board free to deal with general
matters of policy and regulation.
RADIO LEGISLATION
The Department of Commerce has for some years urgently presented the
necessity for further legislation in order to protect radio listeners from
interference between broadcasting stations and to carry out other regulatory
functions. Both branches of Congress at the last session passed enactments

intended to effect such regulation, but the two bills yet remain to be brought
into agreement and final passage.
Due to decisions of the courts, the authority of the department under the law
of 1912 has broken down; many more stations have been operating than can
be accommodated within the limited number of wave lengths available;
further stations are in course of construction; many stations have departed
from the scheme of allocation set down by the department, and the whole
service of this most important public function has drifted into such chaos as
seems likely, if not remedied, to destroy its great value. I most urgently
recommend that this legislation should be speedily enacted.
I do not believe it is desirable to set up further independent agencies in the
Government. Rather I believe it advisable to entrust the important functions
of deciding who shall exercise the privilege of radio transmission and under
what conditions, the assigning of wave lengths and determination of power,
to a board to be assembled whenever action on such questions becomes
necessary. There should be right of appeal to the courts from the decisions
of such board. The administration of the decisions of the board and the
other features of regulation and promotion of radio in the public interest,
together with scientific research, should remain in the Department of
Commerce. Such an arrangement makes for more expert, more efficient,
and more economical administration than an independent agency or board,
whose duties, after initial stages, require but little attention, in which
administrative functions are confused with semijudicial functions and from
which of necessity there must be greatly increased personnel and
expenditure.
THE WAGE EARNER
The great body of our people are made up of wage earners. Several hundred
thousands of them are on the pay rolls of the United States Government.
Their condition very largely is fixed by legislation. We have recently
provided increases in compensation under a method of reclassification and
given them the advantage of a liberal retirement system as a support for
their declining years. Most of them are under the merit system, which is a
guaranty of their intelligence, and the efficiency of their service is a

demonstration of their loyalty. The Federal Government should continue to
set a good example for all other employers.
In the industries the condition of the wage earner has steadily improved.
The 12-hour day is almost entirely unknown. Skilled labor is well
compensated. But there are unfortunately a multitude of workers who have
not yet come to share in the general prosperity of the Nation. Both the
public authorities and private enterprise should be solicitous to advance the
welfare of this class. The Federal Government has been seeking to secure
this end through a protective tariff, through restrictive immigration, through
requiring safety devices for the prevention of accidents, through the
granting of workman’s compensation, through civilian vocational
rehabilitation and education, through employment information bureaus, and
through such humanitarian relief as was provided in the maternity and
infancy legislation. It is a satisfaction to report that a more general
condition of contentment exists among wage earners and the country is
more free from labor disputes than it has been for years. While restrictive
immigration has been adopted in part for the benefit of the wage earner, and
in its entirety for the benefit of the country, it ought not to cause a needless
separation of families and dependents from their natural source of support
contrary to the dictates of humanity.
BITUMINOUS COAL
No progress appears to have been made within large areas of the bituminous
coal industry toward creation of voluntary machinery by which greater
assurance can be given to the public of peaceful adjustment of wage
difficulties such as has been accomplished in the anthracite industry. This
bituminous industry is one of primary necessity and bears a great
responsibility to the Nation for continuity of supplies. As the wage
agreements in the unionized section of the industry expire on April 1 next,
and as conflicts may result which may imperil public interest, and have for
many years often called for action of the Executive in protection of the
public, I again recommend the passage of such legislation as will assist the
Executive in dealing with such emergencies through a special temporary
board of conciliation and mediation and through administrative agencies for
the purpose of distribution of coal and protection of the consumers of coal

from profiteering. At present the Executive is not only without authority to
act but is actually prohibited by law from making any expenditure to meet
the emergency of a coal famine.
JUDICIARY
The Federal courts hold a high position in the administration of justice in
the world. While individual judicial officers have sometimes been subjected
to just criticism, the courts as a whole have maintained an exceedingly high
standard. The Congress may well consider the question of supplying fair
salaries and conferring upon the Supreme Court the same rule-making
power on the law side of the district courts that they have always possessed
on the equity side. A bill is also pending providing for retirement after a
certain number of years of service, although they have not been
consecutive, which should have your favorable consideration. These faithful
servants of the Government are about the last that remain to be provided for
in the postwar readjustments.
BANKING
There has been pending in Congress for nearly three years banking
legislation to clarify the national bank act and reasonably to increase the
powers of the national banks. I believe that within the limitation of sound
banking principles Congress should now and for the future place the
national banks upon a fair equality with their competitors, the State banks,
and I trust that means may be found so that the differences on branch-
banking legislation between the Senate and the House of Representatives
may be settled along sound lines and the legislation promptly enacted.
It would be difficult to overestimate the service which the Federal reserve
system has already rendered to the country. It is necessary only to recall the
chaotic condition of our banking organization at the time the Federal
reserve system was put into operation. The old system consisted of a vast
number of independent banking units, with scattered bank reserves which
never could be mobilized in times of greatest need. In spite of vast banking
resources, there was no coordination of reserves or any credit elasticity. As
a consequence, a strain was felt even during crop-moving periods and when
it was necessary to meet other seasonal and regularly recurring needs.

The Federal reserve system is not a panacea for all economic or financial
ills. It can not prevent depression in certain industries which are
experiencing overexpansion of production or contraction of their markets.
Its business is to furnish adequate credit and currency facilities. This it has
succeeded in doing, both during the war and in the more difficult period of
deflation and readjustment which followed. It enables us to look to the
future with confidence and to make plans far ahead, based on the belief that
the Federal reserve system will exercise a steadying influence on credit
conditions and thereby prevent any sudden or severe reactions from the
period of prosperity which we are now enjoying. In order that these plans
may go forward, action should be taken at the present session on the
question of renewing the banks’ charters and thereby insuring a
continuation of the policies and present usefulness of the Federal reserve
system.
FEDERAL REGULATION
I am in favor of reducing, rather than expanding, Government bureaus
which seek to regulate and control the business activities of the people.
Everyone is aware that abuses exist and will exist so long as we are limited
by human imperfections. Unfortunately, human nature can not be changed
by an act of the legislature. When practically the sole remedy for many evils
lies in the necessity of the people looking out for themselves and reforming
their own abuses, they will find that they are relying on a false security if
the Government assumes to hold out the promise that it is looking out for
them and providing reforms for them. This principle is preeminently
applicable to the National Government. It is too much assumed that because
an abuse exists it is the business of the National Government to provide a
remedy. The presumption should be that it is the business of local and State
governments. Such national action results in encroaching upon the salutary
independence of the States and by undertaking to supersede their natural
authority fills the land with bureaus and departments which are undertaking
to do what it is impossible for them to accomplish and brings our whole
system of government into disrespect and disfavor. We ought to maintain
high standards. We ought to punish wrongdoing. Society has not only the
privilege but the absolute duty of protecting itself and its individuals. But
we can not accomplish this end by adopting a wrong method. Permanent

success lies in local, rather than national action. Unless the locality rises to
its own requirements, there is an almost irresistible impulse for the National
Government to intervene. The States and the Nation should both realize that
such action is to be adopted only as a last resort.
THE NEGRO
The social well-being of our country requires our constant effort for the
amelioration of race prejudice and the extension to all elements of equal
opportunity and equal protection under the laws which are guaranteed by
the Constitution. The Federal Government especially is charged with this
obligation in behalf of the colored people of the Nation. Not only their
remarkable progress, their devotion and their loyalty, but our duty to
ourselves under our claim that we are an enlightened people requires us to
use all our power to protect them from the crime of lynching. Although
violence of this kind has very much decreased, while any of it remains we
can not justify neglecting to make every effort to eradicate it by law.
The education of the colored race under Government encouragement is
proceeding successfully and ought to have continuing support. An
increasing need exists for properly educated and trained medical skill to be
devoted to the service of this race.
INSULAR POSSESSIONS
This Government holds in sacred trusteeship islands which it has acquired
in the East and West Indies. In all of them the people are more prosperous
than at any previous time. A system of good roads, education, and general
development is in progress. The people are better governed than ever before
and generally content.
In the Philippine Islands Maj. Gen. Leonard Wood has been Governor
General for five years and has administered his office with tact and ability
greatly to the success of the Filipino people. These are a proud and sensitive
race, who are making such progress with our cooperation that we can view
the results of this experiment with great satisfaction. As we are attempting
to assist this race toward self-government, we should look upon their
wishes with great respect, granting their requests immediately when they

are right, yet maintaining a frank firmness in refusing when they are wrong.
We shall measure their progress in no small part by their acceptance of the
terms of the organic law under which the islands are governed and their
faithful observance of its provisions. Need exists for clarifying the duties of
the auditor and declaring them to be what everyone had supposed they
were. We have placed our own expenditures under the supervision of the
Comptroller General. It is not likely that the expenditures in the Philippine
Islands need less supervision than our own. The Governor General is
hampered in his selection of subordinates by the necessity of securing a
confirmation, which has oftentimes driven him to the expediency of using
Army officers in work for which civilian experts would be much better
fitted. Means should be provided for this and such other purposes as he may
require out of the revenue which this Government now turns back to the
Philippine treasury.
In order that these possessions might suffer no seeming neglect, I have
recently sent Col. Carmi A. Thompson to the islands to make a survey in
cooperation with the Governor General to suggest what might be done to
improve conditions. Later, I may make a more extended report including
recommendations. The economic development of the islands is very
important. They ought not to be turned back to the people until they are
both politically fitted for self-government and economically independent.
Large areas are adaptable to the production of rubber. No one contemplates
any time in the future either under the present or a more independent form
of government when we should not assume some responsibility for their
defense. For their economic advantage, for the employment of their people,
and as a contribution to our power of defense which could not be carried on
without rubber, I believe this industry should be encouraged. It is especially
adapted to the Filipino people themselves, who might cultivate it
individually on a small acreage. It could be carried on extensively by
American capital in a way to furnish employment at good wages. I am
opposed to the promotion of any policy that does not provide for absolute
freedom on the part of the wage earners and do not think we should
undertake to give power for large holdings of land in the islands against the
opposition of the people of the locality. Any development of the islands
must be solely with the first object of benefiting the people of the islands.

At an early day, these possessions should be taken out from under all
military control and administered entirely on the civil side of government.
 
NATIONAL DEFENSE
Our policy of national defense is not one of making war, but of insuring
peace. The land and sea force of America, both in its domestic and foreign
implications, is distinctly a peace force. It is an arm of the police power to
guarantee order and the execution of the law at home and security to our
citizens abroad. No self-respecting nation would neglect to provide an army
and navy proportionate to its population, the extent of its territory, and the
dignity of the place which it occupies in the world. When it is considered
that no navy in the world, with one exception, approaches ours and none
surpasses it, that our Regular Army of about 115,000 men is the equal of
any other like number of troops, that our entire permanent and reserve land
and sea force trained and training consists of a personnel of about 610,000,
and that our annual appropriations are about $680,000,000 a year, expended
under the direction of an exceedingly competent staff, it can not be said that
our country is neglecting its national defense. It is true that a cult of
disparagement exists, but that candid examination made by the Congress
through its various committees has always reassured the country and
demonstrated that it is maintaining the most adequate defensive forces in
these present years that it has ever supported in time of peace.
This general policy should be kept in effect. Here and there temporary
changes may be made in personnel to meet requirements in other directions.
Attention should be given to submarines, cruisers, and air forces. Particular
points may need strengthening, but as a whole our military power is
sufficient.
The one weak place in the whole line is our still stupendous war debt. In
any modern campaign the dollars are the shock troops. With a depleted
treasury in the rear, no army can maintain itself in the field. A country
loaded with debt is a country devoid of the first line of defense. Economy is
the handmaid of preparedness. If we wish to be able to defend ourselves to
the full extent of our power in the future, we shall discharge as soon as

possible the financial burden of the last war. Otherwise we would face a
crisis with a part of our capital resources already expended.
The amount and kind of our military equipment is preeminently a question
for the decision of the Congress, after giving due consideration to the
advice of military experts and the available public revenue. Nothing is more
laudable than the cooperation of the agricultural and industrial resources of
the country for the purpose of supplying the needs of national defense. In
time of peril the people employed in these interests volunteered in a most
self-sacrificing way, often at the nominal charge of a dollar a year. But the
Army and Navy are not supported for the benefit of supply concerns;
supply concerns are supported for the benefit of the Army and Navy. The
distribution of orders on what is needed from different concerns for the
purpose of keeping up equipment and organization is perfectly justified, but
any attempt to prevail upon the Government to purchase beyond its needs
ought not to be tolerated. It is eminently fair that those who deal with the
Government should do so at a reasonable profit. However, public money is
expended not that some one may profit by it, but in order to serve a public
purpose.
While our policy of national defense will proceed in order that we may be
independent and self-sufficient, I am opposed to engaging in any attempt at
competitive armaments. No matter how much or how little some other
country may feel constrained to provide, we can well afford to set the
example, not of being dictated to by others, but of adopting our own
standards. We are strong enough to pursue that method, which will be a
most wholesome model for the rest of the world. We are eminently
peaceful, but we are by no means weak. While we submit our differences
with others, not to the adjudication of force, but of reason, it is not because
we are unable to defend our rights. While we are doing our best to eliminate
all resort to war for the purpose of settling disputes, we can not but
remember that the peace we now enjoy had to be won by the sword and that
if the rights of our country are to be defended we can not rely for that
purpose upon anyone but ourselves. We can not shirk the responsibility,
which is the first requisite of all government, of preserving its own integrity
and maintaining the rights of its own citizens. It is only in accordance with

these principles that we can establish any lasting foundations for an
honorable and permanent peace.
It is for these reasons that our country, like any other country, proposes to
provide itself with an army and navy supported by a merchant marine. Yet
these are not for competition with any other power. For years we have
besought nations to disarm. We have recently expressed our willingness at
Geneva to enter into treaties for the limitation of all types of warships
according to the ratio adopted at the Washington Conference. This offer is
still pending. While we are and shall continue to be armed it is not as a
menace, but rather a common assurance of tranquillity to all the peace-
loving people of the world. For us to do any less would be to disregard our
obligations, evade our responsibilities, and jeopardize our national honor.
VETERANS
This country, not only because it is bound by honor but because of the
satisfaction derived from it, has always lavished its bounty upon its
veterans. For years a service pension has been bestowed upon the Grand
Army on reaching a certain age. Like provision has been made for the
survivors of the Spanish War. A liberal future compensation has been
granted to all the veterans of the World War. But it is in the case of the
disabled and the dependents that the Government exhibits its greatest
solicitude. This work is being well administered by the Veterans’ Bureau.
The main unfinished feature is that of hospitalization. This requirement is
being rapidly met. Various veteran bodies will present to you
recommendations which should have your careful consideration. At the last
session we increased our annual expenditure for pensions and relief on
account of the veterans of three wars. While I approve of proper relief for
all suffering, I do not favor any further extension of our pension system at
this time.
ALIEN PROPERTY
We still have in the possession of the Government the alien property. It has
always been the policy of America to hold that private enemy property
should not be confiscated in time of war. This principle we have
scrupulously observed. As this property is security for the claims of our

citizens and our Government, we can not relinquish it without adequate
provision for their reimbursement. Legislation for the return of this
property, accompanied by suitable provisions for the liquidation of the
claims of our citizens and our Treasury, should be adopted. If our
Government releases to foreigners the security which it holds for
Americans, it must at the same time provide satisfactory safeguards for
meeting American claims.
PROHIBITION
The duly authorized public authorities of this country have made
prohibition the law of the land. Acting under the Constitution, the Congress
and the legislatures of practically all the States have adopted legislation for
its enforcement. Some abuses have arisen which require reform. Under the
law the National Government has entrusted to the Treasury Department the
especial duty of regulation and enforcement. Such supplementary
legislation as it requires to meet existing conditions should be carefully and
speedily enacted. Failure to support the Constitution and observe the law
ought not to be tolerated by public opinion. Especially those in public
places, who have taken their oath to support the Constitution, ought to be
most scrupulous in its observance. Officers of the Department of Justice
throughout the country should be vigilant in enforcing the law, but local
authorities, which had always been mainly responsible for the enforcement
of law in relation to intoxicating liquor, ought not to seek evasion by
attempting to shift the burden wholly upon the Federal agencies. Under the
Constitution the States are jointly charged with the Nation in providing for
the enforcement of the prohibition amendment. Some people do not like the
amendment, some do not like other parts of the Constitution, some do not
like any of it. Those who entertain such sentiments have a perfect right to
seek through legal methods for a change. But for any of our inhabitants to
observe such parts of the Constitution as they like, while disregarding
others, is a doctrine that would break down all protection of life and
property and destroy the American system of ordered liberty.
FOREIGN RELATIONS
The foreign policy of this Government is well known. It is one of peace
based on that mutual respect that arises from mutual regard for international

rights and the discharge of international obligations. It is our purpose to
promote understanding and good will between ourselves and all other
people. The American people are altogether lacking in an appreciation of
the tremendous good fortune that surrounds their international position. We
have no traditional enemies. We are not embarrassed over any disputed
territory. We have no possessions that are coveted by others; they have none
that are coveted by us. Our borders are unfortified. We fear no one; no one
fears us. All the world knows that the whole extent of our influence is
against war and in favor of peace, against the use of force and in favor of
negotiation, arbitration, and adjudication as a method of adjusting
international differences. We look with disfavor upon all aggressive
warfare. We are strong enough so that no one can charge us with weakness
if we are slow to anger. Our place is sufficiently established so that we need
not be sensitive over trifles. Our resources are large enough so that we can
afford to be generous. At the same time we are a nation among nations and
recognize a responsibility not only to ourselves, but in the interests of a
stable and enlightened civilization, to protect and defend the international
rights of our Government and our citizens.
It is because of our historical detachment and the generations of
comparative indifference toward us by other nations that our public is
inclined to consider altogether too seriously the reports that we are
criticized abroad. We never had a larger foreign trade than at the present
time. Our good offices were never more sought and the necessity for our
assistance and cooperation was never more universally declared in any time
of peace. We know that the sentiments which we entertain toward all other
nations are those of the most sincere friendship and good will and of an
unbounded desire to help, which we are perfectly willing to have judged by
their fruits. In our efforts to adjust our international obligations we have met
with a response which, when everything is considered, I believe history will
record as a most remarkable and gratifying demonstration of the sanctity
with which civilized nations undertake to discharge their mutual
obligations. Debt settlements have been negotiated with practically all of
those who owed us and all finally adjusted but two, which are in process of
ratification. When we consider the real sacrifice that will be necessary on
the part of other nations, considering all their circumstances, to meet their
agreed payments, we ought to hold them in increased admiration and

respect. It is true that we have extended to them very generous treatment,
but it is also true that they have agreed to repay us all that we loaned to
them and some interest.
A special conference on the Chinese customs tariff provided for by the
treaty between the nine powers relating to the Chinese customs tariff signed
at Washington on February 6, 1922, was called by the Chinese Government
to meet at Peking on October 26, 1925. We participated in this conference
through fully empowered delegates and, with good will, endeavored to
cooperate with the other participating powers with a view to putting into
effect promises made to China at the Washington conference, and
considering any reasonable proposal that might be made by the Chinese
Government for the revision of the treaties on the subject of China’s tariff.
With these aims in view the American delegation at the outset of the
conference proposed to put into effect the surtaxes provided for by the
Washington treaty and to proceed immediately to the negotiation of a treaty,
which, among other things, was to make provision for the abolition of taxes
collected on goods in transit, remove the tariff restrictions in existing
treaties, and put into effect the national tariff law of China.
Early in April of the present year the central Chinese Government was
ousted from power by opposing warring factions. It became impossible
under the circumstances to continue the negotiations. Finally, on July 3, the
delegates of the foreign powers, including those of the United States, issued
a statement expressing their unanimous and earnest desire to proceed with
the work of the conference at the earliest possible moment when the
delegates of the Chinese Government are in a position to resume
discussions with the foreign delegates of the problems before the
conference. We are prepared to resume the negotiations thus interrupted
whenever a Government representing the Chinese people and acting on
their behalf presents itself. The fact that constant warfare between
contending Chinese factions has rendered it impossible to bring these
negotiations to a successful conclusion is a matter of deep regret.
Throughout these conflicts we have maintained a position of the most
careful neutrality. Our naval vessels in Asiatic waters, pursuant to treaty
rights, have been used only for the protection of American citizens.

 
Silas H. Strawn, Esq., was sent to China as American commissioner to
cooperate with commissioners of the other powers in the establishment of a
commission to inquire into the present practice of extraterritorial
jurisdiction in China, with a view to reporting to the Governments of the
several powers their findings of fact in regard to these matters. The
commission commenced its work in January, 1926, and agreed upon a joint
report which was signed on September 16, 1926. The commission’s report
has been received and is being studied with a view to determining our
future policy in regard to the question of extraterritorial privileges under
treaties between the United States and China.
The Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference met at
Geneva on May 18 and its work has been proceeding almost continuously
since that date. It would be premature to attempt to form a judgment as to
the progress that has been made. The commission has had before it a
comprehensive list of questions touching upon all aspects of the question of
the limitation of armament. In the commission’s discussions many
differences of opinion have developed. However, I am hopeful that at least
some measure of agreement will be reached as the discussions continue.
The American representation on the commission has consistently tried to be
helpful, and has kept before it the practical objective to which the
commission is working, namely, actual agreements for the limitation of
armaments. Our representatives will continue their work in that direction.
One of the most encouraging features of the commission’s work thus far has
been the agreement in principle among the naval experts of a majority of
the powers parties to the Washington treaty limiting naval armament upon
methods and standards for the comparison and further limitation of naval
armament. It is needless to say that at the proper time I shall be prepared to
proceed along practical lines to the conclusion of agreements carrying
further the work begun at the Washington Conference in 1921.
DEPARTMENT REPORTS
Many important subjects which it is impossible even to mention in the short
space of an annual message you will find fully discussed in the

departmental reports. A failure to include them here is not to be taken as
indicating any lack of interest, but only a disinclination to state
inadequately what has been much better done in other documents.
THE CAPITAL CITY
We are embarking on an ambitious building program for the city of
Washington. The Memorial Bridge is under way with all that it holds for
use and beauty. New buildings are soon contemplated. This program should
represent the best that exists in the art and science of architecture. Into these
structures which must be considered as of a permanent nature ought to go
the aspirations of the Nation, its ideals expressed in forms of beauty. If our
country wishes to compete with others, let it not be in the support of
armaments but in the making of a beautiful capital city. Let it express the
soul of America. Whenever an American is at the seat of his Government,
however traveled and cultured he may be, he ought to find a city of stately
proportion, symmetrically laid out and adorned with the best that there is in
architecture, which would arouse his imagination and stir his patriotic pride.
In the coming years Washington should be not only the art center of our
own country but the art center of the world. Around it should center all that
is best in science, in learning, in letters, and in art. These are the results that
justify the creation of those national resources with which we have been
favored.
AMERICAN IDEALS
America is not and must not be a country without ideals. They are useless if
they are only visionary; they are only valuable if they are practical. A nation
can not dwell constantly on the mountain tops. It has to be replenished and
sustained through the ceaseless toil of the less inspiring valleys. But its face
ought always to be turned upward, its vision ought always to be fixed on
high.
We need ideals that can be followed in daily life, that can be translated into
terms of the home. We can not expect to be relieved from toil, but we do
expect to divest it of degrading conditions. Work is honorable; it is entitled
to an honorable recompense. We must strive mightily, but having striven
there is a defect in our political and social system if we are not in general

rewarded with success. To relieve the land of the burdens that came from
the war, to release to the individual more of the fruits of his own industry, to
increase his earning capacity and decrease his hours of labor, to enlarge the
circle of his vision through good roads and better transportation, to place
before him the opportunity for education both in science and in art, to leave
him free to receive the inspiration of religion, all these are ideals which
deliver him from the servitude of the body and exalt him to the service of
the soul. Through this emancipation from the things that are material, we
broaden our dominion over the things that are spiritual.

List of Papers
[Unless otherwise specified, the correspondence is from or to officials in the
Department of State.]

GENERAL
PROPOSAL OF THE UNITED STATES TO ADHERE, WITH RESERVATIONS, TO THE PROTOCOL OF THE PERMANENT COURT OF
INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926 Jan.
27
Senate Resolution No. 5, 69th Congress, 1st Session
Advice and consent to U. S. adherence to protocol of
December 16, 1920, and the adjoined statute for the
Permanent Court, but not the optional clause for
compulsory 
jurisdiction, 
subject 
to 
certain
reservations 
and 
understandings, 
with 
further
stipulation that signature shall not be affixed until
signatory powers shall have indicated through
exchange of notes their acceptance of the reservations
and understandings as a part and condition of U. S.
acceptance of protocol.
1 [Pg. 1 is
part of Doc.
1]
Undated
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Western
European Affairs
Conversation between the Secretary of State, Senator
Lenroot, Senator Pepper, and Mr. Castle, February 5,
1926, in which it was decided to notify World Court
resolution direct to signatory powers, at the same time
notifying League of Nations that this is being done.
2 [Pg. 2
includes
portions of
Doc. 1 and
Doc. 2]
Feb. 12
To the Austrian Minister
Transmittal of text of Senate resolution, with inquiry
as to acceptance of the conditions, reservations, and
understandings contained therein as a part and
condition of the adherence of the United States to the
said protocol and statute.
(Sent also to the diplomatic representatives in
Washington of Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Chile, 
China, 
Colombia, 
Costa 
Rica, 
Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Finland, France, Great Britain (for Great
3 [Pg. 3
includes
portions of
Doc. 2 and
Doc. 3]

Britain and the Governments of Australia, Canada,
India, New Zealand, and the Union of South Africa),
Greece, 
Haiti, 
Hungary, 
Italy, 
Japan, 
Latvia,
Lithuania, Netherlands, Norway, Panama, Paraguay,
Persia, 
Poland, 
Portugal, 
Rumania, 
Salvador,
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Siam,
Spain, 
Sweden, 
Switzerland, 
Uruguay, 
and
Venezuela.)
Feb. 
12
(25)
To the Minister in Albania
Instructions to address to Albanian Minister of
Foreign Affairs a note of the same text as that sent to
the Austrian Minister.
(The same instruction, mutatis mutandis, to the
Chargé in Liberia.)
4 [Pg. 4
includes
portions of
Doc. 
3,
Doc. 4, and
Doc. 5]
Feb. 
12
(226)
To the Ambassador in Belgium
Note, identical in text with note sent to Austrian
Minister, for transmission to Luxemburg.
4 [Pg. 4
includes
portions of
Doc. 
3,
Doc. 4, and
Doc. 5]
Feb. 15
From the Latvian Minister
Acknowledgment of U. S. note of February 12, with
promise to forward Latvian views as soon as received.
(Footnote: Similar acknowledgments received through
the representatives in Washington of Bolivia, China,
Colombia, Haiti, Lithuania, Panama, Paraguay,
Salvador, and Venezuela; no replies from Bulgaria,
Canada, and Chile. Information from Brazilian
Ambassador, February 24, 1926, that written
acceptance 
would 
be 
sent, 
but 
no 
further
communication from Brazil appears to have been
received.)
5 [Pg. 5
includes
portions of
Doc. 6 and
Doc. 7]
Mar. 
2
(388)
To the Minister in Switzerland
Note for Secretary General of League (text printed)
setting forth conditions of Senate resolution and
5 [Pg. 5
includes
portions of

stating that communications have been addressed to
signatory governments.
Doc. 6 and
Doc. 7]
Mar. 17
From the Cuban Chargé
Cuban acceptance of conditions, reservations, and
understandings as part and condition of adhesion of
United States to protocol.
6 [Pg. 6
includes
portions of
Doc. 7 and
Doc. 8]
Mar. 18
From the Consul at Geneva (tel.)
Adoption by League Council of British proposal
suggesting that replies to U. S. note of February 12
stress difficulty of proceeding by exchange of notes
and real need for general agreement, and that Council
invite all these governments and United States to
appoint a delegate to a meeting to be held at Geneva,
September 1, 1926, to discuss reservations and
framing of new agreement.
7 [Pg. 7
includes
portions of
Doc. 9 and
Doc. 10]
[Mar.(?)]
26
From the Costa Rican Minister
Information that Costa Rica does not believe it a duty
to 
decide 
concerning 
acceptance, 
since 
her
membership in League ceases January 1, 1927.
7 [Pg. 7
includes
portions of
Doc. 9 and
Doc. 10]
Mar. 
31
(792)
From the Chargé in Switzerland
League communication, March 29 (text printed),
inviting United States to send delegate to Geneva for
purposes suggested by British; information that
invitations 
have 
been 
issued 
to 
signatory
governments.
8 [Pg. 8
includes
portions of
Doc. 10 and
Doc. 11]
Apr. 3
To the Consul at Geneva (tel.)
Instruction to ascertain informally whether state
withdrawing from League would automatically lose
status as signatory of protocol and, if not, what steps
would be necessary for withdrawal from Court.
10 [Pg. 10
includes
portions of
Doc. 
11,
Doc. 
12,
and 
Doc.
13]
Apr. 6
From the Consul at Geneva (tel.)
Personal opinion of member of judicial section of
10 [Pg. 10
includes

Secretariat that withdrawal from League would not
automatically deprive member state of status as
signatory of protocol; to withdraw, member state
might denounce protocol or invite other signatories to
release it from its obligations.
portions of
Doc. 
11,
Doc. 
12,
and 
Doc.
13]
Apr. 9
To the Costa Rican Minister
Inquiry whether Costa Rica intends to withdraw
acceptance of Court protocol upon withdrawal from
League.
11 [Pg. 11
includes
portions of
Doc. 
13,
Doc. 
14,
and 
Doc.
15]
Apr. 
9
(558)
From the Greek Minister
Acceptance 
of 
conditions, 
reservations, 
and
understandings contained in Senate resolution.
11 [Pg. 11
includes
portions of
Doc. 
13,
Doc. 
14,
and 
Doc.
15]
Apr. 
17
(63)
To the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
Communication for Secretary General of League (text
printed) declining invitation to send delegate to
Geneva, since Senate resolution specifically provided
procedure by which United States can become a party
to and signatory of the protocol.
12 [Pg. 12
is part of
Doc. 16]
Apr. 21
From the Costa Rican Minister
Information that Costa Rica has not been and is not
now a member of the World Court.
13 [Pg. 13
includes
portions of
Doc. 
16,
Doc. 
17,
and 
Doc.
18]
May 
12
(370)
From the Chargé in Liberia
Note of Liberian Government, May 11 (text printed),
accepting terms of Senate resolution.
13 [Pg. 13
includes
portions of
Doc. 
16,

Doc. 
17,
and 
Doc.
18]
May 
27
(1333/80)
From the Austrian Minister
Austrian reservation of final answer to U. S. note of
February 12 pending results of conference at Geneva.
(Footnote: Similar notes received from Finland and
Persia through their representatives in Washington; no
further replies appear to have been received from
Austria, Finland, or Persia.)
14 [Pg. 14
includes
portions of
Doc. 18 and
Doc. 19]
June 
28
(840)
From the Greek Minister
Information that Greek Government felt it should
accept the invitation to participate in conference at
Geneva, with a view of facilitating the common action
of interested powers.
15 [Pg. 15
includes
portions of
Doc. 19 and
Doc. 20]
Aug. 4
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin
American Affairs
Uruguayan Chargé’s informal statement accepting in
principle U. S. suggestion as to World Court, pending
action of Uruguayan Congress upon invitation to take
part in Court.
(Footnote: No further communication appears to have
been received from the Uruguayan Government.)
16 [Pg. 16
includes
portions of
Doc. 
21,
Doc. 
22,
Doc. 
23,
and 
Doc.
24]
Aug. 20
From the Albanian Minister
Approval of U. S. reservations for adherence to Court.
16 [Pg. 16
includes
portions of
Doc. 
21,
Doc. 
22,
Doc. 
23,
and 
Doc.
24]
Aug. 
23
(60)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Acceptance by Luxemburg, August 21, of conditions
and reserves contained in Senate resolution.
16 [Pg. 16
includes
portions of
Doc. 
21,
Doc. 
22,

Doc. 
23,
and 
Doc.
24]
Aug. 30
From the Dominican Chargé
Information that Dominican delegate in League
Assembly is being instructed to vote for U. S.
adhesion.
16 [Pg. 16
includes
portions of
Doc. 
21,
Doc. 
22,
Doc. 
23,
and 
Doc.
24]
Sept. 
14
(269)
From the Consul at Geneva
First session of Geneva meeting, at which discussion
centered particularly around conditions that would
operate should United States withdraw from Court,
and proviso for U. S. consent in cases in which United
States has or claims an interest.
17 [Pg. 17
includes
portions of
Doc. 24 and
Doc. 25]
Sept. 20
From the Consul at Geneva (tel.)
Drafting committee formula for accepting Senate
resolution, providing welcome of United States into
Court with explanation rather than interpretation of
fifth reservation and stating that United States will
enjoy same rights as most-favored members of
League and, as nonmember, will keep the right of a
nonmember not to appear.
25 [Pg. 25
includes
portions of
Doc. 25 and
Doc. 26]
Nov. 4
Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State
Statement by Colombian Minister that information
that American note of February 12 has been submitted
to Colombian Congress will shortly be communicated
by formal note.
(Footnote: No further communication appears to have
been received.)
26 [Pg. 26
includes
portions of
Doc. 
26,
Doc. 
27,
and 
Doc.
28]
Nov. 5
Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of
Western European Affairs
Résumé of present status of adherence question and
comments concerning action of signatory states in
26 [Pg. 26
includes
portions of
Doc. 
26,

meeting at Geneva, at which draft protocol of
execution was signed. Suggestion that exchange of
notes be attempted with Abyssinia and Irish Free
State, which have now become signatories of Court
protocol.
Doc. 
27,
and 
Doc.
28]
Nov. 8
To the Assistant Chief of the Division of Western
European Affairs
Statement that Senate resolution provides that United
States cannot sign World Court protocol until every
nation signatory to the original statute has accepted
the reservations.
28 [Pg. 28
includes
portions of
Doc. 28 and
Doc. 29]
Nov. 
12
(742)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain
Memorandum 
for 
presentation 
to 
Abyssinian
Government 
(text 
printed), 
inquiring 
whether
Abyssinia accepts Senate resolution.
29 [Pg. 29
is part of
Doc. 30]
Nov. 12
To the Minister of the Irish Free State
Inquiry as to whether Irish Free State accepts
conditions, reservations, and understandings contained
in Senate resolution.
30 [Pg. 30
includes
portions of
Doc. 31 and
Doc. 32]
Dec. 
23
(817)
From the British Ambassador
Note (text printed), in reply to U. S. note of February
12, embodying Geneva conference decisions and
enclosing (1) an extract from the revised rules of the
Court providing for publicity of Court opinions and
(2) the preliminary draft of suggested protocol of
execution providing for a separate understanding
between the United States and the Council as to the
manner in which the consent provided for in
reservation 5 (b) is to be given (texts printed).
(Similar notes, mutatis mutandis, received through the
diplomatic representatives in Washington of Australia,
Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Estonia, France,
Hungary, Irish Free State, Italy, Japan, Netherlands,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Rumania, Kingdom of the
30 [Pg. 30
includes
portions of
Doc. 31 and
Doc. 32]

Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Siam, Union of South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.)
Dec. 
31
(828)
From the British Ambassador
India’s desire to be associated with British views
expressed in note No. 817 of December 23.
(Similar note, mutatis mutandis, transmitted, April 4,
1927, on behalf of New Zealand.)
38 [Pg. 38
includes
portions of
Doc. 
32,
Doc. 
33,
and 
Doc.
34]
1927 Apr.
25 (1811)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain
Foreign Office note, April 22, enclosing Abyssinian
note, March 21 (texts printed), to the effect that
Abyssinia is awaiting certain information from
League before replying to U. S. memorandum as to
acceptance of Senate resolution.
(Footnote: No further communication was received
from the Ethiopian Government.)
38 [Pg. 38
includes
portions of
Doc. 
32,
Doc. 
33,
and 
Doc.
34]
PARTICIPATION OF THE UNITED STATES IN THE WORK OP THE PREPARATORY COMMISSION FOR THE DISARMAMENT CONFERENCE
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Dec. 13
(744)
From the Chargé in Switzerland
Invitation, December 12 (text printed), to send
representatives 
to 
meeting 
of 
the 
Preparatory
Commission 
for 
the 
Disarmament 
Conference,
February 15, 1926.
40 [Pg. 40
is part of
Doc. 35]
1926
Jan. 4
Message of the President of the United States to
Congress
Request for appropriation of $50,000 to cover expenses
of participation in work of Preparatory Commission.
42 [Pg. 42
includes
portions of
Doc. 35 and
Doc. 36]
Jan. 
5
(39)
From the Ambassador in Japan
Request for information concerning subjects to be
discussed at preliminary Conference.
44 [Pg. 44
includes
portions of

Doc. 36 and
Doc. 37]
Jan. 
16
(13)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Suggestion that American delegation be announced as
soon as possible so as to avoid public blame for
postponement which seems likely to occur.
45 [Pg. 45
includes
portions of
Doc. 
37,
Doc. 
38,
and 
Doc.
39]
Jan. 
20
(8)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
President’s unwillingness to accept invitation until
Congress 
has 
acted 
on 
appropriation 
request;
assurance, however, that instructions to delegates will
be completed in ample time before February 15.
(Footnote: Information that resolution providing for
appropriation was passed January 29 and approved
February 1.)
45 [Pg. 45
includes
portions of
Doc. 
37,
Doc. 
38,
and 
Doc.
39]
Jan. 
22
(10)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Query whether press rumors of postponement are
accurate and, if so, when notification of postponement
will be received and new date fixed.
47 [Pg. 47
includes
portions of
Doc. 40 and
Doc. 41]
Jan. 22
From the Consul at Geneva (tel.)
Report of strong chance for postponement, France and
Italy favoring it and England being willing to discuss it.
47 [Pg. 47
includes
portions of
Doc. 40 and
Doc. 41]
Jan. 23
From the Consul at Geneva (tel.)
Hope of Secretary General of League that U. S.
delegation will be restricted to approximately same
limits as other powers, that is, one delegate with
technical advisers.
48 [Pg. 48
includes
portions of
Doc. 
41,
Doc. 
42,
Doc. 
43,
and 
Doc.
44]

Jan. 
23
(18)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Secretary General’s promise to keep Minister fully and
promptly informed of any developments regarding
postponement.
48 [Pg. 48
includes
portions of
Doc. 
41,
Doc. 
42,
Doc. 
43,
and 
Doc.
44]
Jan. 
29
(14)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Note for Secretary General (text printed) accepting
invitation to send representatives to Preparatory
Commission meeting.
48 [Pg. 48
includes
portions of
Doc. 
41,
Doc. 
42,
Doc. 
43,
and 
Doc.
44]
Feb. 
1
(28)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Telegram from Secretary General (text printed)
concerning request from certain Council members for
postponement of Preparatory Commission meeting to
not later than May 15.
(Footnote: Information that Secretary General informed
members of Commission, February 6, that meetings for
February 15 and 16 had been adjourned and that
question of dates had been placed on agenda of March
session of Council.
49 [Pg. 49
includes
portions of
Doc. 
44,
Doc. 
45,
and 
Doc.
46]
Feb. 
6
(22)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Instructions to bring to attention of League Secretariat
the U. S. opinion that it would be unfortunate should
League gain impression that United States, having
agreed to be represented on Preparatory Commission,
would consent to turn over questions in which it has
direct interest to League committees on which it is not
represented and which could not in United States’
opinion appropriately be consulted in matters of
importance to it.
49 [Pg. 49
includes
portions of
Doc. 
44,
Doc. 
45,
and 
Doc.
46]

Feb. 
9
(38)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Report that action on telegram No. 22 of February 6 is
being withheld pending further instructions, since
League committees are not to have role to which
Department objects, since press reports are inaccurate,
and inasmuch as Secretariat could not take any decisive
action at this time.
50 [Pg. 50
includes
portions of
Doc. 46 and
Doc. 47]
Feb. 11
To the Ambassador in Great Britain
U. S. attitude with regard to scope of Conference, land
and naval disarmament, air forces, and sanctions for the
enforcement of a limitation treaty. Instructions to
obtain British views upon these questions.
51 [Pg. 51
includes
portions of
Doc. 47 and
Doc. 48]
Feb. 18
(45)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Statement of Director of League Disarmament Section,
upon Minister’s informal presentation of considerations
outlined in Department telegram No. 22 of February 6,
that for duration of Conference the Permanent
Advisory Commission will be replaced by a technical
advisory subcommission of Preparatory Commission
and that one member each of American, German, and
Japanese delegations will be asked to sit in this Joint
Commission.
56 [Pg. 56
includes
portions of
Doc. 48 and
Doc. 49]
Feb. 27
(39)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Ambassador’s conclusion, after conversations with Sir
Austen Chamberlain, British Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, and Lord Robert Cecil, British
delegate on Preparatory Commission, that decisions of
Conference will be determined by considerations of
general policy having no direct interest to United States
and 
that 
unless Americans 
follow 
British 
in
concessions they feel it wise to make, delegates may
find themselves standing alone and thus responsible for
making agreement impossible.
57 [Pg. 57
is part of
Doc. 50]
Mar. 
2
(15)
To the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Instructions to ascertain discreetly the attitude of the
59 [Pg. 59
includes
portions of

Japanese Government toward subjects Preparatory
Commission is to consider.
Doc. 50 and
Doc. 51]
Mar. 18
(66)
From the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
League Council’s decision to invite military, naval, and
air 
experts 
of 
all 
delegations 
represented 
on
Preparatory Commission to sit with Permanent
Advisory Commission on basis of absolute equality, to
increase membership of Joint Commission by adding
four members from delegations of United States, Japan,
Germany, and Russia, to invite Argentina and Chile to
participate in Preparatory Commission, to invite
Permanent Advisory Commission to meet on May 18
simultaneously with Preparatory Commission, and to
leave to Preparatory Commission decision as to when
Joint Commission is to meet.
60 [Pg. 60
includes
portions of
Doc. 52 and
Doc. 53]
Mar. 20
(61)
From the Chargé in Great Britain (tel.)
Washington despatch in London Times, March 19
(excerpt printed), giving purported substance of
Ambassador Houghton’s report to President and
Secretary of State concerning conditions in Europe;
comments on subject from other newspapers.
(Footnote: Announcement by Department, as quoted in
circular telegram, March 19, 6 p.m., to Embassies in
France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, and the Legation
in Switzerland, that neither Ambassador Houghton nor
Minister Gibson has divulged to any unofficial person
the nature of their reports to the President or Secretary
Kellogg.)
60 [Pg. 60
includes
portions of
Doc. 52 and
Doc. 53]
Mar. 25 Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a
Conversation With the French Ambassador
In which the Ambassador assured the Secretary that
France favors having preliminary Conference on May
18.
62 [Pg. 62
includes
portions of
Doc. 53 and
Doc. 54]
Mar. 25
(780)
From the Chargé in Switzerland
League communication, March 19 (text printed),
enclosing Council report fixing May 18 as date for
63 [Pg. 63
includes
portions of

Preparatory Commission meeting, May 19 for
Permanent Advisory Commission meeting.
Doc. 54 and
Doc. 55]
Mar. 29
[73]
From the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
Information that American citizen to be appointed by
President of Council to sit with Joint Commission
cannot be a member of American delegation, since no
member may be a government representative; and that
several unofficial Americans are being considered for
this post.
67 [Pg. 67
includes
portions of
Doc. 
55,
Doc. 
56,
and 
Doc.
57]
Mar. 30
(48)
To the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
Instructions to present view that Department is unable
to understand necessity for Joint Commission of
League; that United States can participate in
Preparatory Commission only to the extent of the
participation of the President’s representatives; and that
Preparatory Commission is competent to determine
own procedure, appoint subcommittees, and seek
information where it deems best.
67 [Pg. 67
includes
portions of
Doc. 
55,
Doc. 
56,
and 
Doc.
57]
Apr. 
2
(75)
From the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
Secretary General’s suggested solution, in view of
impossibility of revoking Council’s decision to
convene Joint Commission, that member of American
delegation might be designated to sit with Joint
Commission in capacity of an expert.
68 [Pg. 68
includes
portions of
Doc. 57 and
Doc. 58]
Apr. 
7
(54)
To the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
Communication for Secretary General (text printed) to
the effect that American representatives were chosen on
the understanding that Preparatory Commission was
itself to do the preparatory work on limitation of
armaments, not merely to delegate this function to
other bodies, that it was to continue in session until its
report was submitted, and that the task of preparing a
report was to rest with the Commission itself or
subcommittees to be formed therefrom.
70 [Pg. 70
is part of
Doc. 59]
Apr. 
8
(55)
To the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
Concern over increasing tendency to inject League
71 [Pg. 71
includes

committees into work of Commission, thus giving
ground for claim that United States has been
maneuvered into turning over to League matters which
should be discussed only by authorized representatives
of the interested governments.
portions of
Doc. 59 and
Doc. 60]
Apr. 
8
(52)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Instructions to obtain Chamberlain’s views as to how
Preparatory Commission is to function, and to repeat
telegram to Paris, Berne, and Prague for confidential
information.
72 [Pg. 72
includes
portions of
Doc. 60 and
Doc. 61]
Apr. 12
(93)
To the Chargé in France (tel.)
Surprise concerning press report that strong campaign
for another postponement has been started in Paris.
74 [Pg. 74
includes
portions of
Doc. 61 and
Doc. 62]
Apr. 13
(146)
From the Chargé in France (tel.)
Report in French press that postponement proposal has
not been made for fear of displeasing United States,
though French press from beginning has been skeptical
of practical results.
75 [Pg. 75
includes
portions of
Doc. 
62,
Doc. 
63,
and 
Doc.
64]
Apr. 13
(36)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Impression, from interview with Foreign Minister, that
Japan intends to avoid committal to definite policy, but
will leave large discretion to representatives and will
pass on questions as they arise.
75 [Pg. 75
includes
portions of
Doc. 
62,
Doc. 
63,
and 
Doc.
64]
Apr. 14
(74)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Chamberlain’s 
assumption 
that 
Preparatory
Commission will divide into subcommittees which will
act simultaneously, full meeting to take place when
subcommittees are ready to report. Press reports that
Baltic states and Poland, with approval of France, will
request postponement.
76 [Pg. 76
includes
portions of
Doc. 64 and
Doc. 65]

Apr. 15
(96)
To the Chargé in France (tel.)
Instructions, 
in 
view 
of 
repeated 
rumors 
of
postponement, to present U. S. views to Foreign Office.
77 [Pg. 77
includes
portions of
Doc. 
66,
Doc. 
67,
and 
Doc.
68]
Apr. 16
(148)
From the Chargé in France (tel.)
French Foreign Ministry’s categorical denial of press
reports.
77 [Pg. 77
includes
portions of
Doc. 
66,
Doc. 
67,
and 
Doc.
68]
Apr. 17
(33)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Information that Belgian Government does not desire
postponement.
77 [Pg. 77
includes
portions of
Doc. 
66,
Doc. 
67,
and 
Doc.
68]
Apr. 20
To the Ambassador in France (cir. tel.)
Excerpt (text printed) from Secretary of State’s address
in New York, outlining U. S. attitude toward limitation
of land and naval armaments.
(Instructions to repeat to London, Brussels, Rome,
Berne, and Prague.)
78 [Pg. 78
includes
portions of
Doc. 68 and
Doc. 69]
Apr. 22
(13)
From the Minister in Czechoslovakia (tel.)
Belief of Dr. Beneš, member of League Council, that
U. 
S. 
insistence 
that 
Preparatory 
Commission
determine its own procedure may prove most
embarrassing to League.
79 [Pg. 79
includes
portions of
Doc. 69 and
Doc. 70]
Apr. 22
(92)
From the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
Secretary General’s opinion that there would be no
disposition 
at 
the 
Conference 
to 
oppose 
the
80 [Pg. 80
includes
portions of
Doc. 
70,

Department’s views with regard to organization of the
work thereof.
Doc. 
71,
and 
Doc.
72]
Apr. 23
To the Minister in Switzerland
Appointment of Minister as American delegate on the
Preparatory Commission and of Alan F. Winslow as
secretary. 
Instructions 
concerning 
American
participation.
80 [Pg. 80
includes
portions of
Doc. 
70,
Doc. 
71,
and 
Doc.
72]
Undated Memorandum by the Department of State
Consideration of the seven questions submitted with
the invitation of the Council of the League of
December 12, 1925.
(Footnote: 
Information 
that 
memorandum 
was
transmitted to the Chargé in Switzerland, April 29, for
use of the American delegate on the Preparatory
Commission.)
89 [Pg. 89
includes
portions of
Doc. 72 and
Doc. 73]
Apr. 24
(95)
From the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
Uruguayan delegate’s agreement with American views
as expressed in Department telegram No. 54 of April 7
to the Chargé, and promise to support them in
Conference.
100 
[Pg.
100
includes
portions of
Doc. 73 and
Doc. 74]
May 15
(3)
From the American Delegate on the Preparatory
Commission (tel.)
Report that British and French are endeavoring to
arrange that Conference committees be substituted for
League organizations; and opinion as to desirability of
supporting Boncour, of French delegation, as chairman
and the Uruguayan delegate as vice chairman.
101 
[Pg.
101
includes
portions of
Doc. 
74,
Doc. 
75,
and 
Doc.
76]
May 15
(4)
From the American Delegate on the Preparatory
Commission (tel.)
Proposed statement to be made by American delegate
101 
[Pg.
101
includes
portions of

(text printed) concerning U. S. policy toward
participation in Conference.
Doc. 
74,
Doc. 
75,
and 
Doc.
76]
May 18
(8)
From the American Delegate on the Preparatory
Commission (tel.)
Report of opening session, at which Dutch delegate
was elected as president, Uruguayan and Spanish
delegates were elected as vice presidents, and a
military, naval and air committee made up of
representatives of each delegation was provided in
place of Permanent Advisory Commission.
103 
[Pg.
103
includes
portions of
Doc. 76 and
Doc. 77]
May 21
(43)
To the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Request for Japanese attitude concerning Associated
Press report from Geneva that Japanese delegation has
program for separate land and naval armament
limitation and would be willing to participate in a
three-power naval conference at Washington.
104 
[Pg.
104
includes
portions of
Doc. 77 and
Doc. 78]
May 22
(44)
To the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Minutes of statement made by “White House
Spokesman,” May 21 (text printed), concerning reports
of Japanese suggestions for three-power naval
limitation conference.
105 
[Pg.
105
includes
portions of
Doc. 78 and
Doc. 79]
May 25
(51)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Foreign 
Minister’s 
gratification 
upon 
receiving
statement, and assurance that press report from Geneva
is without foundation.
106 
[Pg.
106
includes
portions of
Doc. 79 and
Doc. 80]
May 25
(52)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Foreign Office statement (text printed) denying rumors
of new Japanese proposal for disarmament.
107 
[Pg.
107
includes
portions of
Doc. 80 and
Doc. 81]

June 11
(40)
From the American Delegate on the Preparatory
Commission (tel.)
Conversations with Chamberlain in which dismal
outlook for Commission’s progress was expressed.
Opinion of Beneš that when Germany has entered
League and the Locarno pacts have been found
effective, some measure of disarmament might be
achieved.
108 
[Pg.
108 is part
of Doc. 82]
Sept. 16
(102)
From the American Delegate on the Preparatory
Commission (tel.)
Request for Department authorization for a statement
by American delegate before Preparatory Commission
to the effect that procedure being followed in
subcommittees cannot lead to a report which could be
received seriously as embodying the considered
technical opinion of experts.
109 
[Pg.
109
includes
portions of
Doc. 82 and
Doc. 83]
Sept. 18
(56)
To the American Delegate on the Preparatory
Commission (tel.)
Outline (text printed) for use of delegate in preparing
suggested statement.
112 
[Pg.
112 is part
of Doc. 84]
Sept. 20
(105)
From the American Delegate on the Preparatory
Commission (tel.)
Notice that Preparatory Commission will meet
September 22.
114 
[Pg.
114 includes
portions of
Doc. 
84,
Doc. 
85,
and 
Doc.
86]
Sept. 21
(108)
From the American Delegate on the Preparatory
Commission (tel.)
Explanation that delegate has interpreted Secretary’s
instructions liberally, embodying those as to procedure
in a statement to be delivered September 22 and those
as to general attitude in a separate statement to be
delivered later in discussions.
(Footnote: Information that the latter statement was
114 
[Pg.
114 includes
portions of
Doc. 
84,
Doc. 
85,
and 
Doc.
86]

made at second meeting of second session, September
27.)
Sept. 21
(109)
From the American Delegate on the Preparatory
Commission (tel.)
Statement to be made before Commission, September
22 
(text 
printed), 
pointing 
out 
that 
Military
Commission has approached questions from both
political and military points of view and proposing that
Subcommittee A be instructed to answer on purely
technical grounds, uninfluenced by political or
economic considerations, the questions that have been
referred to it.
115 
[Pg.
115 includes
portions of
Doc. 86 and
Doc. 87]
Oct. 
2
(23)
To the Minister in Uruguay (tel.)
Instructions to express orally and informally to Foreign
Minister regret of United States that Uruguay, not
having been reelected to a seat in League Council, has
withdrawn from participation in work of Preparatory
Commission.
118 
[Pg.
118 includes
portions of
Doc. 87 and
Doc. 88]
Oct. 
7
(53)
From the Minister in Uruguay (tel.)
Information that Uruguay will be represented at next
meeting of Commission.
(Footnote: Minister’s further report, October 9, that
Uruguay had withdrawn from Commission.)
119 
[Pg.
119 includes
portions of
Doc. 
88,
Doc. 
89,
and 
Doc.
90]
Dec. 9
From the Consul at Geneva (tel.)
Adoption 
of 
Council 
resolution, 
December 
8,
requesting 
Preparatory 
Commission 
to 
submit
proposals concerning convening of Disarmament
Conference and to draw up agenda of Conference.
119 
[Pg.
119 includes
portions of
Doc. 
88,
Doc. 
89,
and 
Doc.
90]
DISCONTINUANCE OF THE OFFICE OF AMERICAN UNOFFICIAL OBSERVER, REPARATION COMMISSION

Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Apr. 10
(90)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
For Hill: Request for comments of Ambassador or Hill
on Department’s intention to discontinue independent
office for American observer, as of May 31, 1926, and
to assign Edwin C. Wilson to Embassy staff, in charge
of reparation matters.
120 
[Pg.
120 includes
portions of
Doc. 90 and
Doc. 91]
Apr. 22
(155)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
From Hill: Opinion that although there is no
insurmountable difficulty to office being embodied
ultimately in the Embassy, it would be advisable to
continue it in its present form, at least until September
1, for reasons that (1) later change would create less
comment, (2) pending matters, particularly the D. A. P.
G. tanker case, require attention of someone who has
fullest possible knowledge of the background, and (3)
saving to Department would be inconsiderable, since
change would preclude using assistants heretofore
available from Reparation Commission.
121 
[Pg.
121 includes
portions of
Doc. 91 and
Doc. 92]
Apr. 23
(156)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Comment that there is no space available in the
chancery for a reparation section, and belief that in
present state of European opinion it would be
unfortunate should United States make any move which
could be taken as a lessening of interest in European
affairs.
123 
[Pg.
123 includes
portions of
Doc. 92 and
Doc. 93]
June 7
(165)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
For Hill: Information that Wilson will sail June 9 and
will give attention to reparation matters, but that Hill
will not be instructed to return to Department before
September 1.
124 
[Pg.
124 includes
portions of
Doc. 
93,
Doc. 
94,
and 
Doc.
95]

Dec. 18
(332)
To the Ambassador in France (tel.)
For Hill: Instructions to be prepared to turn over to
Embassy the handling of reparation matters as of
January 31, 1927, and subsequently to report to
Department.
124 
[Pg.
124 includes
portions of
Doc. 
93,
Doc. 
94,
and 
Doc.
95]
1927
Feb. 
1
(42)
From the Ambassador in France (tel.)
Information that Wilson has taken over reparation work
as of February 1, 1927.
(Footnote: Transfer of the office to the Embassy was
effected February 28, 1927.)
125 
[Pg.
125 includes
portions of
Doc. 
96,
Doc. 
97,
and 
Doc.
98]
PROPOSED DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY HELD BY THE ALIEN PROPERTY CUSTODIAN
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Dec.
12
To the Secretary of the Treasury
Inquiry 
whether 
Treasury 
plan, 
published
December 10, 1925, for return of alien property
contemplates the same treatment for property of
German, Austrian, and Hungarian nationals.
(Footnote: 
The 
Treasury 
plan, 
with 
some
modifications, was introduced into Congress
March 29, 1926, and is commonly referred to as
the “Mills Bill.”)
125 [Pg. 125
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 96, Doc.
97, and Doc.
98]
1926 Feb.
3
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State
Discussion with German Ambassador of possibility
of reaching agreement for final disposition of
claims against Germany. The Ambassador’s
statement that Germany will make no agreement
covering claims which is not contingent upon the
return of the alien property fund to its German
owners.
125 [Pg. 125
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 96, Doc.
97, and Doc.
98]

Feb. 4
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State
Conversation in which German Ambassador was
informed that United States is not disposed to
make an agreement contingent upon return of
German 
property 
held 
by 
Alien 
Property
Custodian.
127 [Pg. 127
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 98, Doc.
99, and Doc.
100]
Mar. 17
From the Under Secretary of the Treasury
Information that if a bill covering German property
is adopted, Treasury Department would be glad to
extend the same policy to Austria and Hungary
when liabilities for mixed claims and means of
payment therefor have been definitely established.
127 [Pg. 127
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 98, Doc.
99, and Doc.
100]
Mar. 
19
(438)
To the Minister in Austria
Conversation, March 15, in which Austrian
Minister expressed the hope that the Mills Bill
would include a statement regarding Austrian
property and mentioned funding agreements as
method for taking care of American claims.
128 [Pg. 128
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 100 and
Doc. 101]
Mar. 22
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of
Western European Affairs
Conversation, March 20, in which German
Ambassador said that alien property bill as now
worded covered most of his objections.
130 [Pg. 130
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 101 and
Doc. 102]
Apr. 
2
(838/70)
From the Austrian Minister
Representations concerning certain provisions of
the Mills Bill; request that technical considerations
be waived and a way found to include in the bill
the return of Austrian property.
131 [Pg. 131
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 102 and
Doc. 103]
Apr. 3
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of
Western European Affairs
Information that German Ambassador has received
from 
his 
Government 
permission 
to 
state
categorically that if German private property is
returned, no special Government taxes will be
assessed against it.
135 [Pg. 135
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 103 and
Doc. 104]

Apr. 3
From the German Embassy
Statement that German private property returned
by United States will not be subjected to any kind
of special taxation.
136 [Pg. 136
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 104, Doc.
105, and Doc.
106]
June 
8
(1505/70)
From the Austrian Minister
Statement that Minister has received specific
instructions from his Government to enter into
negotiations aiming at release of Austrian property
held as security for future awards and its
replacement by a security of equal or better quality.
136 [Pg. 136
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 104, Doc.
105, and Doc.
106]
June 11
To the Austrian Minister
Suggestion that Minister communicate with
Secretary of the Treasury, to whom note of June 8
has been transmitted.
(Footnote: Information that on June 29, 1926, the
Minister informed the Department that he had
conferred with the Under Secretary of the
Treasury.)
137 [Pg. 137
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 106 and
Doc. 107]
Nov. 
10
(2556/70)
From the Austrian Minister
Copy of letter to Under Secretary of the Treasury
(text printed) outlining Austrian offer to issue and
turn over Government bonds to extent of Austrian
property held by Alien Property Custodian, these
bonds to serve as security for American claims.
138 [Pg. 138
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 107 and
Doc. 108]
Dec. 15
To the Chairman of the Committee on Ways and
Means of the House of Representatives
Statement placing on record the Secretary’s
apprehension concerning certain international
questions inherent in terms of H. R. 15009
providing for the settlement of U. S.-German
claims, return of property of German nationals, and
apportionment among all claimants of certain
available funds.
141 [Pg. 141
is part of Doc.
109]

Dec. 16
Informal Memorandum Left by the Hungarian
Minister With the Chief of the Division of Western
European Affairs
Statement that Hungary does not intend to follow
Austrian lead to press for an early return of seized
alien property, and sees no reason to protest against
noninclusion of Hungarian property in connection
with release of German property.
143 [Pg. 143
is part of Doc.
110]
Dec. 23
From the Under Secretary of the Treasury
Under Secretary’s statement to Austrian Minister
that Treasury will not recommend legislation
covering return of Austrian property until after
receipt of definite estimate of probable amount of
awards.
144 [Pg. 144
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 110 and
Doc. 111]
SUBMISSION TO THE SENATE OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION RELATING TO THE REGULATION OF AERIAL NAVIGATION, DONE AT
PARIS, OCTOBER 13, 1919
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
June 15
To President Coolidge
Text of report enclosing (1) draft letter for submission to
Senate, (2) convention and additional protocol, (3)
protocol relative to amendment of article 5, (4) protocol
relative to amendment of article 34, and (5) tabulated
statement showing action taken by various countries
with respect to the convention and protocols (texts
printed); recommendation as to form of Senate
resolution of advice and consent (text printed), with
reservations as to provisions to which United States is
unable to give unqualified approval.
(Footnotes: Information that draft letter, with report and
enclosures, was sent to the Senate June 16, 1926; also
that on January 12, 1934, President Roosevelt requested
the return of the convention and accompanying papers,
which request was granted January 15, 1934.)
145 
[Pg.
145
includes
portions of
Doc. 
111
and 
Doc.
112]

CONVENTION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER POWERS REVISING THE INTERNATIONAL SANITARY CONVENTION OF
JANUARY 17, 1912, SIGNED JUNE 21, 1926
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Feb. 25
From the French Ambassador
Inquiry whether United States will send delegates to
conference at Paris for revision of sanitary
convention, and whether October 26, 1925, would
be an acceptable date. Transmittal of draft of
revision of sanitary convention.
(Footnote: Information that in June 1925 the
Ambassador in France reported that conference had
been postponed until May 10, 1926.)
174 [Pg. 174
includes portions
of Doc. 112 and
Doc. 113]
Oct. 8
To the French Ambassador
Opinion of U. S. health officials that existing
sanitary convention should be revised, and their
approval of draft of revision submitted with
Ambassador’s note of February 25. Information that
United States will send delegate, or delegates, to
Paris with full powers.
175 [Pg. 175
includes portions
of Doc. 113 and
Doc. 114]
1926
Mar. 24
To the French Ambassador
Notification of names of U. S. representatives.
176 [Pg. 176
includes portions
of Doc. 114 and
Doc. 115]
June 21 Convention Between the United States and Other
Powers
Revising the international sanitary convention of
January 17, 1912. Also annexes.
177 [Pg. 177
includes portions
of Doc. 115 and
Doc. 116]
Mar. 10 Procès-Verbal
Of the deposit of ratifications of the international
sanitary convention by Belgium, Spain, France,
Great Britain, Monaco, and the Soudan.
234 [Pg. 234
includes portions
of Doc. 116 and
Doc. 117]
Mar. 28 Procès-Verbal
Of the deposit of ratifications of the international
sanitary convention by Czechoslovakia.
237 [Pg. 237
includes portions
of 
Doc. 
117,

Doc. 118, and
Doc. 119]
May 22 Procès-Verbal
Of the deposit of ratifications of the international
sanitary convention by the United States of
America.
237 [Pg. 237
includes portions
of 
Doc. 
117,
Doc. 118, and
Doc. 119]
PRELIMINARY CONFERENCE ON OIL POLLUTION OF NAVIGABLE WATERS, WASHINGTON, JUNE 8–16, 1926
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926 June
16
Final Act of the Preliminary Conference on
Oil 
Pollution 
of 
Navigable 
Waters,
Washington, June 8–16, 1926
With annexed draft convention.
238 [Pg. 238 includes
portions of Doc. 119 and
Doc. 120]
SYMPATHETIC ATTITUDE OF THE UNITED STATES TOWARD EFFORTS BY THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS FOR THE SUPPRESSION OF SLAVERY
Date 
and
number
Subject
Page
1925 
Oct.
12 (C. L.
123. 1925.
VI)
From the Secretary General of the League of
Nations
Transmission 
of 
Council 
resolution 
of
September 
28 
(text 
printed) 
and 
draft
convention on slave trade, with request to
forward observations on draft before June 1,
1926.
247 
[Pg. 
247
includes portions
of Doc. 120 and
Doc. 121]
1926 
May
17 (72)
To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Reply for Secretary General (text printed)
stating that United States, in accord with its
traditional policy, is deeply interested in any
movement which looks toward the abolishment
of all forms of involuntary servitude.
248 
[Pg. 
248
includes portions
of Doc. 121, Doc.
122, 
and 
Doc.
123]
June 
2
(104)
From the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Query as to whether United States would be
248 
[Pg. 
248
includes portions

disposed to attend autonomous international
conference on slavery.
of Doc. 121, Doc.
122, 
and 
Doc.
123]
June 4 (75) To the Minister in Switzerland (tel.)
Instructions informally to advise Secretary
General that invitation to attend autonomous
slavery conference would be given most
sympathetic consideration.
(Footnote: 
Information 
that 
autonomous
conference was not called, and that a
convention drawn up by League Assembly was
opened for signature on September 25, 1926.)
249 
[Pg. 
249
includes portions
of Doc. 123 and
Doc. 124]
 
STATEMENT TO CERTAIN FOREIGN GOVERMENTS REGARDING EFFORTS OF THE UNITED STATES TO CONTROL THE PRODUCTION OF
AND TRAFFIC IN NARCOTIC DRUGS
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Oct. 14
To the Diplomatic Officers of the United States
Accredited to the Governments Party to The Hague
Convention of January 23, 1912
Certain observations as to U. S. methods of controlling
domestic traffic in narcotic drugs and the export thereof.
Instructions, when presenting these views to government
to which accredited, to express U. S. desire for
suggestions regarding control and for cooperation in
attaining ends aimed at by Hague convention.
250 [Pg.
250 
is
part 
of
Doc. 125]
EFFORTS BY THE UNITED STATES TO PREVENT THE INJECTION OF POLITICAL QUESTIONS INTO THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOLÍVAR
CONGRESS AT PANAMA
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925 Apr.
2 (678)
From the Minister in Panama
Panama’s invitation to United States to send
254 
[Pg. 
254
includes 
portions

delegates to a congress at Panama, June 18,
1926, in celebration of first centennial of Bolívar
Congress of 1826.
of Doc. 125 and
Doc. 126]
Apr. 
24
(33)
To the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Instructions discreetly to verify whether program
is of purely ceremonial and commemorative
nature.
255 
[Pg. 
255
includes 
portions
of Doc. 127, Doc.
128, 
Doc. 
129,
Doc. 130, and Doc.
131]
Apr. 
28
(50)
From the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Assurance that Congress is purely ceremonial.
255 
[Pg. 
255
includes 
portions
of Doc. 127, Doc.
128, 
Doc. 
129,
Doc. 130, and Doc.
131]
May 
11
(35)
To the Minister in Panama (tel.)
U. S. acceptance of invitation.
255 
[Pg. 
255
includes 
portions
of Doc. 127, Doc.
128, 
Doc. 
129,
Doc. 130, and Doc.
131]
1926
May 
29
(37)
To the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Appointment of U. S. delegates to Bolivar
Congress, Minister to serve as chairman.
255 
[Pg. 
255
includes 
portions
of Doc. 127, Doc.
128, 
Doc. 
129,
Doc. 130, and Doc.
131]
June 
3
(40)
To the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Instructions to refrain from participation in any
discussions of political or controversial nature,
should they arise.
255 
[Pg. 
255
includes 
portions
of Doc. 127, Doc.
128, 
Doc. 
129,
Doc. 130, and Doc.
131]
June 
22
(21)
To the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Instructions to ascertain whether Honduran
delegate was under instructions in actions
256 
[Pg. 
256
includes 
portions

unfriendly to United States, and to request that
appropriate steps be taken to prevent repetition.
of Doc. 131 and
Doc. 132]
June 
24
(52)
To the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Request 
for 
full 
information 
concerning
Associated Press report, June 22, that Congress
has 
unanimously 
adopted 
a 
resolution
recommending common action by Pan American
states against any aggressor state.
257 
[Pg. 
257
includes 
portions
of Doc. 133 and
Doc. 134]
June 
24
(50)
From the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Abstention of U. S. delegates from voting upon
resolution adopted by Congress recognizing
desirability of an American league of nations.
257 
[Pg. 
257
includes 
portions
of Doc. 133 and
Doc. 134]
June 
25
(43)
From the Minister in Honduras (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s regret concerning action of
Honduran delegate, who was not acting under
instructions and who has ceased to be a delegate.
258 
[Pg. 
258
includes 
portions
of Doc. 135 and
Doc. 136]
Undated
[Rec’d
June 25]
(51)
From the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Resolution adopted by Congress (text printed)
recommending common action by Pan American
states against any aggressor; Minister’s statement
for 
the 
record 
(text 
printed) 
explaining
delegation’s position toward this and other
resolutions of political nature.
258 
[Pg. 
258
includes 
portions
of Doc. 135 and
Doc. 136]
June 
25
(52)
From the Minister in Panama (tel.)
Withdrawal, at final session of Congress, of
Nicaraguan motion recommending that the Sixth
Pan American Conference consider transference
of seat of Pan American Union to Panama.
259 
[Pg. 
259
includes 
portions
of Doc. 136 and
Doc. 137]
TACNA-ARICA ARBITRATION: TERMINATION OF THE PLEBISCITE
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Jan. 
4
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to obtain Peruvian views toward possible
260 
[Pg.
260 is part

(1)
settlement outside of plebiscite, being guided by (1)
information from Ambassador in Chile concerning
conversations with representatives of Bolivia, Uruguay,
and Argentina, and (2) Department telegram to
Ambassador in Chile, December 22, 1925 (summary
printed), to the effect that if interested Latin American
Governments can bring about request from Chile and
Peru for good offices, United States will be glad to offer
them, always provided that integrity of arbitration and
impartiality of Arbitrator are maintained unimpaired.
of 
Doc.
138]
Jan. 
6
(8)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Suggestion that representatives in Argentina and
Uruguay be instructed concerning U. S. attitude toward
diplomatic settlement, and that matter be discussed with
Argentine 
and 
Uruguayan 
representatives 
in
Washington.
263 
[Pg.
263
includes
portions of
Doc. 
139
and 
Doc.
140]
Jan. 
7
(4)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Query whether there has been opportunity to outline to
Argentine and Uruguayan representatives, American
attitude as summarized in telegram No. 1, January 4, to
the Ambassador in Peru.
263 
[Pg.
263
includes
portions of
Doc. 
139
and 
Doc.
140]
Jan. 
8
(9)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Informal statements to Argentine and Uruguayan
representatives; Uruguayan Minister’s preference for
Argentine plan of sounding out Chile and Peru to see if
they would not advise Arbitrator that they appreciate
fact that a more comprehensive settlement should be
made than was thought of when question was submitted
for arbitration.
264 
[Pg.
264 is part
of 
Doc.
141]
Jan. 8
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Opinion that in view of acts of violence
such as that visited by Chileans on repatriated Peruvians
arriving in Tacna January 6, Peruvians should not be
266 
[Pg.
266
includes
portions of

encouraged to return home to take part in plebiscite until
Chilean Commissioner declares a change in policy,
accompanied by punishment of guilty and adequate
guarantees of good government.
Doc. 
141
and 
Doc.
142]
Jan. 
9
(5)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Statement of U. S. policy, in conversations with
Argentine 
and 
Uruguayan 
representatives 
in
Washington; repetition to U. S. representatives in
Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay of certain information to
be used in explaining U. S. attitude, if approached.
268 
[Pg.
268 is part
of 
Doc.
143]
Jan. 
9
(1)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Report that views of representatives of Argentina,
Bolivia, and Brazil in Peru differ from those reported as
coming from representatives of these countries in Chile.
Peru’s desire for and confidence in winning plebiscite if
given fair chance at polls, and belief that onus for
calling off plebiscite will be placed squarely on Chile.
269 
[Pg.
269
includes
portions of
Doc. 
143
and 
Doc.
144]
Jan. 10
(2)
From the Minister in Uruguay (tel.)
Press statement of Argentine Foreign Minister, on visit
in Montevideo, that Argentina’s influence would be
thrown toward execution of award or broadening of
powers of Arbitrator; his opinion that failure to reach
solution would be serious blow to practice of arbitration.
273 
[Pg.
273
includes
portions of
Doc. 
144,
Doc. 
145,
and 
Doc.
146]
Jan. 11 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Pershing: Opinion that Tacna disturbances cannot be
made basis for ultimatum, but that Chile should be
impressed with responsibility for maintaining order; that
avoidance of any new crisis is imperative, pending
Arbitrator’s opinion clarifying situation as to appeals
filed by Chile and Peru.
273 
[Pg.
273
includes
portions of
Doc. 
144,
Doc. 
145,
and 
Doc.
146]
Jan. 11
(4)
To the Minister in Panama (tel.)
For General Lassiter: Notification of his appointment to
274 
[Pg.
274
includes

take place of General Pershing as Chairman of the
Plebiscitary Commission.
portions of
Doc. 
146
and 
Doc.
147]
Jan. 13
(5)
From the Minister in Uruguay (tel.)
Press statement of Uruguayan Foreign Minister,
expressing same attitude as that of Argentine Foreign
Minister reported January 10.
276 
[Pg.
276
includes
portions of
Doc. 
147
and 
Doc.
148]
Jan. 15 To the President of the Plebiscitary Commission (tel.)
Arbitrator’s opinion and decision (text printed) upon the
appeal from the decision of the Plebiscitary Commission
of December 9, 1925.
277 
[Pg.
277 is part
of 
Doc.
149]
Jan. 18 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Pershing: Formal resignation as Commissioner.
(Footnote: Information that General Pershing left Arica
January 27.)
281 
[Pg.
281
includes
portions of
Doc. 
149
and 
Doc.
150]
Jan. 28 To the President of the Plebiscitary Commission (tel.)
Arbitrator’s order (text printed) dismissing, except as to
matters dealt with in opinion of January 15, the appeal
filed by Chile on the same date.
282 
[Pg.
282
includes
portions of
Doc. 
150
and 
Doc.
151]
Feb. 1
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Importance of expediting consideration
of any appeals taken on Chilean and Peruvian motions
defeated in Commission meeting of January 30. Request
for advice as to action should further prosecution of task
of holding plebiscite appear impossible.
283 
[Pg.
283
includes
portions of
Doc. 
151
and 
Doc.
152]

Feb. 
3
(7)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Suggestion to be made to Peruvian President, if
opportunity offers, that leaders’ duty is to use influence
toward settlement rather than deliberately to arouse
public feeling. Conversation with Peruvian Ambassador
at Washington, in which Secretary made U. S. attitude of
nonintervention plain.
284 
[Pg.
284
includes
portions of
Doc. 
152
and 
Doc.
153]
Feb. 4
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Assurance of Arbitrator’s readiness to
dispose of any appeals taken. Instructions to give Chile
and Peru to understand that should election be vitiated,
Commissioner will vote to set it aside and hold a new
one.
286 
[Pg.
286 is part
of 
Doc.
154]
Feb. 10 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Proposal, should conditions not be
improved at once, to press for passage of a resolution by
Plebiscitary Commission charging Chilean authorities
with frustrating plebiscite.
288 
[Pg.
288 is part
of 
Doc.
155]
Feb. 11 To the President of the Plebiscitary Commission (tel.)
Arbitrator’s order (text printed) allowing Chilean and
Peruvian appeals on motions defeated in Commission
meeting of January 30.
295 
[Pg.
295
includes
portions of
Doc. 
155
and 
Doc.
156]
Feb. 15
(9)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Explanation that submission of certain plebiscitary
questions to decision and control of Chilean tribunals
and authorities has been humiliating to Peru.
296 
[Pg.
296
includes
portions of
Doc. 
156
and 
Doc.
157]
Feb. 16 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Promulgation of registration and election
regulations on February 15 and postponement of
registration until March 15.
297 
[Pg.
297
includes
portions of

Doc. 
157
and 
Doc.
158]
Feb. 16
(10)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Memorandum for Foreign Minister (text printed)
inquiring whether Chile would be disposed to avail
herself of U. S. good offices, it being understood that
pending any adjustment other than by plebiscite, the
authority of Plebiscitary Commission and arrangements
for plebiscite remain unimpaired.
298 
[Pg.
298
includes
portions of
Doc. 
158
and 
Doc.
159]
Feb. 16 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions not to press for resolution
charging Chile with frustration, but to continue in
attitude of withholding judgment and of proceeding with
plebiscite, and to make no intimation of what may be
ultimate action.
300 
[Pg.
300
includes
portions of
Doc. 
159
and 
Doc.
160]
Feb. 16
(12)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Memorandum for Foreign Minister (text printed)
inquiring whether Peru would be disposed to avail
herself of U. S. good offices, it being understood that
pending any adjustment other than by plebiscite, the
authority of Plebiscitary Commission and arrangements
for plebiscite remain unimpaired.
302 
[Pg.
302
includes
portions of
Doc. 
160
and 
Doc.
161]
Feb. 18
(20)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Belief that diplomatic settlement can be brought about,
despite recent change in sentiment which now favors
plebiscite.
303 
[Pg.
303
includes
portions of
Doc. 
161
and 
Doc.
162]
Feb. 18
(10)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian President’s response, to inquiry made by head
of New York house of Wessel, Duval & Co. as to a
peaceable compromise, that bitterness could be ended
only by restoration of the provinces to Peru.
304 
[Pg.
304
includes
portions of
Doc. 
162

and 
Doc.
163]
Feb. 19
(22)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Chile’s 
memorandum 
(text 
printed) 
indicating
willingness to accept U. S. good offices, with
understanding that proceedings or steps taken in
exercise of such good offices will not impede
plebiscitary proceedings provided in arbitral award.
305 
[Pg.
305
includes
portions of
Doc. 
163
and 
Doc.
164]
Feb. 20
(23)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Conversation in which Foreign Minister stated that
tender of good offices had come at time when Chile was
confident of favorable outcome of plebiscite and that
there were limits to concessions which Government
could get Congress to approve.
306 
[Pg.
306
includes
portions of
Doc. 
164
and 
Doc.
165]
Feb. 20 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Inquiry whether Department policy is to
press forward with plebiscite.
309 
[Pg.
309
includes
portions of
Doc. 
166
and 
Doc.
167]
Feb. 23 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions to push actively ahead with
plebiscite.
309 
[Pg.
309
includes
portions of
Doc. 
166
and 
Doc.
167]
Feb. 23
(14)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to present good-offices memorandum at
once and to cable Peru’s reply at earliest possible
moment.
310 
[Pg.
310
includes
portions of
Doc. 
167

and 
Doc.
168]
Feb. 24 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Report that Peruvians may demand
postponement of registration beyond March 15, and that
representative of Plebiscitary Commission is being sent
to Iquique to receive statements of Peruvians wishing to
return to provinces. Query whether American consuls at
other points in Chile might be notified also to receive
such statements.
311 
[Pg.
311 includes
portions of
Doc. 
168
and 
Doc.
169]
Feb. 25 To the President of the Plebiscitary Commission (tel.)
Decision of Arbitrator upon appeals made January 30
(text printed).
312 
[Pg.
312 is part
of 
Doc.
170]
Feb. 25 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Query as to policy to be pursued if
assumption that pressing for plebiscite would forward
negotiations proves to be a mistake. Recommendation
that if Peru accepts good offices, proceedings should be
suspended.
315 
[Pg.
315 is part
of 
Doc.
171]
Feb. 26 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Regret that consular officers cannot be
authorized to act for Plebiscitary Commission; question,
indeed, whether Commission itself has jurisdiction to
act outside of plebiscitary area.
316 
[Pg.
316
includes
portions of
Doc. 
171
and 
Doc.
172]
Feb. 26
(16)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian 
memorandum 
(text 
printed) 
expressing
preference for plebiscite, although willing to have some
other adjustment, provided United States is a party
thereto.
317 
[Pg.
317
includes
portions of
Doc. 
173
and 
Doc.
174]
Feb. 27 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Assertion that since both parties insist on
317 
[Pg.
317

plebiscite, there is no choice but to conduct proceedings
with all care to protect Arbitrator and ultimately to place
blame for failure where it belongs.
includes
portions of
Doc. 
173
and 
Doc.
174]
Mar. 2
(18)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Memorandum for Peru (text printed) expressing regret at
rejection of good offices and stating impossibility of
United States becoming a party to an adjustment.
319 
[Pg.
319
includes
portions of
Doc. 
174
and 
Doc.
175]
Mar. 2
(18)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian President’s reluctance in rejecting U. S. offer;
his reiteration of willingness to accept settlement should
United States be a party to it, and suggestion that a U. S.
guarantee be indirectly accomplished.
320 
[Pg.
320 is part
of 
Doc.
176]
Mar. 4
(21)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Position that acceptance of good offices with condition
annexed constitutes rejection of offer as made, that
United States cannot guarantee any settlement, and that
speculation over ways to accomplish such aim indirectly
is futile.
321 
[Pg.
321
includes
portions of
Doc. 
177
and 
Doc.
178]
Mar. 9
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Peruvian Commissioner’s threat to
withdraw should his resolution to postpone fail. U. S.
Commissioner’s view that only course is (1) to state that
conditions are incompatible with fair plebiscite, but
continue registration in hope of improvement, or (2) to
terminate plebiscitary operations, fixing responsibility
on Chile.
321 
[Pg.
321
includes
portions of
Doc. 
177
and 
Doc.
178]
Mar. 10
(30)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Possibility that should Peru’s request for postponement
be denied, she might accept a new tender of good
offices.
322 
[Pg.
322
includes
portions of

Doc. 
178
and 
Doc.
179]
Mar. 10 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Opinion that recent incidents are not
sufficiently conclusive to justify sudden reversal of
existing policy, and that Commission should continue
plebiscitary arrangements until time arrives for
determining finally whether fair plebiscite can be held.
324 
[Pg.
324 is part
of 
Doc.
180]
Mar. 11 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Commissioner’s conviction that he
should proceed with course outlined in telegram of
March 9.
325 
[Pg.
325
includes
portions of
Doc. 
180
and 
Doc.
181]
Mar. 11
(20)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Memorandum for Foreign Minister (text printed)
interpreting term “good offices” in its widest possible
intendment.
(Similar memorandum transmitted in telegram No. 23,
March 11, to Peru.)
327 
[Pg.
327 is part
of 
Doc.
182]
Mar. 12 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Opinion that it would be unfortunate
should Commission take any attitude closing door and
leaving Peru to conclude she had succeeded in having
plebiscite called off without having to assume
responsibility for it and at same time had succeeded in
having blame placed on Chile.
328 
[Pg.
328
includes
portions of
Doc. 
182
and 
Doc.
183]
Mar. 12
(24)
From the Chargé in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian memorandum (text printed) stating willingness
to accept good offices as now explained, provided the
same entails U. S. assurance of no war between Peru
and Chile.
330 
[Pg.
330
includes
portions of
Doc. 
184
and 
Doc.
185]

Mar. 15 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Opinion that upon passage of Peruvian
resolution recommending termination of proceedings,
Arbitrator should suspend electoral proceedings for
three months, have personnel of electoral boards
withdrawn, and direct Plebiscitary Commission to
adjourn to meet in Washington May 1.
330 
[Pg.
330
includes
portions of
Doc. 
184
and 
Doc.
185]
Mar. 16
(36)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Chilean 
memorandum 
(text 
printed) 
expressing
continued disposition to accept U. S. good offices.
332 
[Pg.
332
includes
portions of
Doc. 
185
and 
Doc.
186]
Mar. 18 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Opinion that program sketched in telegram
of March 15 would facilitate obstructive tactics of Peru
and render difficult any lasting settlement; that only way
to keep door open for settlement is by publishing good-
offices correspondence and by voting down resolutions
pending before Plebiscitary Commission.
333 
[Pg.
333 is part
of 
Doc.
187]
Mar. 18
(25)
To the Chargé in Peru (tel.)
Memorandum for Peru (text printed) expressing hope of
more favorable view toward good-offices proposal.
334 
[Pg.
334
includes
portions of
Doc. 
187
and 
Doc.
188]
Mar. 19
(27)
From the Chargé in Peru (tel.)
Opinion that Peruvian President would find himself at
odds with people were he to alter views as to holding
plebiscite.
335 
[Pg.
335
includes
portions of
Doc. 
189
and 
Doc.
190]

Mar. 19 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Reasons why action outlined in
Department’s telegram of March 18 would prejudice
more than further a desirable state of affairs.
335 
[Pg.
335
includes
portions of
Doc. 
189
and 
Doc.
190]
Mar. 20
(26)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Importance of exploring possibility of Chile’s presenting
any new suggestion toward settlement, such as
enlargement of Arbitrator’s powers.
337 
[Pg.
337
includes
portions of
Doc. 
190
and 
Doc.
191]
Mar. 21
(31)
From the Chargé in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian memorandum, March 20 (text printed),
reiterating desire for plebiscite.
338 
[Pg.
338
includes
portions of
Doc. 
191
and 
Doc.
192]
Mar. 21 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Objections to further postponement, and
recommendation 
for 
termination 
of 
proceedings;
willingness, however, to carry out Department program
if this is still considered best course; request for
instructions should Peru withdraw.
339 
[Pg.
339
includes
portions of
Doc. 
192
and 
Doc.
193]
Mar. 22
(40)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Conversation in which Foreign Minister emphasized
difficulty of securing congressional approval for
unlimited enlargement of Arbitrator’s powers; his
suggestion that Arbitrator bring pressure on Peru to
induce acceptance of mediation and that plebiscite be
kept alive by adjournment.
340 
[Pg.
340
includes
portions of
Doc. 
193
and 
Doc.
194]

Mar. 22 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Chilean note (text printed) presenting
Chilean viewpoint and inquiring as to further steps to be
taken to insure fair plebiscite.
343 
[Pg.
343 is part
of 
Doc.
195]
Mar. 22 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Procedure to be followed in carrying out
Department program; instruction, should Peru withdraw,
to take briefest possible adjournment; information that
publication of good-offices correspondence is being
withheld for present. Instructions to make specific
demands upon Chilean Commissioner looking to
immediate improvement of conditions necessary for
holding free and fair plebiscite.
345 
[Pg.
345
includes
portions of
Doc. 
195
and 
Doc.
196]
Mar. 23
(25)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Information and comments concerning Department
program and Chilean aspects of situation. Explanation
that telegram No. 26, March 20, was not intended as
invitation to use pressure on Chile to accept unlimited
enlargement of Arbitrator’s powers, that Arbitrator has
not been consulted on question, and that he could not
accept such powers unless Peru also were willing.
346 
[Pg.
346
includes
portions of
Doc. 
196
and 
Doc.
197]
Mar. 24
(33)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian memorandum (text printed) accepting good
offices, in view of worsened situation in plebiscitary
area.
348 
[Pg.
348
includes
portions of
Doc. 
197
and 
Doc.
198]
Mar. 25 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Statement made in Commission meeting
March 25 (text printed) abstaining from voting upon
resolution to inform Arbitrator that fair plebiscite is
impossible. Suggestion that, in view of failure of various
motions, Peru’s failure to withdraw, and possibility that
she may not take part in registration, Peruvian and
349 
[Pg.
349
includes
portions of
Doc. 
198
and 
Doc.
199]

Chilean Commissioners be instructed to vote for
postponement.
Mar. 25
(30)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Memorandum for Foreign Minister (text printed)
inquiring whether, in view of fact that offer of good
offices has now been accepted by both Chile and Peru,
Chile will (1) instruct her Commissioner to take
appropriate steps to suspend plebiscitary proceedings
and (2) authorize representatives to enter into
negotiations at Washington with representatives of Peru,
U. S. good offices to be exercised by and through
Secretary of State.
350 
[Pg.
350
includes
portions of
Doc. 
199
and 
Doc.
200]
Mar. 25
(27)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Memorandum for Peru (text printed) making inquiries
identical with those made of Chile.
351 
[Pg.
351
includes
portions of
Doc. 
200
and 
Doc.
201]
Mar. 26 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Request that Chilean and Peruvian
Commissioners be notified to vote for 30-day
postponement of registration, since indications are that
Peru may not participate.
(Footnote: Department suggestion, March 26, that, for
lack of time to arrange suspension, day-to-day
adjournments be taken.)
352 
[Pg.
352
includes
portions of
Doc. 
202,
Doc. 
203,
and 
Doc.
204]
Mar. 26 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Approval of statement made March 25.
352 
[Pg.
352
includes
portions of
Doc. 
202,
Doc. 
203,
and 
Doc.
204]

Mar. 26
(45)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Possibility that Chile may now refuse good offices and
insist either upon going ahead with registration or on
delay Of only 10 or 15 days.
352 
[Pg.
352
includes
portions of
Doc. 
202,
Doc. 
203,
and 
Doc.
204]
Mar. 26
(47)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Statement of Chile that no modification has been made
in her express reservation that exercise of good offices
should not impede plebiscitary proceedings; intention of
Chile to publish Department’s first memorandum on
subject, with Chilean reply.
353 
[Pg.
353
includes
portions of
Doc. 
204
and 
Doc.
205]
Mar. 27 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Request that Arbitrator intervene to
terminate plebiscite or neutralize territory.
354 
[Pg.
354 is part
of 
Doc.
206]
Mar. 27 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions, since Chile is hesitating about
accepting good offices, to go ahead with registration, if
possible, and, if not, to be prepared to continue at any
moment.
355 
[Pg.
355
includes
portions of
Doc. 
207
and 
Doc.
208]
Mar. 27
(32)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Surprise at Chilean attitude as expressed in telegram No.
45, March 26, and opinion that 15 days would not
suffice for negotiations.
355 
[Pg.
355
includes
portions of
Doc. 
207
and 
Doc.
208]
Mar. 27 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Renewal of recommendation to terminate
356 
[Pg.
356
includes

plebiscitary proceedings and suspend operations of
registration and election boards.
portions of
Doc. 
209
and 
Doc.
210]
Mar. 27 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Proposal that Peruvian Commissioner be
informed that request for participation in suspension of
plebiscite is annulled and that he be offered choice of
proposing his own motion to terminate plebiscite or else
either to proceed with registration or to withdraw.
356 
[Pg.
356
includes
portions of
Doc. 
209
and 
Doc.
210]
Mar. 27 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Information that Arbitrator cannot
terminate proceedings on own initiative and that
registration must be continued until both parties agree
upon suspension, as contemplated by offer of good
offices.
357 
[Pg.
357
includes
portions of
Doc. 
210
and 
Doc.
211]
Mar. 27
(35)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Explanation that suspension during negotiations is
distinct from a postponement or termination. Inability to
believe that Chile will insist upon reservation which
qualifies her acceptance of good offices in such a way as
to render it wholly illusory. Intention to furnish entire
correspondence to press if Chile publishes any part of it.
358 
[Pg.
358
includes
portions of
Doc. 
212
and 
Doc.
213]
Mar. 27 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Insistence that registration shall proceed,
since Chile questions right to suspend without her
consent and since failure to continue will cause
embarrassment and prejudice all plans for settlement.
358 
[Pg.
358
includes
portions of
Doc. 
212
and 
Doc.
213]
Mar. 27
(48)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Chilean memorandum (text printed) agreeing to instruct
Ambassador 
at 
Washington 
to 
participate 
in
359 
[Pg.
359
includes
portions of

negotiations, but refusing to agree to suspension of
plebiscitary proceedings during such negotiations.
Doc. 
213
and 
Doc.
214]
Mar. 27
(36)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian memorandum (text printed) agreeing to
suspend plebiscitary proceedings during negotiations at
Washington.
361 
[Pg.
361
includes
portions of
Doc. 
215
and 
Doc.
216]
Mar. 28
(50)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Importance of continuing registration until Chilean
misunderstanding over suspension is cleared up.
361 
[Pg.
361
includes
portions of
Doc. 
215
and 
Doc.
216]
Mar. 29
(30)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to obtain Peruvian cooperation toward
minimizing seriousness of new complication interjected
by Peru’s refusal to participate in registration, a refusal
apparently based on mistaken idea that offer and
acceptance of good offices imposed suspension of
registration.
362 
[Pg.
362
includes
portions of
Doc. 
216
and 
Doc.
217]
Mar. 29
(36)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Hope that Foreign Minister will find way to agree to
suspension during negotiations.
364 
[Pg.
364
includes
portions of
Doc. 
217,
Doc. 
218,
and 
Doc.
219]
Mar. 29 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Reiteration of point that best and perhaps
only hope of settlement by negotiation lies in
maintaining situation for present just as it is.
364 
[Pg.
364
includes
portions of

Doc. 
217,
Doc. 
218,
and 
Doc.
219]
Mar. 30
(38)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
President’s disposition to cooperate in good faith, the
disinclination to proceed with registration being based
upon assertion of impossible conditions in the provinces
and belief that settlement by direct negotiations is
preferable; 
his 
intention 
to 
appoint 
Peruvian
representative 
on 
Plebiscitary 
Commission 
as
Plenipotentiary to negotiate at Washington.
365 
[Pg.
365
includes
portions of
Doc. 
219
and 
Doc.
220]
Mar. 31
(31)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to emphasize seriousness of Peruvian
position, inasmuch as (1) suspension of plebiscite can
properly be brought about only by agreement with Chile
and Peru, (2) Peru’s declination to participate in
registration is equivalent to withdrawal, (3) Chile may
contend that Peru by abandoning proceedings has given
up legal right to plebiscite, and therefore to territory, and
(4) Department efforts to have Chile agree to suspension
are embarrassed by Peru’s failure to cooperate.
366 
[Pg.
366 is part
of 
Doc.
221]
Apr. 1
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Inquiry as to nonregistration of Peruvians,
and comment that negotiations would be greatly delayed
by sending Peruvian Commissioner to Washington as
Plenipotentiary.
367 
[Pg.
367
includes
portions of
Doc. 
221,
Doc. 
222,
and 
Doc.
223]
Apr. 
1
(40)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
President’s statement that Peru could not accept
responsibility for present situation, nor for failure of
plebiscite or of good offices, if that should follow; that
plebiscite was impossible without improved conditions;
and that whole morale and spirit of Peruvian delegation
367 
[Pg.
367
includes
portions of
Doc. 
221,
Doc. 
222,

has been broken by the general assumption that
plebiscite would be suspended.
and 
Doc.
223]
Apr. 1
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Proposal for submission to Peru and Chile
(text printed) that plenipotentiaries be designated to
meet in Washington April 6, that Secretary of State
submit basis of adjustment for their consideration, and
that, upon acceptance in principle of basis, plebiscite be
suspended.
(Telegrams transmitting proposal sent also to Chile and
Peru.)
369 
[Pg.
369
includes
portions of
Doc. 
223
and 
Doc.
224]
Apr. 1
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Peruvian assertion that in failing to
participate in registration Peru is complying with U. S.
request to suspend, and that she will withdraw unless
complete suspension is granted. Indications that Chile
will not suspend and is registering 200 voters a day.
370 
[Pg.
370
includes
portions of
Doc. 
225
and 
Doc.
226]
Apr. 
2
(33)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Explanation of purpose in submitting three-point
program of April 1. Instructions to make clear to
Peruvian President that suspension during negotiations
can be achieved only by agreement between the parties.
370 
[Pg.
370
includes
portions of
Doc. 
225
and 
Doc.
226]
Apr. 
3
(58)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Chilean memorandum (text printed) accepting three-
point program proposed April 1, and designating
Chilean Ambassador at Washington as Plenipotentiary.
371 
[Pg.
371
includes
portions of
Doc. 
226,
Doc. 
227,
and 
Doc.
228]
Apr. 
4
(44)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian memorandum (text printed) accepting three-
371 
[Pg.
371
includes

point program and designating Peruvian Ambassador at
Washington as Plenipotentiary.
portions of
Doc. 
226,
Doc. 
227,
and 
Doc.
228]
Apr. 
6
(60)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Foreign Office statement to press, April 5 (text printed),
that proceeding under good offices is limited to
differences between Chile and Peru, arrangement with
Bolivia being subject of conversations between Bolivia
and the Chilean Minister at La Paz.
372 
[Pg.
372
includes
portions of
Doc. 
228
and 
Doc.
229]
Apr. 6
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Secretary’s formal statement made at first
meeting 
of 
Plenipotentiaries 
(substance 
printed)
suggesting as a basis for adjustment an equitable
division of territory in dispute and suspension of
plebiscitary proceedings pending an agreement.
373 
[Pg.
373 is part
of 
Doc.
230]
Apr. 10 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Request for views as to whether, if
registration be extended to allow Peru full 30 days, she
would be in position to proceed with registration.
374 
[Pg.
374
includes
portions of
Doc. 
231
and 
Doc.
232]
Apr. 10
(43)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Message from Lassiter (text printed) reporting Edwards’
remarks, upon return as Commissioner, concerning
Chile’s continued desire for plebiscite. Conversation
with Chilean Ambassador (substance printed) in which
Secretary asserted that Edwards was first to propose
adjustment outside the plebiscite, and Ambassador
agreed to urge Chilean Government to make a definite
proposition.
374 
[Pg.
374
includes
portions of
Doc. 
231
and 
Doc.
232]
Apr. 11
(44)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Assurance that there is no basis for any assumption of
375 
[Pg.
375

breakdown in negotiations and that Secretary intends to
exhaust every possibility of settlement before allowing
negotiations to fail.
includes
portions of
Doc. 
232
and 
Doc.
233]
Apr. 11
(67)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Formula for presentation to Plenipotentiaries (text
printed) suggesting that, in view of unwillingness to
agree to equitable division, the parties consider
advisability of either (1) a grant of independent
nationality to inhabitants of area (neutralization) or (2)
cession to Bolivia.
376 
[Pg.
376
includes
portions of
Doc. 
233
and 
Doc.
234]
Apr. 11 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Opinion that Peru, if told to proceed
without cancelation of registration, would withdraw.
Suggestion that Chile be offered choice of either
neutralizing territory during plebiscite or recognizing
that plebiscite must be terminated with blame for its
frustration placed upon her.
377 
[Pg.
377
includes
portions of
Doc. 
234
and 
Doc.
235]
Apr. 12
(45)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions to ascertain whether Foreign Minister
would be willing for Secretary to present to
Plenipotentiaries a proposal involving Bolivia.
(Similar telegram sent to Ambassador in Peru.)
378 
[Pg.
378
includes
portions of
Doc. 
235
and 
Doc.
236]
Apr. 12
(46)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Secretary’s intention of framing proposal along line
suggested in Ambassador’s telegram No. 67, April 11,
should he receive favorable reply to telegram No. 45,
April 12.
379 
[Pg.
379
includes
portions of
Doc. 
237
and 
Doc.
238]
Apr. 12
(69)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s desire for cession of entire province
to Bolivia. Ambassador’s opinion that it would be
379 
[Pg.
379
includes

unwise for Secretary to propose cession, and that if
Chile and Peru do not propose it, plan in alternative
form, as suggested in telegram No. 67, April 11, be
advanced.
portions of
Doc. 
237
and 
Doc.
238]
Apr. 13
(43)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to ascertain whether Peruvian President’s
speech of April 9 has been reported correctly and what
are real intentions as to Peruvian-Bolivian alliance.
380 
[Pg.
380
includes
portions of
Doc. 
238,
Doc. 
239,
and 
Doc.
240]
Apr. 13 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From 
Lassiter: 
Information 
that 
Department’s
instructions of March 22 to demand reforms by Chile
were not carried out because of later instructions to
maintain status quo; offer to forward outline of demands
necessary to be made in order to hold plebiscite.
380 
[Pg.
380
includes
portions of
Doc. 
238,
Doc. 
239,
and 
Doc.
240]
Apr. 14
(71)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Press editorial ridiculing plan of independence and
neutralization. The Ambassador’s opinion that United
States should present this plan only in alternative form,
and then only if authorship be ascribed to Edwards.
381 
[Pg.
381
includes
portions of
Doc. 
240
and 
Doc.
241]
Apr. 15 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions to report on particular respects
in which Chile has defaulted in meeting Commission
demands, using for a guide questions based upon
prerequisites resolution of November 1925.
382 
[Pg.
382 is part
of 
Doc.
242]
Apr. 15
(50)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Query whether interview with General Pershing or
intimation to press would be preferable method of
384 
[Pg.
384
includes
portions of

getting published the facts as to authorship of
neutralization proposal.
Doc. 
243
and 
Doc.
244]
Apr. 15 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Secretary’s proposal to Plenipotentiaries,
April 15 (text printed), incorporating alternative
propositions. Acceptance of neutralization proposition
by Peru. Query whether discreet suggestion can be made
to Edwards to urge Chilean Government also to accept
neutralization.
384 
[Pg.
384
includes
portions of
Doc. 
243
and 
Doc.
244]
Apr. 15
(44)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Acceptance 
by 
Peruvian 
Plenipotentiary 
of
neutralization proposition as basis of adjustment.
(Similar telegram sent to Ambassador in Chile.)
385 
[Pg.
385
includes
portions of
Doc. 
244,
Doc. 
245,
and 
Doc.
246]
Apr. 16
(76)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Foreign Office statement published in Chilean press
(text printed) deploring press editorial of April 14 and
giving facts as to origin of neutralization plan.
385 
[Pg.
385
includes
portions of
Doc. 
244,
Doc. 
245,
and 
Doc.
246]
Apr. 17
(52)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Secretary’s press statement (text printed) making public
full terms of his proposal of April 15 and explaining
source of neutralization proposition.
386 
[Pg.
386
includes
portions of
Doc. 
246
and 
Doc.
247]
Apr. 17
(78)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Information that neither President nor Foreign Minister
387 
[Pg.
387
includes

is disposed to accept either of alternative propositions,
since Chilean Congress insists on a plebiscite.
portions of
Doc. 
247
and 
Doc.
248]
Apr. 18
(79)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Suggestion that if proposal to cede to Bolivia be not
accepted, Secretary try division of territory based upon
cession of Arica to Chile, to be at once ceded to Bolivia,
and retention of Tacna by Peru; or that, failing in this,
award be modified and Tacna and Arica separately be
permitted to determine to which nation it shall belong.
388 
[Pg.
388
includes
portions of
Doc. 
248
and 
Doc.
249]
Apr. 18
(53)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Peruvian Plenipotentiary’s suggestion of combining
alternative propositions, by neutralizing all territory
except a strip to be transferred to Bolivia. Instructions to
make clear to Chile fact that Peru has not rejected
cession proposition. Query whether it would be helpful
should Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay join in urging
settlement.
390 
[Pg.
390
includes
portions of
Doc. 
250
and 
Doc.
251]
Apr. 18 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Statement that Chile’s real default lies
not in technical nonfulfillment, although that can be
shown, but in deportations of Peruvians and constant
campaign of open violence and secret terrorism, and that
she is counting on difficulty of securing satisfactory
evidence against her.
390 
[Pg.
390
includes
portions of
Doc. 
250
and 
Doc.
251]
Apr. 18
(80)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Suggestion of formal memorandum to impress Chile
with gravity of situation and shake her confidence in
validity of present registration.
395 
[Pg.
395
includes
portions of
Doc. 
251
and 
Doc.
252]
Apr. 19 From the President of Bolivia to President Coolidge
(tel.)
Appreciation of suggestion of Secretary of State that
396 
[Pg.
396 is part

Bolivia’s desire for a port be taken into account.
Intimation that Bolivia now should be represented in
Washington negotiations.
of 
Doc.
253]
Apr. 19 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Personal message from General Pershing
to Edwards (text printed) seeking Commissioner’s
influence in solution by neutralization.
397 
[Pg.
397
includes
portions of
Doc. 
254
and 
Doc.
255]
Apr. 20
(56)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions discreetly to influence Chile to vote for 30-
day extension of registration suggested in a cable from
the Secretary to General Lassiter.
397 
[Pg.
397
includes
portions of
Doc. 
254
and 
Doc.
255]
Apr. 20
(87)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
View that Bolivia only should be invited to enter
negotiations, and then only if Peru and Chile are willing,
and that Chilean opposition to good offices, which is
based on confidence that plebiscite will not be annulled,
must be broken down.
398 
[Pg.
398 is part
of 
Doc.
256]
Apr. 21
(58)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Decision that best and safest way to insure continuance
of negotiations is by holding plebiscitary process in
statu quo rather than by delivering suggested formal
memorandum to Chile.
399 
[Pg.
399 is part
of 
Doc.
257]
Apr. 21 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Outline of general principles of policy to
govern action should good offices fail.
400 
[Pg.
400
includes
portions of
Doc. 
257
and 
Doc.
258]

Apr. 21 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From 
Lassiter: 
Assertion 
that 
declaration 
of
Commission, April 20, that no date is now set for
election accomplishes maintenance of status quo and
renders action on 30-day extension of registration
unnecessary.
401 
[Pg.
401
includes
portions of
Doc. 
258
and 
Doc.
259]
Apr. 22 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions to push extension of
registration period, since any new situation, such as
lapse of registration without extension, would seriously
prejudice, if not defeat, prospects of settlement, and
since Chile has now agreed to vote for a 25-day
extension, up to and including May 20 or 21.
402 
[Pg.
402
includes
portions of
Doc. 
259
and 
Doc.
260]
Apr. 23 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Request that Department withdraw
instructions to push extension, since extension will
simply strengthen Chile’s position and place American
Commissioner in increasingly embarrassing position.
403 
[Pg.
403
includes
portions of
Doc. 
261
and 
Doc.
262]
Apr. 23 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Reply from Edwards to General Pershing
(text printed), to the effect that Chilean Government is
handling political aspects of problem and it is for them
to decide the course considered best for the continuing
of peace.
403 
[Pg.
403
includes
portions of
Doc. 
261
and 
Doc.
262]
Apr. 24 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Judgment that extension will least disturb
existing situation and will least prejudice normal
progress of good offices. Disappointment regarding state
of the evidence bearing upon Chile’s alleged frustration
of plebiscite.
404 
[Pg.
404
includes
portions of
Doc. 
262
and 
Doc.
263]

Apr. 24 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Assertion that in spite of difficulties in
obtaining proof, deportations have been so numerous
that large amount of evidence against controlling
authority is available.
407 
[Pg.
407 is part
of 
Doc.
264]
Apr. 25
(110)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Suggestion that Chile be sounded out on solution
embodying (1) cession of Arica to Bolivia; (2) Peruvian
consent to Chilean-Bolivian agreement on compensation
and economic arrangements, in consideration of
restoration of Tacna to Peru; and (3) demilitarization of
Morro of Arica and its creation as an international
memorial and symbol of peace.
408 
[Pg.
408 is part
of 
Doc.
265]
Apr. 26 From President Coolidge to the President of Bolivia
(tel.)
Information that negotiations at Washington are
confined to Chile and Peru and that Secretary of State
could not appropriately invite other governments to
participate.
409 
[Pg.
409
includes
portions of
Doc. 
266
and 
Doc.
267]
Apr. 26
(67)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Inquiry whether anything has been said to Bolivian
Minister at Santiago which could be interpreted as a U.
S. attempt to rupture direct negotiations between Chile
and Bolivia.
409 
[Pg.
409
includes
portions of
Doc. 
266
and 
Doc.
267]
Apr. 27
(116)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Negative reply to telegram No. 67, April 26. Opinion
that if Peru first accepts plan set forth in telegram No.
110, April 25, there will be no difficulty about
agreement being reached by Chile and Peru.
410 
[Pg.
410
includes
portions of
Doc. 
267
and 
Doc.
268]
Apr. 27
(117)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Opinion of commercial adviser of Chilean Ministry of
411 
[Pg.
411 includes

Commerce that influential Chileans prefer solution by
good offices and that Chile would gladly resume direct
negotiations, as she fears that refusal to negotiate further
may mean loss of opportunity to do so and may throw
Bolivia into close commercial relations with Argentina,
resulting in outlet to sea through Buenos Aires.
portions of
Doc. 
269,
Doc. 
270,
and 
Doc.
271]
Apr. 27
(68)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Chilean Ambassador’s recommendation to Foreign
Minister, on his own responsibility, that Tacna be
assigned to Peru and Arica to Bolivia, Peru and Chile
each to undertake negotiations with Bolivia as to
compensation 
and 
commercial 
advantages, 
the
agreements thus reached to be embodied in final
settlement of negotiations under good offices.
411 
[Pg.
411 includes
portions of
Doc. 
269,
Doc. 
270,
and 
Doc.
271]
Apr. 30
(124)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Statement, in resolution before Chilean Senate, that U.
S. 
Commissioner’s 
former 
opinion 
regarding
unfavorable conditions for plebiscite must be considered
as having disappeared in the light of his subsequent acts
furthering plebiscite. Likelihood that Senate will pass
resolution of Foreign Affairs Committee demanding
cessation of good offices.
411 
[Pg.
411 includes
portions of
Doc. 
269,
Doc. 
270,
and 
Doc.
271]
May 1
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin
American Affairs
Conversation with Chilean Ambassador, in which the
Secretary asserted that the statements made by U. S.
Commissioner (excerpts printed) in voting upon various
resolutions showed that he had reserved his position at
all times and had kept a perfectly free hand in the
matter.
412 
[Pg.
412
includes
portions of
Doc. 
271
and 
Doc.
272]
May 5
(46)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Résumé of considerations affecting present situation,
and instructions to endeavor to have Peruvian President
accept, in principle, division of the territory.
416 
[Pg.
416
includes
portions of
Doc. 
272

and 
Doc.
273]
May 6
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Request for information concerning
purported statement by Peru on April 29 that her
nonparticipation in electoral functions is in accordance
with a U. S. suggestion.
418 
[Pg.
418
includes
portions of
Doc. 
274
and 
Doc.
275]
May 7
(141)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Remedial effect upon outlook for diplomatic settlement,
occasioned by Ambassador’s note reminding Foreign
Office that United States did not conceive idea of good
offices, nor was forcing it upon Chile against her will,
but that Chile had made initial request in 1925.
418 
[Pg.
418
includes
portions of
Doc. 
274
and 
Doc.
275]
May 7
(53)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian President’s willingness to accept, in principle,
division of territory; necessity, however, of consulting
with congressional leaders before giving definite
answer.
420 
[Pg.
420
includes
portions of
Doc. 
275
and 
Doc.
276]
May 7
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Attempt to make clear Peru’s attitude
toward 
registration. 
U. 
S. 
Commissioner’s
understanding that extension of registration was for
purpose of preserving the status quo, and not with any
idea that Peru would commit herself to registration in
middle of registration period.
421 
[Pg.
421 is part
of 
Doc.
277]
May 9
(146)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Ambassador’s new note to Foreign Minister, May 8,
expressing regret that erroneous impression as to U. S.
motives had been allowed to permeate the masses and
calling attention to fact that Chile had been first to
422 
[Pg.
422
includes
portions of
Doc. 
277

suggest and virtually to invite good offices; publication
of note in newspapers of May 9.
and 
Doc.
278]
May 9
(147)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Transmittal of substance of note presented to Foreign
Office, May 8.
424 
[Pg.
424
includes
portions of
Doc. 
278
and 
Doc.
279]
May 11 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Review of record, showing that it is
incomprehensible for Peru to contend that United States
has countenanced, or advised or suggested, her
abstention from registration.
426 
[Pg.
426 is part
of 
Doc.
280]
May 11
(56)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian President’s inability, for reasons of internal
politics, to accept division of provinces, even in
principle; his point, however, that agreement already
made to cede portion of Arica to Bolivia, will effect
same result.
427 
[Pg.
427
includes
portions of
Doc. 
280
and 
Doc.
281]
May 12
(49)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to obtain Peruvian acceptance, in principle,
of plan of Bolivian corridor, with areas to north and
south of corridor going respectively to Peru and Chile,
details of plan to be worked out by negotiation.
428 
[Pg.
428
includes
portions of
Doc. 
282
and 
Doc.
283]
May 12 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Chilean Commissioner’s inquiry as to
what situation would be after end of registration period,
May 21.
428 
[Pg.
428
includes
portions of
Doc. 
282
and 
Doc.
283]

May 12
(151)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Foreign Office statement to press (text printed)
repudiating statement of Ministry’s legal counselor that
Chilean memorandum in 1925 suggesting good offices
had been drafted to head off a similar proceeding
instituted by the American Ambassador without the
knowledge of the Chilean Government.
429 
[Pg.
429
includes
portions of
Doc. 
283
and 
Doc.
284]
May 13 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Belief that, in consideration of certain
factors, it does not lie with United States to blame Peru
for abstaining from registration.
430 
[Pg.
430
includes
portions of
Doc. 
284
and 
Doc.
285]
May 14
(58)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Peruvian memorandum, May 13, accepting “formula for
negotiation” to include (1) Peruvian ratification of
promise made to Bolivia to grant her in the plebiscitary
territory a corridor to the sea, (2) allotment to Chile of
the territory south of the corridor, and (3) allotment to
Peru of the territory north of the corridor.
431 
[Pg.
431
includes
portions of
Doc. 
285
and 
Doc.
286]
May 14 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions to maintain strictest reticence
as to what situation is apt to be after May 21.
432 
[Pg.
432
includes
portions of
Doc. 
286
and 
Doc.
287]
May 15 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Suggested termination resolution for use in
Commission in case of abrupt break in negotiations (text
printed), with request for views thereon.
433 
[Pg.
433
includes
portions of
Doc. 
287
and 
Doc.
288]

May 15
(50)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Query as to whether Peruvian President has confirmed
the Secretary’s understanding of proposal as set forth in
telegram No. 49, May 12, to the Ambassador in Peru.
434 
[Pg.
434
includes
portions of
Doc. 
288
and 
Doc.
289]
May 15
(59)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Reply that understanding of proposal as Secretary stated
it in telegram No. 49, May 12, to the Ambassador in
Peru is correct.
435 
[Pg.
435
includes
portions of
Doc. 
289
and 
Doc.
290]
May 16
(80)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Secretary’s hope of success of his recent direct
negotiations with President of Peru. Conversation with
Chilean Ambassador in which Secretary pointed out that
whole success of plan hinges on bringing about
agreement whereby Chile and Peru together shall
provide corridor for Bolivia.
436 
[Pg.
436 is part
of 
Doc.
291]
May 17 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Report that 15 Peruvians were injured in
attacks in Arica May 14.
437 
[Pg.
437
includes
portions of
Doc. 
291,
Doc. 
292,
and 
Doc.
293]
May 17 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Opinion that expiration of registration
period May 21 raises no issue which requires action on
that date and that all action that in any way disturbs
status quo so far as plebiscite is concerned should be
avoided.
437 
[Pg.
437
includes
portions of
Doc. 
291,
Doc. 
292,

and 
Doc.
293]
May 18
(81)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Chilean 
Foreign 
Minister’s 
misunderstanding 
of
Secretary’s proposal regarding division of territory, as
evidenced by Foreign Minister’s telegram to Chilean
Ambassador; the Ambassador’s promise to clarify
matter by telegraphing to Foreign Minister.
438 
[Pg.
438
includes
portions of
Doc. 
293
and 
Doc.
294]
May 21
(83)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions, in view of press reports that Chile will not
accept proposal regarding division of territory and that
movement is being launched to compel Chile to
terminate negotiations and insist on plebiscite, to state
orally to Foreign Minister the risks attending insistence
on plebiscite.
439 
[Pg.
439
includes
portions of
Doc. 
294
and 
Doc.
295]
May 22
(84)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Messages from Chilean Foreign Minister to Chilean
Ambassador, May 20 (texts printed), outlining basis on
which 
Chile 
would 
negotiate. 
The 
Secretary’s
interpretation of proposal as nothing more than
reiteration of earlier demand for the entire Department
of Arica with its present boundaries and settlement with
Bolivia on her own terms.
441 
[Pg.
441
includes
portions of
Doc. 
295
and 
Doc.
296]
May 26
(93)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Communication for presentation to Foreign Minister
(text 
printed) 
directing 
attention 
to 
certain
considerations suggested by his messages of May 20
and expressing earnest hope for a response of such a
nature as to permit the continuance of the Secretary’s
good offices.
(Footnote: Information that by telegram No. 92, May 26,
the Department instructed the Ambassador not to act
until he had received both telegrams No. 93 and No. 94.)
444 
[Pg.
444
includes
portions of
Doc. 
296
and 
Doc.
297]
May 26 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Report of increasingly unsatisfactory
448 
[Pg.
448

conditions in the provinces and of instances of violence
at Tacna. Request for views as to policy to be followed
by U. S. Commissioner.
includes
portions of
Doc. 
297
and 
Doc.
298]
May 26
(94)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions to point out to Foreign Minister the
inadvisability of Chile’s attempting to force issue on
continuance of plebiscite.
449 
[Pg.
449
includes
portions of
Doc. 
298
and 
Doc.
299]
May 27 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions to continue to report all
instances of violence. Assurance that decisions as to
policy will be given as promptly as possible.
450 
[Pg.
450
includes
portions of
Doc. 
299,
Doc. 
300,
and 
Doc.
301]
May 28
(179)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Decision of Chilean Cabinet that no corridor could be
given which would include any part of Arica–La Paz
railway. Presentation of Secretary’s memorandum
telegraphed May 26.
450 
[Pg.
450
includes
portions of
Doc. 
299,
Doc. 
300,
and 
Doc.
301]
May 29
(98)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Opinion 
that 
probable 
declaration 
by 
U. 
S.
Commissioner that plebiscite is off and Chile is
responsible can be prevented only by a prompt decision
of Chile to make concession which will permit a
settlement and to agree to suspension of plebiscite and
withdrawal of costly delegations and personnel. Request
for suggestions.
451 
[Pg.
451
includes
portions of
Doc. 
301
and 
Doc.
302]

May 30
(182)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Suggestion that action be delayed three more weeks and
that statements be made (1) by the Secretary, to the
effect that good offices cannot be renewed later if now
broken off, and (2) by the Secretary of Commerce, to the
effect 
that 
reestablishment 
of 
Chilean-Peruvian
friendship would save nitrate export trade of both
countries.
452 
[Pg.
452
includes
portions of
Doc. 
302
and 
Doc.
303]
June 1
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions to avoid any action by
Commission pending definite decisions on Stimson
report.
(Footnote: Information that Stimson report of June 3,
1926, reviewed evidence submitted by Department and
concluded (1) that fair plebiscite cannot now be held in
Tacna, (2) that responsibility rests ultimately on Chilean
Government, and (3) that attempt to produce a fair
election by any further demand for guarantees, short of
complete reorganization of local administration of law
and order, under neutral authority, would only result in
failure.)
454 
[Pg.
454
includes
portions of
Doc. 
303,
Doc. 
304,
and 
Doc.
305]
June 1
(99)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Surmise that final crisis cannot be delayed beyond
current week and may come at any moment.
Unwillingness to appeal to Chilean public by issuing
first statement suggested; intention, however, of acting
on suggestion as to statement to be made by Secretary of
Commerce.
454 
[Pg.
454
includes
portions of
Doc. 
303,
Doc. 
304,
and 
Doc.
305]
June 1
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Doubt of possibility of passing resolution
contained in Secretary’s telegram of May 15.
Desirability of moving for passage of substitute draft
resolution for termination (text printed) at Commission
meeting June 5, provided it will not affect negotiations
at Washington unfavorably.
456 
[Pg.
456
includes
portions of
Doc. 
305
and 
Doc.
306]

June 2
(102)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Secretary’s disposition, expressed in conversation with
Chilean Ambassador, to allow U. S. Commissioner to
dispose of plebiscite as he thinks best; the Ambassador’s
reply 
that 
he 
had 
recommended 
that 
Chilean
Government concede Bolivian corridor including
railway, but did not know what answer would be made.
457 
[Pg.
457
includes
portions of
Doc. 
306
and 
Doc.
307]
June 2
(188)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Foreign Office note (substance printed) replying to
Secretary’s memorandum transmitted in telegram No.
93, May 26, and concluding with expression of desire to
arrive at equitable solution, which would not be one
depriving Chile of rights given by Treaty of Anc6n, by
the award, and by manifest desire of great majority of
people of the territory.
458 
[Pg.
458
includes
portions of
Doc. 
307
and 
Doc.
308]
June 3
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions as to procedure to be followed
in Commission meeting June 5, and transmittal of
modified form of termination resolution (text printed).
459 
[Pg.
459
includes
portions of
Doc. 
308
and 
Doc.
309]
June 3
(103)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Unwillingness of Secretary of Commerce to make
statement suggested in telegram No. 182, May 30.
461 
[Pg.
461
includes
portions of
Doc. 
309
and 
Doc.
310]
June 4
Minutes of Meeting of the Plenipotentiaries, Under the
Extension of Good Offices of the Secretary of State
Chilean Ambassador’s criticism that new basis of
discussion proposed by Secretary (text printed) is not
sufficiently detailed. The Secretary’s observation that it
is impossible to arrive anywhere by rejections; his
willingness to make more definite proposal if given
462 
[Pg.
462 is part
of Doc. 311]

intimation of what Chile and Peru would agree to.
Statements by Chilean and Peruvian Ambassadors that
they wished good offices to continue and would
telegraph their Governments regarding situation.
June 4
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Résumé of meeting of Plenipotentiaries,
June 4. Instructions, if possible, to avoid action in
Commission meeting of June 5.
465 
[Pg.
465
includes
portions of
Doc. 
311
and 
Doc.
312]
June 4
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Probability that Chilean Commissioner
would appeal termination resolution. Intention of U. S.
Commissioner to remove American personnel from
territory as quickly as possible after passage of
resolution.
466 
[Pg.
466
includes
portions of
Doc. 
312,
Doc. 
313,
and 
Doc.
314]
June 5
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions not to introduce termination
resolution in meeting of June 7, in view of rapidly
developing sentiment in Chile favoring diplomatic
settlement.
466 
[Pg.
466
includes
portions of
Doc. 
312,
Doc. 
313,
and 
Doc.
314]
June 6
(197)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Belief that majority of both chambers would approve
Secretary’s latest plan if Government were to
recommend it.
467 
[Pg.
467
includes
portions of
Doc. 
314
and 
Doc.
315]
June 7
(105)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Information that vote on Chilean Commissioner’s
468 
[Pg.
468

resolutions for definite action to fix election date, etc.,
proposed in Commission meeting June 5, has been
postponed until June 9, when U. S. Commissioner will
probably have to act. Assertion of Alessandri, ex-
President of Chile, that no settlement of any kind could
ever be put through Chilean Congress.
includes
portions of
Doc. 
315
and 
Doc.
316]
June 7
(200)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Necessity for postponement beyond June 9, so as to
allow time to present to Peru any proposition which may
result from conference of Government heads at
Santiago.
470 
[Pg.
470
includes
portions of
Doc. 
316
and 
Doc.
317]
June 8
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions to let termination resolution go
over until another meeting, if possible, but, if not, to
insure that final record leaves no room for assertion to
be made that United States has closed door at a moment
when parties are making serious effort constructively to
adjust their differences.
471 
[Pg.
471
includes
portions of
Doc. 
317
and 
Doc.
318]
June 8
(201)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Opinion that there is no prospect of diplomatic
settlement and that U. S. Commissioner should not
delay longer in presenting termination resolution.
473 
[Pg.
473
includes
portions of
Doc. 
318
and 
Doc.
319]
June 8
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions to attempt arrangement for
further adjournment of Commission, in view of Chilean
Ambassador’s receipt of concrete proposals for
settlement reached at meeting in Santiago, and to
introduce termination resolution only if issue is crowded
to that point by Chilean Commissioner.
474 
[Pg.
474
includes
portions of
Doc. 
319
and 
Doc.
320]
June 8
To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Disposition, upon further reflection and
475 
[Pg.
475

consideration of latest advices from Santiago, to allow
U. S. Commissioner to use own judgment as to
introduction of termination resolution unless Chilean
Commissioner consents to maintenance of status quo for
an agreed period.
includes
portions of
Doc. 
320,
Doc. 
321,
and 
Doc.
322]
June 9
(107)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Meeting 
of 
Plenipotentiaries 
at 
which 
Chilean
Ambassador presented three proposals based on
conclusions reached at meeting in Santiago.
475 
[Pg.
475
includes
portions of
Doc. 
320,
Doc. 
321,
and 
Doc.
322]
June 9
From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Introduction of termination resolution in
meeting of Commission; Chilean Commissioner’s
request for delay in order that he might refer matter to
his Government; agreement by Commission that no
publicity should be given to proceedings.
476 
[Pg.
476
includes
portions of
Doc. 
322
and 
Doc.
323]
June 10
(108)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Background of action by Plebiscitary Commission, June
9, for Ambassador’s information in case proceedings
receive publicity.
477 
[Pg.
477
includes
portions of
Doc. 
323
and 
Doc.
324]
June 11 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Feeling in Chilean Embassy that
termination resolution is unwarranted public indictment
of Chile and that honor will require her to break off
negotiations and possibly to break off relations with
United States. Instructions to try to adjourn action
should Chilean Commissioner propose any way by
which passage of resolution would be avoided.
478 
[Pg.
478
includes
portions of
Doc. 
324,
Doc. 
325,
and 
Doc.
326]

June 11 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Suggestion to intimate to Chilean
Ambassador that U. S. Commissioner would support a
resolution by Chilean Commissioner to suspend
activities during good offices and to postpone action on
all motions concerning plebiscite.
478 
[Pg.
478
includes
portions of
Doc. 
324,
Doc. 
325,
and 
Doc.
326]
June 11 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For 
Lassiter: 
Countersuggestion 
that 
U. 
S.
Commissioner indicate willingness to hold plebiscitary
activities in abeyance and to defer action on all pending
motions, until the further order of the Commission.
479 
[Pg.
479
includes
portions of
Doc. 
327
and 
Doc.
328]
June 11 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Probability that Chile will either (1) vote
against termination resolution and take an appeal to the
arbitrator, or (2) accept good offices and propose
suspension of all plebiscitary activities, or (3) withdraw
from Commission.
479 
[Pg.
479
includes
portions of
Doc. 
327
and 
Doc.
328]
June 12 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Information that upon request of Chilean
Commissioner meeting is being called for June 14.
480 
[Pg.
480
includes
portions of
Doc. 
329
and 
Doc.
330]
June 12 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Procedure to be followed, contingent upon
decision by Chile to withdraw or to continue to
participate in proceedings of Commission.
480 
[Pg.
480
includes
portions of
Doc. 
329
and 
Doc.
330]

June 12 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Query as to what action is to be taken by
Commission should Chile withdraw.
481 
[Pg.
481
includes
portions of
Doc. 
331
and 
Doc.
332]
June 13 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Instructions to adjourn meeting of June 14,
should Chile offer any constructive suggestion for
adjustment.
481 
[Pg.
481
includes
portions of
Doc. 
331
and 
Doc.
332]
June 13 To the Consul at Arica (tel.)
For Lassiter: Further instructions as to procedure to be
followed at Commission meeting June 14, including
action to be taken should Chile withdraw.
482 
[Pg.
482
includes
portions of
Doc. 
332,
Doc. 
333,
and 
Doc.
334]
June 14 From the Consul at Arica (tel.)
From Lassiter: Passage, following statements by
respective Commissioners, of motion to terminate
plebiscitary 
proceedings; 
Chilean 
Commissioner’s
announcement that he was now the only legal member,
that is, that Peruvian and U. S. Commissioners had
voted themselves out of the Commission; adjournment
of Commission to June 16; publication of pertinent
documents; U. S. Commissioner’s intention to ship
records and personnel on boat sailing June 20.
(Footnote: Information that by resolution of June 16 the
Commission authorized transfer of its records to
Washington and the release of personnel.)
482 
[Pg.
482
includes
portions of
Doc. 
332,
Doc. 
333,
and 
Doc.
334]

June 18 From the Chilean Plenipotentiary
Instructions of Chilean Government that negotiations
under good offices be brought to an end.
484 
[Pg.
484
includes
portions of
Doc. 
334
and 
Doc.
335]
RENEWAL OF GOOD OFFICES BY THE UNITED STATES IN REGARD TO THE TACNA-ARICA CONTROVERSY AND REJECTION BY PERU OF
THE PROPOSED SETTLEMENT
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
June 25
(113)
To the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Instructions to find out, in view of fact that Chilean
Ambassador has expressed interest in renewal of good
offices, whether public opinion in Chile will support a
settlement under good offices.
486 
[Pg.
486 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 335 and
Doc. 336]
June 26
(222)
From the Ambassador in Chile (tel.)
Suggestion made to President and Foreign Minister
that Chile place before the Secretary a definite
proposal which the Congress would be sure to ratify.
487 
[Pg.
487 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 336 and
Doc. 337]
July 
8
(76)
From the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Report that Chilean Ambassador in Italy will telegraph
his Government recommending that Department of
State be approached as to a solution by which disputed
territory will be ceded to Bolivia with compensations.
488 
[Pg.
488 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 337 and
Doc. 338]
July 26
(60)
To the Ambassador in Italy (tel.)
Résumé of present status of matter, that is, that
Chilean-Bolivian negotiations, begun after Chilean
termination of good offices, have broken down; that
Peru is ready to resume negotiations under U. S. good
offices; that Chile has not yet taken definite official
step to resume negotiations under good offices; and
489 
[Pg.
489 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
338,
Doc. 
339,
and 
Doc.
340]

that Bolivia holds view that solution must be reached
through cooperation of Chile and Peru with Bolivia
under U. S. good offices.
Oct. 
6
(285)
From the Chargé in Chile (tel.)
Foreign Minster’s personal desire to show conciliatory
spirit; his invitation to American Chargé to review
Foreign Office correspondence of last four months and
to point out anything unfair or unreasonable; the
Chargé’s declination to do this, on ground of not being
in position to make suggestions of value.
489 
[Pg.
489 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
338,
Doc. 
339,
and 
Doc.
340]
Oct. 
8
(72)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Outline of general situation, for use in seeking
statement from Peruvian President on whether or not
he wishes speedy and practical termination of question.
490 
[Pg.
490 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 340 and
Doc. 341]
Oct. 
9
(137)
To the Chargé in Chile (tel.)
Approval of Chargé’s declination to review Foreign
Office 
correspondence. 
Instructions 
to 
acquaint
Foreign Minister with Department’s views and efforts,
and to report concerning governmental and public
opinion regarding the several methods of settlement.
493 
[Pg.
493 is part of
Doc. 342]
Oct. 11
(86)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Request, for use in presenting matter to President, for
outline of terms proposed recently to Peruvian counsel
in Washington and of terms which might be acceptable
to Chile. Inquiry whether matter should be pressed at a
time when question of ratification of Peruvian-
Colombian boundary treaty is at critical stage.
494 
[Pg.
494 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 342 and
Doc. 343]
Oct. 13
(74)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Indications that Chilean representatives at Washington
might recommend to Chilean Government such a plan
as Secretary proposed recently to Peruvian counsel
(text printed). Opinion that there should be no delay in
presenting matter to Peruvian President. Request for
suggestions as to possible sale by Chile and Peru of
495 
[Pg.
495 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 343 and
Doc. 344]

their rights in disputed territory and as to compensation
Bolivia should accord.
Oct. 16
(87)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Conversation in which Peruvian President expressed
preference for neutralization of territory and said that
Peru would never consent to cession of city of Arica to
Chile. The Ambassador’s opinion that Bolivia should
pay not less than 15 million gold for free port at Arica
and railroad corridor to Pacific.
497 
[Pg.
497 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 344 and
Doc. 345]
Oct. 19 Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin
American Affairs
Suggested plan of former Secretary of State Hughes for
drafting a proposal to Chile and Peru for sale of Tacna
and Arica to Bolivia.
499 
[Pg.
499 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 345 and
Doc. 346]
Nov. 3
From the Peruvian Embassy
Statement, in response to plan proposed to Peruvian
counsel, that Peru desires in all sincerity to settle
controversy and will cooperate to that end, with one
unalterable reservation, i. e., she will not consider any
proposal that would give to another power the city,
port, and Morro of Arica.
500 
[Pg.
500 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 346 and
Doc. 347]
Nov. 4
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin
American Affairs
Conversation with Peruvian Ambassador and others
concerning Peruvian memorandum of November 3; the
Secretary’s statement that as it appeared impossible to
reach any solution by further conversations he was
now considering making a definite proposal of his
own.
502 
[Pg.
502 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 347 and
Doc. 348]
Nov. 6
From the Peruvian Embassy
Information that reservation in Peruvian memorandum
of November 3 does not exclude possibility of
settlement contemplating cession to Bolivia of a
corridor to the sea, nor modify Peru’s acceptance of
proposal of total neutralization, nor change Peru’s
504 
[Pg.
504 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
348,
Doc. 
349,
and 
Doc.
350]

readiness 
to 
consider 
any 
other 
solution 
not
inconsistent with the aforementioned reservation.
Nov. 30
(84)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Memorandum for Peru (text printed) outlining a plan
for cession of disputed territory to Bolivia, subject to
appropriate 
guaranties 
and 
compensation, 
with
provisos that the Morro of Arica be reserved from the
transfer and internationalized as a memorial to the
valor of Chile and Peru; that suitable treaties of
friendship be entered into between Chile and Peru; that
the territory be perpetually demilitarized; and that the
city of Arica be made forever a free port.
(Footnotes: Similar telegram sent to Chile as
Department’s No. 158; circular telegram in the same
sense sent to all Missions in South America, November
30, 11 a.m.)
504 
[Pg.
504 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
348,
Doc. 
349,
and 
Doc.
350]
Nov. 30
(338)
From the Chargé in Chile (tel.)
Foreign Minister’s thanks, upon receipt of U. S.
memorandum of November 30, for Secretary’s
generous and unselfish interest; the Chargé’s surmise,
from informal remarks, that officials favor some such
solution as suggested.
509 
[Pg.
509 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 350 and
Doc. 351]
Nov. 30
(100)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Presentation of U. S. memorandum of November 30, to
Foreign Minister at 12:55 and to President at 1:10.
510 
[Pg.
510 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 352 and
Doc. 353]
Dec. 
3
(78)
From the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Bolivian note, December 2 (text printed), accepting
solution proposed in U. S. memorandum of November
30 and pledging every effort to arrive at an agreement
with Chile and Peru by means of U. S. good offices.
510 
[Pg.
510 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 352 and
Doc. 353]
Dec. 4
Memorandum of the Chilean Government
Agreement to consider, in principle, the proposal
outlined in U. S. memorandum of November 30.
512 
[Pg.
512 is part of
Doc. 354]

Dec. 
7
(88)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to urge Peruvian President to accept U. S.
proposal, thereby opening road to final settlement.
515 
[Pg.
515 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 354 and
Doc. 355]
Dec. 7
To the Ambassador in Argentina, the Ambassador in
Brazil, and the Minister in Uruguay (cir. tel.)
Request for representations by Argentina, Brazil, and
Uruguay urging Peruvian acceptance of U. S. proposal.
516 
[Pg.
516 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 355 and
Doc. 356]
Dec. 
9
(68)
From the Minister in Uruguay (tel.)
Report that Uruguay is consulting Argentina as to
representations to be made to Peru, and that Argentine
Minister to Uruguay believes representations should be
either joint or identic.
517 
[Pg.
517 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
356,
Doc. 
357,
and 
Doc.
358]
Dec. 
9
(95)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Brazilian decision that representations at this time
would not serve main purpose, in view of sharp
political crisis created in Peru by U. S. memorandum.
517 
[Pg.
517 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
356,
Doc. 
357,
and 
Doc.
358]
Dec. 
9
(96)
From the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Information that Argentina is consulting Brazil,
although believing that even concerted diplomatic
action will be too late, inasmuch as Peru’s refusal is
expected within 48 hours.
518 
[Pg.
518 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
358,
Doc. 
359,
and 
Doc.
360]
Dec. 11 To the Peruvian Ambassador
Opinion, in reply to Peruvian memorandum of
December 3 (text printed), that U. S. proposal as made
November 30 will secure every possible protection to
518 
[Pg.
518 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
358,
Doc. 
359,

the interests of the inhabitants of the provinces that is
possible in the circumstances.
and 
Doc.
360]
Dec. 15
(98)
From the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Brazilian reply to Argentina, expressing view that
intervention in Peru is inopportune at present moment.
519 
[Pg.
519 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 360 and
Doc. 361]
1927
Jan. 12
Memorandum of the Peruvian Government
Peruvian refusal of U. S. proposal, on grounds that
controversies of the nature of that of Tacna-Arica are
limited in scope to the contending nations; that as
plebiscite has not been held, the provinces continue to
be Peruvian; that by cession to Bolivia the honor and
dignity of Peru would be irretrievably outraged; and
that Peru cannot accept a solution which carries with it
the forsaking of its citizens in the provinces.
520 
[Pg.
520 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 361 and
Doc. 362]
BOUNDARY DISPUTES
BOLIVIA AND PARAGUAY
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Mar. 
3
(51)
From the Minister in Paraguay
Conversation in which Foreign Minister asked if
United States would consider acting as arbitrator in
Bolivian-Paraguayan 
boundary 
dispute; 
the
American Minister’s avoidance of reply, by
suggesting that since both countries are members of
League of Nations, ground for adjustment ought to
be there.
531 [Pg. 531 is
part 
of 
Doc.
363]
Apr. 
5
(6)
To the Minister in Paraguay (tel.)
Instructions to make no further suggestions
regarding intervention of League of Nations.
532 [Pg. 532
includes
portions of Doc.

363, Doc. 364,
and Doc. 365]
Sept. 10
(144)
From the Minister in Paraguay
Report of Foreign Minister’s continued desire for U.
S. good offices, despite opposition of Bolivia.
532 [Pg. 532
includes
portions of Doc.
363, Doc. 364,
and Doc. 365]
Dec. 
7
(203)
From the Minister in Paraguay
Information that Paraguayan note requesting U. S.
interest in boundary limits controversy is being
prepared.
(Footnote: Information that no note of nature
contemplated was delivered.)
533 [Pg. 533
includes
portions of Doc.
365 and Doc.
366]
 
COLOMBIA AND PERU
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
June 16
(53)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions to take up with Peruvian President the
fact that failure to ratify Peruvian-Colombian
boundary treaty of March 24, 1922, is holding up
Colombia’s conclusion of the boundary treaty with
Brazil, which is provided in procès-verbal of March
4, 1925, between Brazil, Colombia, and Peru.
534 [Pg. 534
includes portions
of Doc. 366 and
Doc. 367]
June 18
(66)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Information that hostile attitude of Congress and
bitter opposition to treaty in Department of Loreto
constitute serious obstacles to ratification. Opinion
that further action would be inexpedient before
Congress reconvenes the last of July.
535 [Pg. 535
includes portions
of Doc. 367 and
Doc. 368]
June 19
(54)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Agreement with opinion expressed in telegram No.
66, June 18.
536 [Pg. 536
includes portions
of Doc. 368, Doc.

369, Doc. 370,
and Doc. 371]
July 
5
(54)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Information that Brazilian Foreign Minister and
Colombian Minister in Brazil consider time
favorable for renewing representations to Peruvian
Government regarding ratification of treaty.
536 [Pg. 536
includes portions
of Doc. 368, Doc.
369, Doc. 370,
and Doc. 371]
July 14
(38)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Peruvian President’s intention to urge ratification as
soon as Congress convenes. Secretary’s suggestion
that it would be helpful if Brazil also would make
known to Peruvian President her desire that treaty
be ratified.
536 [Pg. 536
includes portions
of Doc. 368, Doc.
369, Doc. 370,
and Doc. 371]
Aug. 
5
(40)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Peruvian President’s assurance that he will use all
his influence to obtain ratification. Suggestion of U.
S. Ambassador in Peru that Brazil renew
representations.
537 [Pg. 537
includes portions
of Doc. 371, Doc.
372, Doc. 373,
and Doc. 374]
Aug. 19
(61)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Telegram from Brazilian Chargé in Peru stating that
Peruvian President has promised ratification within
the next few weeks.
537 [Pg. 537
includes portions
of Doc. 371, Doc.
372, Doc. 373,
and Doc. 374]
Sept. 29
(70)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Instructions, in view of two-month delay in
ratification, to make further representations and to
suggest similar action to diplomatic representatives
in Lima of Brazil and Colombia.
537 [Pg. 537
includes portions
of Doc. 371, Doc.
372, Doc. 373,
and Doc. 374]
Oct. 
2
(84)
From the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Compliance with instructions contained in telegram
No. 70, September 29, and intention to renew
representations after allowing short time for
developments in Congress. Belief that outcome is
uncertain, 
considering 
adverse 
sentiment 
in
Congress and among Peruvians generally.
538 [Pg. 538
includes portions
of Doc. 374 and
Doc. 375]

Oct. 
4
(71)
To the Ambassador in Peru (tel.)
Secretary’s declaration that he is leaving whole
matter to Ambassador’s discretion.
539 [Pg. 539
includes portions
of Doc. 375, Doc.
376, and Doc.
377]
 
COSTA RICA AND PANAMA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Feb. 
4
(8)
To the Chargé in Panama (tel.)
Note for Panaman Government (text printed)
reviewing negotiations for settlement of Costa
Rican-Panaman boundary dispute and inquiring
whether Panama would accept the Costa Rican
proposal of December 17, 1925 (text printed).
Instructions to endeavor to have proposal accepted
by Panama.
539 [Pg. 539
includes
portions of Doc.
375, Doc. 376,
and Doc. 377]
Aug. 10
(1125)
From the Minister in Panama
Panaman note, August 7 (text printed), regretting
inacceptability of Costa Rican proposal.
542 [Pg. 542
includes
portions of Doc.
377 and Doc.
378]
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC AND HAITI
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Mar. 
4
(105)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic
Report of informal conversations between Haitian
Minister and Dominican Government, with view of
settling boundary controversy; probability that,
following presidential elections in Haiti, settlement
543 [Pg. 543
includes
portions of Doc.
378 and Doc.
379]

may be effected by adoption of slightly modified
“American line” of 1912.
June 16 Memorandum by Mr. Orme Wilson of the Division of
Latin American Affairs
Department’s feeling, expressed to Dominican
Minister, that presence of Haitian President in
Washington is favorable for using informal good
offices of United States in reaching settlement; the
Minister’s hesitant promise to refer matter to his
Government.
544 [Pg. 544
includes
portions of Doc.
379 and Doc.
380]
June 17 Memorandum by Mr. Orme Wilson of the Division of
Latin American Affairs
Decision of Dominican Minister not to cable his
Government, but to discuss matter with President on
his early return to Santo Domingo.
545 [Pg. 545
includes
portions of Doc.
380 and Doc.
381]
Nov. 30
(348)
From the Minister in the Dominican Republic
Memorandum of a conversation with the Haitian
Minister in the Dominican Republic, November 29
(text printed), in which the Minister expressed
opinion that matter could now be settled by direct
negotiations, the first move to take the form of a
visit to Santo Domingo by the Haitian President.
546 [Pg. 546 is
part 
of 
Doc.
382]
Dec. 18
(125)
To the Minister in the Dominican Republic
Authorization to take whatever steps are considered
useful in promoting early settlement, keeping in
mind American Government’s preference for direct
negotiations without resort to arbitration.
547 [Pg. 547
includes
portions of Doc.
382, Doc. 383,
and Doc. 384]
PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES OF PERSONS BELONGING TO FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN THE UNITED STATES
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
May 18
From the German Ambassador
Request for a compilation of the provisions of U. S.
law relating to the privileges and immunities of
persons belonging to diplomatic missions.
547 [Pg. 547
includes
portions of Doc.

382, Doc. 383,
and Doc. 384]
July 16
To the German Chargé
Provisions of sections 4062 to 4065 of the Revised
Statutes and other acts pertaining to diplomatic
privileges and immunities.
548 [Pg. 548
includes
portions of Doc.
384 and Doc.
385]
July 27
To the German Chargé
Concurrence in modification of a sentence in note of
July 16, in order to answer specific inquiries made
by the Secretary of the German Embassy, and to
show that persons belonging to foreign missions in
the United States are entitled to exemption from the
civil and criminal jurisdiction of all the courts.
552 [Pg. 552
includes
portions of Doc.
385 and Doc.
386]
RULINGS BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE WITH REGARD TO PRESUMPTION OF EXPATRIATION OF NATURALIZED CITIZENS IN CERTAIN
CASES
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Jan. 
8
(Dip.
Ser. 457)
To American Diplomatic and Consular Officers
Department ruling that the presumption of expatriation
of a naturalized American citizen after 2 years’
residence in the country from which he came, or 5
years’ residence in any other foreign state, does not
arise against a person born in Great Britain and who is
residing in a self-governing Dominion of the Empire
until he has resided therein for 5 years; application of
the same rule to persons born in a self-governing
Dominion and resident in Great Britain or in another
self-governing Dominion.
553 
[Pg.
553
includes
portions of
Doc. 
387
and 
Doc.
388]
Mar. 17
(2121)
From the Consul at Beirut
Inquiry whether persons born in one part of the former
Ottoman Empire and residing in a locality now
independent of Turkey and other than the place of their
553 
[Pg.
553
includes
portions of
Doc. 
387

birth, should be considered as residing in the foreign
state from which they came.
and 
Doc.
388]
May 4
To the Consul at Beirut
Ruling that it was the intent of Congress that
presumption of expatriation arises after residence of 2
years in the territory in which the person originally had
his home, even though a change in sovereignty has
occurred; and, conversely, that presumption of
expatriation does not arise for 5 years in cases where a
naturalized citizen takes up residence in a country
which, as defined by present boundaries, is not the
original home country of such person, but was formerly
a part of the country from another district of which he
came.
554 
[Pg.
554
includes
portions of
Doc. 
388
and 
Doc.
389]
REPLY BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE TO QUESTIONNAIRES ON INTERNATIONAL LAW SUBMITTED BY THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Oct. 12
(64)
To the Chargé in Switzerland (tel.)
Communication for Secretary General (text printed)
expressing views concerning questionnaires submitted
by the League on: Nationality, territorial waters,
diplomatic privileges and immunities, responsibility of
states for damage done in their territories to the person
or property of foreigners, procedure of international
conferences and procedure for the conclusion and
drafting of treaties, piracy, and exploitation of the
products of the sea.
555 
[Pg.
555 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
389
and 
Doc.
390]

AFGHANISTAN
PROPOSAL FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR REPRESENTATION BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND
AFGHANISTAN
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Nov. 
4
(5671)
From the Ambassador in France
Request for instructions regarding reply to be made to
Afghan note of October 30, expressing desire to establish
diplomatic relations with United States and enclosing a
draft treaty of friendship (texts printed).
557
[Pg. 557
is part of
Doc. 391]
1926
Jan. 
26
(1839)
To the Ambassador in France
Transmittal of reply for Afghan Minister (text printed)
expressing U. S. appreciation of friendly sentiments and
promising 
careful 
consideration 
of 
draft 
treaty.
Instructions to forward a report of the conversations
referred to in Afghan note as having taken place between
the American Ambassador and the Afghan Minister in
France on July 15 and October 28, 1925.
(Footnote: Information that in his despatch No. 6078,
February 20, 1926, the Ambassador reported that the first
conversation occurred on June 19, 1925, and not on July
15.)
559
[Pg. 559
is part of
Doc. 392]

ARGENTINA
REQUEST TO THE ARGENTINE GOVERNMENT THAT AMERICAN ARMS MANUFACTURERS BE GIVEN THE SAME CONSIDERATION AS
THOSE OF OTHER NATIONS
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Mar. 
1
(11)
To the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Instructions, should opportunity offer, to inform
Argentine 
commission 
in 
Brussels 
of
Ambassador’s interest in assuring to American
manufacturers fair consideration with regard to
any contracts the commission may consider
placing.
561 
[Pg. 
561
includes portions
of Doc. 393 and
Doc. 394]
Mar. 
1
(12)
To the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Instructions, should opportunity offer, to inform
Argentine Government of U. S. trust that
Americans competing for arms contracts will
receive the same consideration as that given to
nationals of other countries.
561 
[Pg. 
561
includes portions
of Doc. 393 and
Doc. 394]
Mar. 
4
(16)
From the Ambassador in Argentina (tel.)
Discussion in which Foreign Minister authorized
statement that Argentina will disregard all
influences brought to bear and that no decision
will be made until commission returns and makes
its report.
562 
[Pg. 
562
includes portions
of Doc. 394, Doc.
395, 
and 
Doc.
396]
Mar. 
5
(18)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Information that no decision will be made until
subcommittee of experts has been sent to United
States to test products of company there.
562 
[Pg. 
562
includes portions
of Doc. 394, Doc.
395, 
and 
Doc.
396]

BOLIVIA
REPRESENTATIONS BY THE UNITED STATES TO BOLIVIA REGARDING PETROLEUM CONCESSIONS CONTAINING CLAUSES
DISCRIMINATING AGAINST AMERICAN CITIZENS
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1924
Oct. 
3
(576)
From the Minister in Bolivia
Transmittal of clause (text printed) inserted in
petroleum concessions granted to Bolivian citizens,
which apparently is not only a discrimination
against American citizens but is in direct violation
of the treaty of friendship of 1858.
564 [Pg. 564 is
part of Doc. 397]
1925
Jan. 3 (2)
To the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Aide-mémoire for Foreign Office (text printed)
quoting discriminatory clause and expressing
confidence that such steps will be taken as will
insure to American citizens equal opportunity with
citizens of other nations in the matter of
investments in Bolivia.
565 [Pg. 565
includes portions
of Doc. 397 and
Doc. 398]
May 
9
(15)
To the Minister in Bolivia (tel.)
Note for Foreign Office (text printed) making
further representations concerning discriminatory
clause and expressing hope that Government will
take early action to modify or suspend the
provision in question.
566 [Pg. 566
includes portions
of Doc. 398 and
Doc. 399]
1926
Feb. 11
(220)
To the Minister in Bolivia
Instructions discreetly to seek official assurance, if
not already given, that Bolivian Government will
not 
insert 
discriminatory 
clause 
in 
future
concessions.
567 [Pg. 567
includes portions
of Doc. 399, Doc.
400, and Doc.
401]
Mar. 15
(1010)
From the Minister in Bolivia
Foreign Minister’s reassurance that clause would
not 
again 
appear 
in 
decrees 
granting 
oil
concessions.
567 [Pg. 567
includes portions
of Doc. 399, Doc.

400, and Doc.
401)

BRAZIL
PROPOSED TREATY OF FRIENDSHIP, COMMERCE AND CONSULAR RIGHTS BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND BRAZIL
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926 Aug.
21 (1162)
To the Ambassador in Brazil
Instructions to inquire whether Brazil would be
agreeable to negotiation with the United States of a
treaty 
for 
unconditional 
most-favored-nation
treatment in customs matters.
569 
[Pg.
569 is part
of Doc. 402]
Sept. 
18
(2652)
From the Chargé in Brazil
Report of conversations with Foreign Minister and
others in the interest of a treaty.
(Footnote: Information that in instruction No. 1173,
October 1, the Department transmitted to the Chargé a
draft of the proposed treaty, but that the negotiations
did not result in the signing of any treaty.)
572 
[Pg.
572 is part
of Doc. 403]
 
RENEWAL OF CONTRACT FOR AMERICAN NAVAL MISSION TO BRAZIL, SIGNED NOVEMBER 6, 1922
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
June 30
To the Brazilian Ambassador
U. S. consent to renewal of contract for American
naval mission to Brazil for a period of four years
from date of expiration of present contract on
November 
6, 
1926, 
the 
renewal 
to 
be
accomplished by an exchange of notes.
574 
[Pg. 
574
includes 
portions
of Doc. 404 and
Doc. 405]
July 
6
(26)
From the Brazilian Ambassador
Declaration accepting renewal of the contract by
exchange of notes.
574 
[Pg. 
574
includes 
portions
of Doc. 404 and
Doc. 405]

July 6
To the Brazilian Ambassador
Declaration that exchange of notes validly
accomplishes the renewal of the contract.
575 
[Pg. 
575
includes 
portions
of Doc. 405, Doc.
406, and Doc. 407]
PROPOSALS TO STIMULATE THE PRODUCTION OF RUBBER IN THE AMAZON VALLEY
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Dec. 19
(72)
To the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Inquiries to be made of Brazilian Government, in
interest of U. S. rubber manufacturers, as to whether
organization to stimulate rubber production in
Amazon Valley would be welcomed, and whether
assurances would be given that export duties would
not be advanced and that free production and
exportation of rubber would not be restricted.
575 [Pg. 575
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 405, Doc.
406, and Doc.
407]
Dec. 22
(82)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Affirmative replies of Minister of Agriculture in
response to inquiries; proviso, however, that
assurances must be secured from interested State
governments as to nonincrease in export duties.
576 [Pg. 576
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 407 and
Doc. 408]
1926
Jan. 18
(3)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Receipt 
of 
communication 
from 
Minister 
of
Agriculture, January 16, welcoming American
cooperation and repeating same assurances as those
reported in telegram No. 82, December 22.
577 [Pg. 577
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 409 and
Doc. 410]
Jan. 25
(6)
From the Ambassador in Brazil (tel.)
Transmittal by Minister of Agriculture of telegrams
from Governors of States of Para and Amazonas
agreeing to nonincrease in export duties on rubber.
577 [Pg. 577
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 409 and
Doc. 410]

CANADA
APPROVAL BY THE UNITED STATES OF PROPOSAL BY THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF A CANADIAN MINISTER
AT WASHINGTON
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Nov. 19
(723)
From the British Chargé
British proposal for the appointment of a
Canadian Minister at Washington who would
take charge of all affairs relating to Canada and
who would be entirely responsible to the
Canadian Government.
578 [Pg. 578 is
part of Doc. 411]
Nov. 20
To the British Chargé
Acceptability to United States of proposal for
appointment 
of 
a 
Canadian 
Minister 
at
Washington in accordance with the arrangements
as outlined in British note.
579 
[Pg. 
579
includes portions of
Doc. 
411, 
Doc.
412, and Doc. 413]
Dec. 
3
(764)
From the British Chargé
Appointment of the Honorable Vincent Massey
as 
Envoy 
Extraordinary 
and 
Minister
Plenipotentiary to represent the interests of the
Dominion of Canada in the United States.
579 
[Pg. 
579
includes portions of
Doc. 
411, 
Doc.
412, and Doc. 413]
Dec. 4
To the British Chargé
Reiteration of former verbal assurance that Mr.
Massey’s appointment will be entirely agreeable
to the United States.
580 
[Pg. 
580
includes portions of
Doc. 
413, 
Doc.
414, and Doc. 415]
CONTINUED PROTESTS BY THE CANADIAN GOVERNMENT AGAINST INCREASED DIVERSION OF THE WATERS OF THE GREAT LAKES
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Feb. 
5
(91)
From the British Ambassador
Representations regarding U. S. failure to state in note
of November 24, 1925, the considerations which
580 
[Pg.
580
includes

convinced the Secretary of War that the whole
abstraction of water from the Great Lakes authorized
by his permit of March 3, 1925, is essential to health;
regarding Canada’s desire for a statement as to
progress made toward diminishing the abstraction; and
regarding Canadian apprehension that proposed
Illinois-Mississippi waterway construction may be
based upon and dependent upon indefinite continuance
or even increase of abstraction of water through the
Chicago Sanitary District Canal.
portions of
Doc. 
413,
Doc. 
414,
and 
Doc.
415]
Apr. 
28
(291)
From the British Chargé
Resolution of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario,
April 7 (text printed), protesting U. S. enactment of
any legislation authorizing diversion of water from the
Great Lakes at Chicago in disregard of the vital
interest of communities bordering the Lakes.
582 
[Pg.
582
includes
portions of
Doc. 
415
and 
Doc.
416]
Undated
[Rec’d
May 
1]
(299)
From the British Chargé
Continued representations that no diversions from the
Great Lakes involving transfer of water from a
common watershed to another should be effected or
confirmed in either country, unless after joint
consideration and agreement.
584 
[Pg.
584
includes
portions of
Doc. 
416
and 
Doc.
417]
May 18
To the British Ambassador
Information that note of April 28, with resolution, is
being transmitted to interested U. S. authorities.
585 
[Pg.
585
includes
portions of
Doc. 
417,
Doc. 
418,
and 
Doc.
419]
July 26
To the British Ambassador
Information showing that diversion limits were the
least that could be made consistent with regard to
health; that satisfactory progress toward reduction is
585 
[Pg.
585
includes
portions of

being made; that the bill authorizing improvement of
the Illinois River has been carried over to the
December session of Congress; and that the United
States is prepared to discuss all outstanding questions
affecting the Great Lakes and their waterways.
Doc. 
417,
Doc. 
418,
and 
Doc.
419]
Nov. 
16
(711)
From the British Chargé
Proposal for simultaneous publication in Canada and
the 
United 
States, 
December 
9, 
of 
certain
correspondence relative to diversion of water from
Lake Michigan by the Sanitary District of Chicago.
588 
[Pg.
588 is part
of 
Doc.
420]
Nov. 26
To the British Chargé
Information that proposal to publish correspondence
has been referred to authorities concerned and that a
reply will be made as soon as possible.
589 
[Pg.
589
includes
portions of
Doc. 
421
and 
Doc.
422]
Dec. 7
To the British Chargé
Observation that, in view of altered understanding of
the situation, occasioned by the report of the Joint
Board of Engineers on the St. Lawrence Waterway
Project showing that only a small part of the fall in
Lake levels has been due to the Chicago diversion, it
would be advisable to suspend publication of the
correspondence and to enter upon discussion of
question of providing the recommended compensatory
works.
589 
[Pg.
589
includes
portions of
Doc. 
421
and 
Doc.
422]

CHINA
CIVIL WAR IN NORTH CHINA: INTERNATIONAL NAVAL DEMONSTRATION AT TAKU; OVERTHROW OF THE PROVISIONAL
GOVERNMENT OF TUAN CHI-JUI
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Feb. 18
(81)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Abandonment of office by Premier Hsu and
precarious tenure of present Cabinet.
591 [Pg. 591
is part of Doc.
423]
Mar. 
2
(107)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram to commander in chief, U. S. Asiatic Fleet
(text printed) recommending dispatch of a destroyer
to Taku and continuance of ships at Chefoo and
Tsingtao.
592 [Pg. 592
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 423 and
Doc. 424]
Mar. 
3
(108)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information of grave situation induced by probability
of heavy fighting at several points between
Kuominchun and allied forces of Wu Pei-fu, Chang
Tso-lin, and possibly Sun Ch’uan-fang.
593 [Pg. 593
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
424,
Doc. 425, and
Doc. 426]
Mar. 
4
(109)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram to consul general at Shanghai (text printed)
reporting that Shanghai–Tientsin sea route may
become dangerous and that Tientsin–Peking train
service shortly may be interrupted. Information that
U. S. destroyer Preston will proceed to Taku from
Shanghai and that Wu–Chang forces have captured
several towns.
593 [Pg. 593
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
424,
Doc. 425, and
Doc. 426]
Mar. 
8
(115)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report by destroyer Preston which arrived off Taku
on March 7; also report of consul general at Tientsin
that position of Chinese cruiser in channel has
completely stopped navigation.
594 [Pg. 594
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 426 and
Doc. 427]

Mar. 
9
(119)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Intention, in view of report of consul general at
Tientsin that port has been completely closed by
mining of Taku channel, to propose to representatives
of protocol powers a display of international naval
force for purpose of enforcing 1901 protocol.
595 [Pg. 595
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 427 and
Doc. 428]
Mar. 10
(57)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of proposed display of international naval
force.
596 [Pg. 596
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
428,
Doc. 429, and
Doc. 430]
Mar. 10
(120)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Senior Minister’s note to Chinese Foreign Minister
(text printed) protesting closing of port and
demanding its reopening, reserving rights of protocol
powers to take action should Chinese Government fail
to accomplish this forthwith; his instruction to senior
consuls at Tientsin, Mukden, and Tsinanfu (text
printed) for notifying Chinese military authorities.
596 [Pg. 596
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
428,
Doc. 429, and
Doc. 430]
Mar. 12
(123)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram to U. S. naval commander in chief (text
printed) requesting cooperation with naval authorities
of other powers in notifying Chinese military and
naval authorities that, if satisfactory assurances are
not given by March 15, measures will be taken to
insure safe navigation between Tientsin and the sea.
598 [Pg. 598
is part of Doc.
431]
Mar. 13
(125)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of naval commanders’ request for one day’s
delay in notifying Chinese authorities.
599 [Pg. 599
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 432 and
Doc. 433]
Mar. 13
(127)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of firing upon Japanese destroyers by Chinese
at Taku, in disregard of previous arrangements for
their passage.
599 [Pg. 599
includes
portions 
of

Doc. 432 and
Doc. 433]
Mar. 15
(130)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Identic 
instructions 
from 
Ministers 
to 
naval
commanders (text printed) as to procedure for
delivering notification to Chinese authorities.
600 [Pg. 600
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 433 and
Doc. 434]
Mar. 16
(134)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Identic 
instructions 
from 
Ministers 
to 
naval
commanders (text printed) stating, in response to
information that notification will be delivered March
16 and that noncompliance with it by noon, March 18,
may result in use of foreign garrisons, that Ministers
would not be prepared to seek authority from their
Governments for use of land forces, except as a last
resort.
601 [Pg. 601
is part of Doc.
435]
Mar. 18
(137)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that, in view of satisfactory assurances
from Chinese authorities, naval authorities are being
told that no further action is required in connection
with insuring communication between Tientsin and
sea.
602 [Pg. 602
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 435 and
Doc. 436]
Mar. 18
(138)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that in demonstrations against demands of
protocol powers relative to Taku matter, a number of
demonstrators were killed and wounded by Chief
Executive Tuan’s bodyguard.
603 [Pg. 603
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 437 and
Doc. 438]
Mar. 19
(67)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Gratification that forceful action was not necessary in
maintaining protocol status of Tientsin; belief that, in
general, policy should be not to use force of arms to
enforce treaty rights unless such action is necessary to
protect American lives.
603 [Pg. 603
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 437 and
Doc. 438]
Mar. 22
(143)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that mandate of March 20 directs investigation
of March 18 disturbances; that Kuominchun leaders
604 [Pg. 604
includes
portions 
of

have proposed termination of hostilities and are
withdrawing troops; that leaders are being urged by
prominent ex-officials to compose their differences;
and that Cabinet has resigned.
Doc. 438 and
Doc. 439]
Mar. 23
(146)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Ministers’ decision against having Legation Guard
police any part of Peking, against discussing
suggested loan to General Lu Chung-lin in return for
protection, and against taking initiative with respect to
neutralization of Peking; authorization for support to
Chamber of Commerce in any efforts to obtain police
force to replace protective force now in control.
605 [Pg. 605
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 439 and
Doc. 440]
Mar. 24
(147)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Advance of Chang and retirement of Kuominchun
from Tientsin. Report that Kuominchun leaders are
endeavoring to effect a compromise with Chang for
establishment in Peking of coalition government
excluding Wu.
606 [Pg. 606
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 440 and
Doc. 441]
Mar. 26
(153)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Reports 
of 
Chang’s 
continued 
advances; 
of
Kuominchun’s establishment of defense line around
Peking; and of attempts of ex-officials to mediate
between contending factions.
607 [Pg. 607
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 442 and
Doc. 443]
Apr. 
3
(164)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Continuance of confused politico-military situation
during negotiations among various factions.
607 [Pg. 607
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 442 and
Doc. 443]
Apr. 
7
(166)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of continued bombing of Peking; of Senior
Minister’s note reminding Chinese Government of
responsibilities regarding protection of foreign lives
and property; and of secret negotiations which may
result in almost any regrouping of factions.
608 [Pg. 608
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 443 and
Doc. 444]
Apr. 10
(170)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Coup d’état, engineered by Lu, by which Tuan has
609 [Pg. 609
includes

been placed under restraint, ex-President Tsao Kun
liberated, and Wu asked to come to Peking to assume
charge of situation.
portions 
of
Doc. 444 and
Doc. 445]
Apr. 12
(171)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Indications that coup was executed without Wu’s
consent. Resumption of airplane attacks on city.
610 [Pg. 610
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 445 and
Doc. 446]
Apr. 15
(177)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Indeterminate position of Provisional Government
pending outcome of political intrigues and military
operations now in progress.
611 [Pg. 611
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 446 and
Doc. 447]
Apr. 15
(178)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Withdrawal of Kuominchun from Peking, police
control having been turned over to committee of
safety.
613 [Pg. 613
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
447,
Doc. 448, and
Doc. 449]
Apr. 19
(185)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Continued confusion, resulting from withdrawal of
Kuominchun, friction among troops around city,
resumption of functions by Tuan and Cabinet, and
jealousies concerning administrative appointments.
613 [Pg. 613
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
447,
Doc. 448, and
Doc. 449]
Apr. 20
(189)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Flight of Tuan from city and cessation of Cabinet’s
functions.
614 [Pg. 614
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
449,
Doc. 450, and
Doc. 451]
Apr. 21
(190)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
General information regarding status of politico-
military situation, with report that early hostilities
may be precipitated between Wu and Chang.
614 [Pg. 614
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
449,

Doc. 450, and
Doc. 451]
May 
4
(201)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Unwillingness of Yen, 1924 Premier, to comply with
circular telegram sent by Tsao Kun to 1924 officials,
upon his resignation, in favor of 1924 Cabinet.
Statement by Wu’s adviser that Yen will consent to
early establishment of a regency cabinet government;
that Wu and Chang are solidly in accord; and that Wu-
Chang alliance is continuing work of eliminating
Kuominchun.
615 [Pg. 615
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 451 and
Doc. 452]
May 14
(208)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for authorization to deal with Yen Cabinet on
a de facto basis if satisfactory assurances are given as
to observance of treaty rights and if other powers
decide to act likewise.
616 [Pg. 616
is part of Doc.
453]
May 17
(99)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Authorization to deal with Yen Cabinet on a de facto
basis.
617 [Pg. 617
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 454 and
Doc. 455]
May 18
(214)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Ministers’ decision to do no more than acknowledge
Yen’s identic note of May 15 until after the Cabinet’s
actual assumption of office; meantime, that Senior
Minister shall intimate to Yen that his Government is
expected to assume existing treaty and other
international obligations of Chinese Government.
617 [Pg. 617
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 454 and
Doc. 455]
INVASION OF THE YANGTZE VALLEY BY THE SOUTHERN NATIONALIST FORCES AND MEASURES TAKEN FOR THE PROTECTION OF
AMERICAN INTERESTS
Date
and
number
Subject
Page

1926
July 26
(304)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, July 23: Report that Canton army is
advancing rapidly toward Hankow and Wuchang and
that General Chiang Kai-shek is expected to leave for
Hunan in a few days.
618 
[Pg.
618 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
456,
Doc. 
457,
and 
Doc.
458]
July 30
(311)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, July 29: Prediction that Hankow and
Wuchang will soon be captured; information that
General Chiang has left for Hunan.
618 
[Pg.
618 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
456,
Doc. 
457,
and 
Doc.
458]
Aug. 5
(317)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From 
Hankow, 
August 
4: 
Information 
as 
to
reinforcements made by Sun Ch’uan-fang and Wu Pei-
fu.
618 
[Pg.
618 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
456,
Doc. 
457,
and 
Doc.
458]
Aug. 17
(328)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Changsha: Report announcing arrival of General
Chiang and stating that renewal of drive toward
Hankow is not unlikely.
619 
[Pg.
619 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
459,
Doc. 
460,
and 
Doc.
461]
Aug. 24
(347)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Summary of telegram, August 23, from Hankow,
reporting advances of Cantonese forces, expected
arrival of Wu, and concern of Chinese at Hankow lest
situation has been permitted to go too far.
619 
[Pg.
619 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
459,
Doc. 
460,
and 
Doc.
461]

Aug. 25
(348)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Reports from Hankow and Changsha of further
advances of Cantonese troops.
619 
[Pg.
619 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
459,
Doc. 
460,
and 
Doc.
461]
Aug. 27
(357)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, August|26: Arrival of Wu and
reinforcements.
620 
[Pg.
620 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
461,
Doc. 
462,
and 
Doc.
463]
Aug. 30
(359)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Repetition, to commander in chief of U. S. Asiatic Fleet,
of telegram from consul general, Hankow, August 29
(text printed), reporting that vice consul at Changsha
has protested mining of Siang and Yangtze Rivers and
that it may become desirable to send American force to
Hankow and to convoy American merchantmen.
620 
[Pg.
620 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
461,
Doc. 
462,
and 
Doc.
463]
Aug. 30
(360)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, August 27: Report of notification by
Cantonese authorities that all foreign warships are to be
searched at Chenglingki.
The Minister’s telegram, August 30 (text printed),
instructing consul general at Canton to make
representations for cancelation of notification.
621 
[Pg.
621 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
463
and 
Doc.
464]
Sept. 1
(362)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, August 31: Report that Cantonese troops
are near Wuchang; request of Americans that destroyers
be sent to Hankow as a precautionary measure.
The Minister’s concurrence in suggestion for despatch
of destroyers.
622 
[Pg.
622 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
464,
Doc. 
465,
and 
Doc.
466]

Sept. 1
(366)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow: Report of measures to be taken should
trouble result from overcrowding of concessions by
refugees.
622 
[Pg.
622 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
464,
Doc. 
465,
and 
Doc.
466]
Sept. 2
(369)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Despatch of two destroyers to Hankow.
623 
[Pg.
623 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
467,
Doc. 
468,
and 
Doc.
469]
Sept. 3
(372)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow: Report of sustained attack on Wuchang.
623 
[Pg.
623 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
467,
Doc. 
468,
and 
Doc.
469]
Sept. 4
(373)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 3: Reports that Wuchang is
still under bombardment, with Wu still holding city.
623 
[Pg.
623 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
467,
Doc. 
468,
and 
Doc.
469]
Sept. 7
(376)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 6: Report of surrender of
Hanyang Arsenal, of determination of Wu’s men to
make no further resistance, and of discussion of peace
terms.
624 
[Pg.
624 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
469,
Doc. 
470,
and 
Doc.
471]

Sept. 8
(379)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of casualties suffered by British in attempting
release of two merchantmen illegally detained at
Wanhsien; of intimation that attempt may be renewed
with larger force to release the vessels.
624 
[Pg.
624 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
469,
Doc. 
470,
and 
Doc.
471]
Sept. 8
(381)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 6 and 7: Reports that Wu has
evacuated Hankow, although Wuchang is still holding
out.
625 
[Pg.
625 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
471
and 
Doc.
472]
Sept. 10
(386)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram sent to commander of U. S. Asiatic Fleet (text
printed) asking compliance with British request for
presence of American gunboat at Chungking should
evacuation of British subjects become necessary.
626 
[Pg.
626 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
473,
Doc. 
474,
and 
Doc.
475]
Sept. 11
(388)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Report that instructions have been issued for necessary
protection of British subjects at Chungking.
626 
[Pg.
626 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
473,
Doc. 
474,
and 
Doc.
475]
Sept. 11
(391)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Swatow, September 10: Request for instructions
concerning regulations issued by Chinese authorities in
connection with mining of Swatow Bay.
626 
[Pg.
626 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
473,
Doc. 
474,
and 
Doc.
475]
Sept. 13
(394)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 12: Report that local
627 
[Pg.
627 includes

Cantonese commander has agreed, in response to
protests, to issue order forbidding firing on foreign
vessels; that conditions in Hankow are improving; and
that Wuchang is still holding out.
portions 
of
Doc. 
475,
Doc. 
476,
and 
Doc.
477]
Sept. 14
(400)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
To Swatow: Instructions to protest regulation requiring
one day’s advance notice of arrival of a naval vessel
before entering port; and to reserve right of U. S.
vessels to leave at night in an emergency, after due
notice to authorities.
627 
[Pg.
627 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
475,
Doc. 
476,
and 
Doc.
477]
Sept. 14
(192)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Approval of instructions to Swatow reported in
telegram No. 400, September 14.
628 
[Pg.
628 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
477,
Doc. 
478,
and 
Doc.
479]
Sept. 15
(403)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
To Canton: Instructions to request Cantonese authorities
to issue appropriate instructions in response to
American 
protest 
and 
reservation 
concerning
regulations issued by military commander at Swatow.
628 
[Pg.
628 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
477,
Doc. 
478,
and 
Doc.
479]
Sept. 15
(407)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 14: Consul general’s
intention of avoiding any act which might seem to
denote recognition of the new regime, whose
establishment is taking place only slowly.
The Chargé’s approval of consul general’s proposed
attitude.
629 
[Pg.
629 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
479
and 
Doc.
480]
Sept. 15
(408)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
To Chungking: Instructions to extend unofficial good
offices to British during temporary absence of British
630 
[Pg.
630 includes
portions 
of

consul.
Information that British consul will accompany second
British expedition to effect release of vessels still held
at Wanhsien.
Doc. 
481
and 
Doc.
482]
Sept. 15 Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far
Eastern Affairs
Conversation between the Italian Ambassador and the
Secretary, in which the Ambassador inquired as to U. S.
attitude toward cooperation with Great Britain in a
firmer policy in China; the Secretary’s statement that,
while naval forces in Far East have standing instructions
to cooperate with friendly powers in protecting life in
emergencies, this Government not only did not
contemplate joint action, but that there did not seem to
be any occasion for it at present.
630 
[Pg.
630 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
481
and 
Doc.
482]
Sept. 16
(410)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 15: Report that American
gunboat Pigeon has been fired upon by Cantonese shore
battery off Chenglingki.
631 
[Pg.
631 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
482,
Doc. 
483,
and 
Doc.
484]
Sept. 17
(413)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 16: Report that American
volunteer forces and naval units will be withdrawn; that
French gunboat has been fired upon at Chenglingki; and
that arrangements have been made to send limited food
supplies by mail to Americans in Wuchang, where
conditions are growing worse.
631 
[Pg.
631 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
482,
Doc. 
483,
and 
Doc.
484]
Sept. 18
(414)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 10: Report that American
vessels proceeding past Hanyang have been fired upon;
that destroyer Stewart has taken aboard British
wounded in Wanhsien attack; that Wuchang is still
holding out and negotiations for surrender are still in
632 
[Pg.
632 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
484
and 
Doc.
485]

progress; and that situation of foreigners is becoming
increasingly difficult.
Sept. 19
(416)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 18: Report that Wuchang is
still resisting, Hankow is quiet, and Cantonese have
advanced well into Honan.
633 
[Pg.
633 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
485,
Doc. 
486,
and 
Doc.
487]
Sept. 20
(418)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 19: Reports of firing upon
American gunboat Pigeon; of notification from
Cantonese commissioner of foreign affairs (text printed)
instructing foreign gunboats to withdraw from war zone
area; and of notification from commissioner forbidding
navigation of Yangtze at night and informing that all
vessels will be fired upon if they fail to stop on signal
for search during daylight hours.
633 
[Pg.
633 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
485,
Doc. 
486,
and 
Doc.
487]
Sept. 21
(422)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram (text printed) instructing consul general at
Hankow to reply to commissioner that United States is
willing, temporarily and with due reservation of treaty
rights, to allow American commercial ships to comply
with regulations if they so desire; on the other hand,
however, that directions will not be given to war vessels
to comply with any of the regulations, and that Chinese
authorities will be responsible for any untoward
incidents arising from any effort to enforce the
regulations.
635 
[Pg.
635 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
487
and 
Doc.
488]
Sept. 21
(423)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
To Canton: Instructions to protest vigorously to Acting
Minister of Foreign Affairs the regulations adopted by
commissioner of foreign affairs at Hankow; to request
their cancelation; and to state that they appear to be of
an entirely provocative character, since obviously the
637 
[Pg.
637 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
488
and 
Doc.
489]

United States could not be expected to comply with
them.
Sept. 22
(203)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Approval of Chargé’s instructions, and suggestion that
Chinese authorities be informed that American war
vessels represent a friendly nation acting strictly within
treaty rights and that it is expected that both factions
will give them the cooperation to which they are
entitled. Query whether British intend to comply as
concerns their naval vessels.
638 
[Pg.
638 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
489
and 
Doc.
490]
Sept. 23
(426)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow: Report that about 70 refugees, mostly
British, have arrived at Ichang from Chungking; that
attacks on Wuchang continue, peace negotiations
having been broken off; and that Wanhsien case has
been amicably settled and the two ships released.
639 
[Pg.
639 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
490,
Doc. 
491,
and 
Doc.
492]
Sept. 23 Memorandum by the Secretary of State
Conversation in which the Portuguese Minister was
informed that the Secretary did not think it necessary
for the powers to unite to protect their citizens in China.
639 
[Pg.
639 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
490,
Doc. 
491,
and 
Doc.
492]
Sept. 24
(430)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 23: Report from Chungking
that military authorities there may support Chiang;
possibility that Ichang authorities may do likewise; that
American destroyers have arrived in Hankow; and that
Sun is in Kiukiang with 60,000 to 100,000 troops.
640 
[Pg.
640 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
492
and 
Doc.
493]
Sept. 25
(432)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from consul general, Hankow, September 22,
stating that commissioner of foreign affairs in a note
dated September 20 refers to his previous notification
regarding withdrawal of naval vessels and states that
river below Wuchang and Hanyang was meant, not the
641 
[Pg.
641 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
493
and 
Doc.
494]

river below the whole port of Hankow, because boats
anchoring within the boundaries of the concessions will
not be endangered by the military operations.
Sept. 29
(438)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Unconfirmed information that British have agreed to
stop their war vessels on signal and receive a courtesy
visit by a Chinese officer at Chenglingki.
642 
[Pg.
642 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
495
and 
Doc.
496]
Sept. 30
(439)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, September 28: Report of mining of
Yangtze by Cantonese.
642 
[Pg.
642 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
495
and 
Doc.
496]
Oct. 
2
(447)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, October 1: Report that protest has been
filed with Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs, who
declines to admit that regulations restricting navigation
on Yangtze are in violation of the treaties.
643 
[Pg.
643 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
497
and 
Doc.
498]
Oct. 
5
(453)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Request for authorization to send American military
officer to effect rescue of American missionaries
detained at Sianfu.
643 
[Pg.
643 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
497
and 
Doc.
498]
Oct. 
5
(454)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, October 4: Report of more moderate
attitude of Cantonese toward American war vessels.
Unofficial reports of success of Sun’s forces and
increasingly hazardous position of Cantonese.
644 
[Pg.
644 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
498,
Doc. 
499,
Doc. 
500,
and 
Doc.
501]

Oct. 
5
(218)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Authorization for action suggested in telegram No. 453,
October 5.
644 
[Pg.
644 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
498,
Doc. 
499,
Doc. 
500,
and 
Doc.
501]
Oct. 
7
(459)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, October 5: Report that protest will be
made concerning ban on passage of vessels past Boca
Tigris and Whampoa Fort areas at night.
644 
[Pg.
644 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
498,
Doc. 
499,
Doc. 
500,
and 
Doc.
501]
Oct. 
8
(461)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, October 7: Report that Sun’s troops are
evacuating Kiukiang; that refugees are being evacuated
from Wuchang daily; and that British will land
bluejackets at Hankow as a precautionary measure.
645 
[Pg.
645 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
501,
Doc. 
502,
and 
Doc.
503]
Oct. 
9
(465)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, October 8: Report that evacuation of
Kiukiang did not reach large proportions and that
conditions at Wuchang have been greatly exaggerated.
645 
[Pg.
645 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
501,
Doc. 
502,
and 
Doc.
503]
Oct. 
9
(224)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information that Red Cross will be disposed to assist at
Wuchang in case of necessity.
646 
[Pg.
646 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
503,
Doc. 
504,

and 
Doc.
505]
Oct. 10
(467)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information that no action at Wuchang seems required,
in view of telegram from consul general, Hankow,
October 9 (text printed), stating that terms of surrender
of Wuchang are being agreed upon.
646 
[Pg.
646 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
503,
Doc. 
504,
and 
Doc.
505]
Oct. 12
(472)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, October 11: Report of capture of
Wuchang by Cantonese despite fact that agreement for
surrender had almost been reached.
647 
[Pg.
647 is part
of Doc. 506]
Oct. 13
(602)
From the British Chargé
Conveyance of British Government’s thanks for action
of U.S.S. Stewart in removing British wounded in
Wanhsien attack.
648 
[Pg.
648 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
507
and 
Doc.
508]
Oct. 13
(476)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information that American military officer will not
proceed to Sianfu unless report that detained
missionaries are now safe proves incorrect.
648 
[Pg.
648 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
507
and 
Doc.
508]
Oct. 15
(481)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, October 14: Report of firing upon
French gunboat, of improved conditions at Wuchang,
and of unchanged conditions at Kiukiang.
649 
[Pg.
649 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
509
and 
Doc.
510]
Oct. 18
(488)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow: Report of firing upon British and
American merchantmen.
649 
[Pg.
649 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
509

and 
Doc.
510]
Oct. 21
(503)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Hankow, October 20: Report that removal of
capital from Canton to Wuchang has been approved,
and that Sun’s position in Kiukiang area is increasingly
difficult.
650 
[Pg.
650 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
511,
Doc. 
512,
and 
Doc.
513]
Nov. 6
(533)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, November 5: Report of capture of
Kiukiang on November 4 and of landing of British,
Japanese, and American naval units as precautionary
measure.
650 
[Pg.
650 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
511,
Doc. 
512,
and 
Doc.
513]
Nov. 8
(584)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, November 6: Report of complete
occupation of Kiukiang by Cantonese and of
withdrawal of Japanese and American landing forces.
650 
[Pg.
650 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
511,
Doc. 
512,
and 
Doc.
513]
Nov. 29
(834)
From the Minister in China
Telegram to the consul at Chungking, November 24
(text printed), agreeing with his view that suspension of
sailings of American vessels during disturbed periods is
only practicable method of protecting American flag on
Upper Yangtze from violation; authorizing him if
necessary to warn American shipping companies that U.
S. protection may not be expected in cases where
vessels are operated during periods when such operation
would unduly imperil the vessels themselves, the
general interests of American citizens, or the relations
between the United States and China. Request for
651 
[Pg.
651 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
513
and 
Doc.
514]

Department’s views with respect to various phases of
present situation.
Nov. 29
(585)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, November 27: Report of insistence of
Americans in Hankow that more adequate protection be
afforded.
Information that two American warships were ordered
to Hankow November 28.
655 
[Pg.
655 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
514,
Doc. 
515,
and 
Doc.
516]
Nov. 30
(587)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Transmittal to commander in chief of request from
consul at Foochow for an American warship (text
printed).
655 
[Pg.
655 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
514,
Doc. 
515,
and 
Doc.
516]
Dec. 1
(589)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, November 29: Report that general
situation is unimproved although strike against Japanese
has been settled; and that British and French naval
forces have been landed.
656 
[Pg.
656 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
516,
Doc. 
517,
and 
Doc.
518]
Dec. 1
(591)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, November 30: Report that situation is
slightly less tense and that several labor strikes have
been settled.
656 
[Pg.
656 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
516,
Doc. 
517,
and 
Doc.
518]
Dec. 1
(592)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that commander in chief has ordered warship to
Foochow.
657 
[Pg.
657 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
518,
Doc. 
519,

and 
Doc.
520]
Dec. 4
(596)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, December 3: Report of movements of
warships of powers, and hope that arrival of Acting
Minister of Foreign Affairs may help in stabilizing
situation.
657 
[Pg.
657 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
518,
Doc. 
519,
and 
Doc.
520]
Dec. 7
(601)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, December 6: Report of withdrawal of
British and French landing parties, and of general
improvement in situation.
658 
[Pg.
658 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
521
and 
Doc.
522]
Dec. 9
(605)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Résumé of general politico—military situation, with
particular reference to conference of Northern leaders at
Tientsin for purpose of formulating united policy and
making plans to combat Cantonese, and at which Chang
Tso-lin was elected commander in chief of a military
coalition under the name of “Ankuochun.”
658 
[Pg.
658 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
521
and 
Doc.
522]
Dec. 11
(610)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, December 10: Report of arrival of
officials of Cantonese Government and the consul
general’s intention to call on Acting Minister of Foreign
Affairs; further report on strikes.
659 
[Pg.
659 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
522
and 
Doc.
523]
Dec. 15
(615)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Shanghai, December 14: Report that declaration
of independence of Chekiang is momentarily expected.
The Minister’s understanding that Cantonese will not
assent to making Chekiang a buffer region, but are
determined to occupy it.
660 
[Pg.
660 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
523,
Doc. 
524,
and 
Doc.
525]

Dec. 17
(616)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow: Report of disturbed conditions at
Ichang, upon appearance of Kweichow and Cantonese
troops in that vicinity.
660 
[Pg.
660 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
523,
Doc. 
524,
and 
Doc.
525]
Dec. 17
(617)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Shanghai, December 16: Report of imminent
hostilities between Cantonese and forces of Marshal
Sun.
661 
[Pg.
661 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
525,
Doc. 
526,
and 
Doc.
527]
Dec. 17
(622)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, December 16: Report that new
Government is getting settled and that general situation
locally is clearing.
661 
[Pg.
661 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
525,
Doc. 
526,
and 
Doc.
527]
Dec. 19
(627)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for Department’s views as to possible use of
landing force at Shanghai, particularly with reference to
understanding as to whether it is to be used for
protecting the integrity of the Settlement as well as life
and property in event of Cantonese invasion.
662 
[Pg.
662 is part
of Doc. 528]
Dec. 23
(307)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions that United States is not prepared to use its
naval force at Shanghai for purpose of protecting the
integrity of the Settlement.
663 
[Pg.
663 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
528
and 
Doc.
529]
Dec. 28
(642)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Request that Department inform powers of decision
concerning use of naval force at Shanghai.
664 
[Pg.
664 includes
portions 
of

Doc. 
530,
Doc. 
531,
and 
Doc.
532]
Dec. 30
(312)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Query whether it will not be sufficient for Minister to
inform his colleagues concerning U. S. attitude.
664 
[Pg.
664 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
530,
Doc. 
531,
and 
Doc.
532]
DECISION OF THE UNITED STATES TO AWAIT DEVELOPMENTS BEFORE RECOGNIZING ANY FACTION CLAIMING TO ACT WITH
AUTHORITY FOR CHINA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Feb. 27
(93)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Résumé of considerations which, in Minister’s
opinion, 
are 
motivating 
British 
toward 
early
recognition of Canton Government; his view that,
while such action might be reconciled with letter of
Washington treaty, it would have effect of restoring
scramble for spheres of influence and for concessions,
and of recommencing the process of partitioning
China.
664 [Pg. 664
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 530, Doc.
531, and Doc.
532]
June 16
(248)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that agreement has been made between Chang
and Wu whereby Yen “governing cabinet,” which has
not yet functioned, shall be replaced by a cabinet to be
formed by Wu.
666 [Pg. 666
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 532 and
Doc. 533]
June 26
(257)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that Eugene Chen, of Canton Government,
now insists upon being addressed as Minister for
Foreign Affairs as a condition precedent to dealing
667 [Pg. 667
includes
portions 
of

with international questions, and has begun to sign
certificates of identification; and that American consul
general is following British procedure of writing him
that use of title is matter of politeness and that
recognition is not to be implied therefrom.
Doc. 533 and
Doc. 534]
July 
3
(135)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that, in view of disturbed conditions, it is not
necessary that Peking Government appointee sign
certificates; instructions tactfully to point out to
Canton authorities that certificates signed by a
provincial 
officer, 
corresponding 
in 
rank 
to
commissioners of foreign affairs elsewhere in China,
would be acceptable.
668 [Pg. 668
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 534, Doc.
535, and Doc.
536]
July 
7
(482)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Minister in
China
Article from Canton Gazette of July 5 (text printed)
quoting consul general’s letter, June 30, to Chen and
Chen’s reply, July 2, setting forth his attitude toward
recognition. Consul general’s intention to make no
reply to Chen’s letter.
668 [Pg. 668
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 534, Doc.
535, and Doc.
536]
Aug. 12
(324)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information concerning various phases of present
governing cabinet’s futility.
670 [Pg. 670
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 536 and
Doc. 537]
Aug. 14
(325)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that, with Tariff Conference in abeyance
because of disintegration of governmental entity at
Peking, a definite decision must be made as to
whether to take a frank and open position that an
administration which professes to be Chinese
government cannot be dealt with until it has been
established as actually representative of all of China
and as possessing authority sufficient to carry out its
international obligations.
671 [Pg. 671
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 537 and
Doc. 538]

Aug. 14
(326)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Suggested statement (text printed) for use in advising
Great Britain and Japan that United States considers
that no purpose beneficial to the interests of China or
the United States would be served by recognition as a
central government of any administration which is not
in fact generally representative of the Chinese people
and competent to exercise the ordinary functions of
government.
680 [Pg. 680
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 538 and
Doc. 539]
Aug. 24
(171)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that it would not be wise for United States to
take lead in abandoning Tariff Conference and in
giving public notification to China that she has no
government.
682 [Pg. 682
is part of Doc.
540]
Sept. 8
(377)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information 
from 
Canton 
that 
certificates 
of
identification are now being issued under the seal of a
special bureau created for issuance of passports for
America from Liangkwang.
683 [Pg. 683
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 541, Doc.
542, Doc. 543,
and Doc. 544]
Oct. 
1
(211)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval 
of 
arrangement 
for 
issuance 
of
identification certificates.
683 [Pg. 683
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 541, Doc.
542, Doc. 543,
and Doc. 544]
Oct. 31
(522)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, October 30: Report of resolution passed
by Kuomintang that Government would not be bound
by diplomatic agreements and alliances of Chiang
Kai-shek or other military officers if made without the
consent of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at Canton.
683 [Pg. 683
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 541, Doc.
542, Doc. 543,
and Doc. 544]
Nov. 11 Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far
Eastern Affairs
Conversation in which the Secretary informed the
Italian Ambassador that the question of extending
683 [Pg. 683
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 541, Doc.

recognition to the Canton regime doubtless would be
considered if and when that regime obtained control
over the greater part of China.
542, Doc. 543,
and Doc. 544]
Nov. 17
(556)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, November 14: Interview of consul
general with Eugene Chen, in which Chen said that
the interests of the powers were not identical, and that
from now on China must deal with them separately
and not en masse; his intimation that while there
might be some excuse for withholding full recognition
of Canton regime, the powers should be prepared to
accord international status of some sort.
684 [Pg. 684
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 544 and
Doc. 545]
Dec. 18
(625)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Inquiry by representative of Chang Tso-lin concerning
American attitude on questions of finance and treaty
revision should Chang, as leader of Ankuochun,
establish at Peking a reform government.
685 [Pg. 685
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 545 and
Doc. 546]
Dec. 18
(626)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, December 17: Statement by Chen that
office of Commissioner of Foreign Affairs is being
merged into that of Minister for Foreign Affairs, that
Canton Government is now national in scope, and that
a form must be agreed upon for addressing to him
diplomatic correspondence from local American
official representative.
687 [Pg. 687
is part of Doc.
547]
1927
Jan. 14
(28)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for indication of Department’s views
concerning recognition of new “Regent Cabinet”
which, although dominated by Chang, is a transitory
makeshift until he can substitute a cabinet of Fengtien
party men.
688 [Pg. 688
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 548 and
Doc. 549]
Jan. 15
(12)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that, in view of development of opposition to
Peking factions, direction of events should be awaited
before considering recognition of any group or faction
688 [Pg. 688
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 548 and
Doc. 549]

claiming that it acts with authority for whole Chinese
people.
PROTECTION OF AMERICAN MISSIONARY INTERESTS ENDANGERED BY ANTIFOREIGN MOVEMENT IN SOUTH CHINA
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Jan. 
5
(4)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Department’s preference for leaving question of
elimination or modification of missionary privilege
clauses in treaty being prepared by Tariff Conference
until it can be dealt with in negotiations for a new
commercial treaty with China.
689 [Pg. 689
includes
portions of Doc.
550 and Doc.
551]
Feb. 
2
(63)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that for the present there should be no
reduction in destroyers attached to Asiatic Fleet.
689 [Pg. 689
includes
portions of Doc.
550 and Doc.
551]
Feb. 
6
(380)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Minister
in China
Suggestions as to measures which might be taken to
protect American citizens and property from
encroachments by officials of Canton regime, strike
pickets, and others.
690 [Pg. 690
is part of Doc.
552]
Feb. 10
(164)
From the American Minister in China to the Chinese
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Representations 
against 
deplorable 
state 
of
lawlessness in several provinces, with particular
reference to lack of protection of American citizens
and their legitimate interests.
694 [Pg. 694
includes
portions of Doc.
553 and Doc.
554]
Feb. 10
(39)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for information concerning attack by
students 
and 
Bolshevist 
sympathizers 
on 
an
American Presbyterian mission in Kachek, on
Hainan Island.
694 [Pg. 694
includes
portions of Doc.
553 and Doc.
554]

Feb. 11
(71)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report concerning attack, January 31, upon hospital
at Kachek, in which American flag was desecrated.
695 [Pg. 695
includes
portions of Doc.
555 and Doc.
556]
Feb. 26
(92)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, February 23: Request for instructions
to insist that Canton authorities give written
expression of regret respecting flag incident and
issue proclamation at Kachek expressing regret and
warning against insulting flag of friendly nations.
To Canton: Approval of consul general’s suggestions.
695 [Pg. 695
includes
portions of Doc.
555 and Doc.
556]
Mar. 
1
(101)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report from consul general, Canton, February 28,
that destroyer is no longer needed at Hainan Island.
696 [Pg. 696
includes
portions of Doc.
556, Doc. 557,
and Doc. 558]
Mar. 
1
(103)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, February 26: Information that
conditions at Hainan are worse than previously
reported. Request for instructions to take strong
position with Canton Government; suggestion that a
consular officer be sent to Hainan.
696 [Pg. 696
includes
portions of Doc.
556, Doc. 557,
and Doc. 558]
Mar. 
1
(105)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that consul general at Canton has been
informed of Minister’s approval of proposed
representations to Canton authorities.
697 [Pg. 697
includes
portions of Doc.
558, Doc. 559,
Doc. 560, and
Doc. 561]
Mar. 
1
(50)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of action reported in telegram No. 105,
March 1.
697 [Pg. 697
includes
portions of Doc.
558, Doc. 559,
Doc. 560, and
Doc. 561]

Mar. 
1
(106)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Regret that there is no consular officer who can be
spared to go to Hainan; recommendation that it
would be well, in view of unsettled conditions, to
bring up to normal standard the personnel of the
consulates.
697 [Pg. 697
includes
portions of Doc.
558, Doc. 559,
Doc. 560, and
Doc. 561]
Mar. 13
(126)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, March 10 and 12: Report on failure of
local government to protect hospital at Canton
against strike pickets; proposal that American staff
be re victualed by naval forces, if necessary.
To Canton: Approval of consul general’s suggestion
regarding 
revictualing 
and 
information 
that
commander has been asked to afford any assistance
requested.
698 [Pg. 698
includes
portions of Doc.
561 and Doc.
562]
Mar. 14
(128)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Recommendation that Department take up with
interested missionary organizations the advisability
of withdrawing their missionaries from interior of
Hainan, in view of impossibility of affording them
protection during period of lawlessness.
699 [Pg. 699
includes
portions of Doc.
562 and Doc.
563]
Mar. 15
(64)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of instructions to Canton as quoted in
telegram No. 126, March 13.
700 [Pg. 700
includes
portions of Doc.
563, Doc. 564,
and Doc. 565]
Mar. 24
(148)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, March 23: Report that situation at
Wuchow and elsewhere continues threatening; and
that at Canton Chiang Kai-shek has made arrests of
Soviet sympathizers, will have no more Russian
advisers, and is being supported by moderates in the
government.
To Canton, March 22: Answer to inquiry of consul
general, March 16, as to use of Navy (text printed),
stating that policy is to distinguish between
700 [Pg. 700
includes
portions of Doc.
563, Doc. 564,
and Doc. 565]

protecting life and protecting property; but, however,
that interpretation of policy must be made according
to the necessities in each instance.
Mar. 28
(156)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, March 27: Decision by American
missionaries to evacuate Wuchow; possibility that it
may become necessary to urge all missionaries to
evacuate island stations.
702 [Pg. 702
includes
portions of Doc.
566 and Doc.
567]
Mar. 30
(192)
To the Minister in China
Information that action recommended in telegram
No. 128, March 14, has been taken.
702 [Pg. 702
includes
portions of Doc.
566 and Doc.
567]
Apr. 3
To the Consul General at Canton (tel.)
Inquiry whether recent incidents are part of a general
antiforeign feeling or are evidences of special
hostility against Americans.
703 [Pg. 703
includes
portions of Doc.
568, Doc. 569,
and Doc. 570]
Apr. 7
From the Consul General at Canton (tel.)
Information 
that 
anti-Christian 
movement 
is
apparently a general one, Americans being affected
primarily probably because their missions are most
numerous.
703 [Pg. 703
includes
portions of Doc.
568, Doc. 569,
and Doc. 570]
Apr. 14
(422)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Minister
in China
Increasing evidences of definite plan by Communists
and radical members of Kuomintang to force
American missionary institutions in South China to
close their doors in order that an excuse may exist
for Chinese authorities to seize them.
703 [Pg. 703
includes
portions of Doc.
568, Doc. 569,
and Doc. 570]
May 20
(219)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for authority to send Counselor of Legation
to Canton and Hongkong to study situation, in order
that Minister may have basis for making more
confident 
and 
intelligent 
recommendations 
to
Department as to policy to be pursued regarding
705 [Pg. 705
includes
portions of Doc.
570 and Doc.
571]

alarming developments now in progress in South
China.
May 21
(104)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of request made in telegram No. 219, May
20.
707 [Pg. 707
includes
portions of Doc.
571 and Doc.
572]
May 23
(226)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Outline of proposed instructions for Counselor of
Legation and others, concerning consultations to be
held in connection with Counselor’s trip into South
China.
708 [Pg. 708
includes
portions of Doc.
572 and Doc.
573]
May 26
(107)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Department’s 
views 
concerning 
proposed
instructions.
(Footnote: Information that Counselor left Peking
May 31 and that his arrival at Canton was reported
June 12.)
709 [Pg. 709
includes
portions of Doc.
573, Doc. 574,
and Doc. 575]
June 
8
(614)
From the Minister in China
Notes to Foreign Office, April 7 and May 22 (texts
printed), protesting the continued ill-treatment of
Chinese 
Christian 
converts, 
and 
American
missionaries and their property, with particular
reference to missionaries at Waichow and on Hainan
Island.
709 [Pg. 709
includes
portions of Doc.
573, Doc. 574,
and Doc. 575]
July 
7
(275)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Observations, pending opportunity for further
reflection upon Counselor’s report, that some
alteration must be made in character of U. S.
relations, both with so-called Chinese Government,
which has dwindled into insignificance, and with
component regional units, which in fact are
autonomous and which alone have any political
vitality.
712 [Pg. 712
includes
portions of Doc.
576 and Doc.
577]
July 19
(290)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, July 18: Information that Chinese have
712 [Pg. 712
includes

taken over hospital at Wuchow.
portions of Doc.
576 and Doc.
577]
July 24
(299)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, July 22: Recommendation that action
be taken to clear hospital of Chinese should
authorities not agree to evacuate in a reasonable
time.
713 [Pg. 713
includes
portions of Doc.
578 and Doc.
579]
July 26
(149)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions for consul general at Canton to limit
efforts toward recovering hospital to negotiation and
notification that United States reserves right to claim
reimbursement to mission of value of property.
713 [Pg. 713
includes
portions of Doc.
578 and Doc.
579]
Oct. 
1
(441)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, September 28: Information that on
September 19 Chinese soldiers vacated hospital;
prospect of early reopening, Americans now being in
complete possession and labor troubles apparently
having been settled with assistance of local
authorities.
714 [Pg. 714
includes
portions of Doc.
580 and Doc.
581]
POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES WITH RESPECT TO PROTECTION OF AMERICAN INTERESTS DURING CHINESE BOYCOTTS AND
STRIKES AT CANTON AND TIENTSIN
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Feb. 10
(69)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Discussion with Inspector General of Customs of
telegram from Commissioner General of Customs at
Canton (text printed) reporting his action in instance of
seizure by boycott pickets of import cargoes between
ship and shore; concurrence in Inspector General’s view
that if Canton local agent supports strikers it will raise
direct issue as to right to trade with China under the
treaties and in that event will probably involve seizure of
714 [Pg.
714
includes
portions of
Doc. 
580
and 
Doc.
581]

the customs by local authorities at Canton and other
ports; assurance of readiness to instruct consul general at
Canton to join with interested colleagues in protest to
local authorities regarding seizures; opinion that naval
forces would be warranted in protecting landing of cargo
from American vessels to customhouse.
Feb. 11
(40)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of attitude adopted in conversation with
Inspector General.
715 [Pg.
715
includes
portions of
Doc. 
581,
Doc. 
582,
and 
Doc.
583]
Feb. 20
(471)
From the Minister in China
Review of strikes in rug factories at Tientsin; Minister’s
commendation of consul general at Tientsin, in letter of
February 4 (text printed), for his wise decision in
insisting that Chinese authorities decide as to measures
to be taken for protecting property of American factories,
and in pursuing and urging on American interests a
policy of patience, caution, and tolerance.
715 [Pg.
715
includes
portions of
Doc. 
581,
Doc. 
582,
and 
Doc.
583]
Apr. 1
(159)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
To Canton, March 31: Opinion that it would be
inexpedient to convoy American oil company shipments
from Hongkong to Wuchow, in view of possible reaction
against existing relatively favorable U. S. position.
719 [Pg.
719
includes
portions of
Doc. 
583
and 
Doc.
584]
Apr. 15
(176)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
To Canton: Request for expression of judgment as to
whether, in view of new factors presented and
particularly of its appearing that in the case of British
convoys strike pickets have not brought on conflicts, the
facts warrant a reconsideration of the question of
expediency of convoy.
720 [Pg.
720
includes
portions of
Doc. 
584
and 
Doc.
585]

Apr. 21
(192)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, April 19: Opinion that convoy should be
furnished.
To Canton: Approval of convoy.
721 [Pg.
721
includes
portions of
Doc. 
586
and 
Doc.
587]
June 7
(241)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, June 5: Report of Canton Government’s
appointment of three delegates to negotiate with
Hongkong for settlement of strike; abolition of office of
provincial commissioner of foreign affairs; abolition of
oil monopoly to take place June 15.
721 [Pg.
721
includes
portions of
Doc. 
586
and 
Doc.
587]
July 24
(300)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, July 22: Report that upon refusal of British
delegates at boycott conference to accede to Chinese
demand 
for 
cash 
indemnity, 
Chinese 
demanded
submission of entire matter to international commission
of inquiry.
722 [Pg.
722
includes
portions of
Doc. 
588
and 
Doc.
589]
July 26
(302)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, July 24: Adjournment of boycott
conference and failure of efforts at settlement.
722 [Pg.
722
includes
portions of
Doc. 
588
and 
Doc.
589]
Sept. 2 From the British Ambassador
Inquiry whether, in view of recent outrage on a U. S.
citizen, United States wishes to associate itself with
British action in instructing naval forces at Canton to
seize and disable all boats employed by strike pickets.
723 [Pg.
723
includes
portions of
Doc. 
590
and 
Doc.
591]

Sept. 2
(182)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for report concerning incidents referred to in
British note, and for views and comments in regard to
the inquiry.
723 [Pg.
723
includes
portions of
Doc. 
590
and 
Doc.
591]
Sept. 4
(374)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of incidents involving American citizens, with
particular reference to case of J. W. Banbury, engaged in
ferrying 
passengers 
to 
Hongkong 
steamer;
recommendation that commander of South China Patrol
be instructed to seize and disable any strike picket boat
which attacks American citizens, that Canton regime be
notified of instructions, and that British be informed of
U. S. position.
724 [Pg.
724 is part
of 
Doc.
592]
Sept. 7
(185)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Department view that U. S. policy of protection under
normal conditions should not be allowed to encourage
Americans under abnormal conditions to involve their
Government in questions which would be the care
entirely of the British shipping interests involved, and
that commander of South China Patrol should be guided
by this distinction in efforts to protect Americans.
726 [Pg.
726
includes
portions of
Doc. 
593
and 
Doc.
594]
Sept. 9 To the British Ambassador
Regret that United States cannot become associated in
action set forth in note of September 2; belief that
standing instructions are sufficient to enable commander
of American naval forces to protect lives and property of
Americans.
726 [Pg.
726
includes
portions of
Doc. 
593
and 
Doc.
594]
Sept. 14
(399)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Radiogram from U. S. S. Sacramento at Swatow (text
printed) stating that after September 11 British
discontinued action against strike pickets, and that
727 [Pg.
727
includes
portions of
Doc. 
594,

negotiations concerning removal of boycott are to be
resumed.
Doc. 
595,
and 
Doc.
596]
Sept. 14
(401)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Opinion of commander in chief, Asiatic Fleet (text
printed), that it is unnecessary that Navy Department
issue new instructions to him to take care of policy
outlined in Department’s telegram No. 185, September 7;
suggestion, however, that Americans be notified not to
use Banbury’s boats, in view of practical difficulties in
protecting his boats when carrying Americans and not
protecting them at other times. The Minister’s renewal of
recommendation made in telegram No. 374, September
4.
727 [Pg.
727
includes
portions of
Doc. 
594,
Doc. 
595,
and 
Doc.
596]
Sept. 15
(406)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Swatow, September 13: Resumption of operations
at Standard Oil Company, after strike of 7 months’
duration.
728 [Pg.
728
includes
portions of
Doc. 
596
and 
Doc.
597]
Sept. 15
(409)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Opinion that success which has attended British efforts
against strike pickets confirms wisdom of adopting a
firm policy at Canton.
729 [Pg.
729
includes
portions of
Doc. 
598
and 
Doc.
599]
Sept. 17
(195)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Suggestion that difficulty with regard to Banbury’s boats
be overcome by arranging for Navy transportation to any
American desiring to board Hongkong steamer at
Canton.
729 [Pg.
729
includes
portions of
Doc. 
598
and 
Doc.
599]

Sept. 20
(419)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, September 19: Arrangements by Canton
authorities to end boycott before October 10.
730 [Pg.
730
includes
portions of
Doc. 
599,
Doc. 
600,
and 
Doc.
601]
Sept. 24
(429)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, September 23: Indications that boycott is
ending.
730 [Pg.
730
includes
portions of
Doc. 
599,
Doc. 
600,
and 
Doc.
601]
Oct. 12
(471)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, October 11: Statements by Kuomintang
and strike committee declaring boycott ended, but
reaffirming intention to carry on economic struggle with
renewed vigor.
731 [Pg.
731
includes
portions of
Doc. 
602,
Doc. 
603,
and 
Doc.
604]
Oct. 17
(487)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, October 16: Report that unless situation
soon clears up as to moving of British goods and
handling of British cargoes, British will have gained
nothing from so-called ending of strike boycott.
731 [Pg.
731
includes
portions of
Doc. 
602,
Doc. 
603,
and 
Doc.
604]
FORCED LEVIES UPON AMERICAN BUSINESS IN CHINA

Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
June 
14
(624)
From the Minister in China
Request for instructions as to whether protest
should be made against forced levies by
Chinese military leaders upon Chinese agents
of American firms doing business in the
interior.
731 
[Pg. 
731
includes portions of
Doc. 602, Doc. 603,
and Doc. 604]
July 
23
(287)
To the Minister in China
Opinion that in a case where levy is made in the
name of the company rather than against the
Chinese agent in his personal capacity, a protest
could properly be made.
733 
[Pg. 
733
includes portions of
Doc. 604, Doc. 605,
and Doc. 606]
CONTINUATION OF THE EMBARGO ON SHIPMENTS OF ARMS TO CHINA
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Apr. 
3
(162)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Conviction that arms embargo of 1919 is wholly
ineffective and that refusal to permit sales to some
factions, in the face of supply to others by other
countries, is tantamount to intervention to their
detriment. Request for views as to whether matter
should be discussed with colleagues.
733 [Pg. 733
includes portions
of Doc. 604, Doc.
605, and Doc.
606]
Apr. 13
(80)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Preference that Minister refrain from initiating
discussion of question, since U. S. lead in revision
or discontinuance of embargo might offer seeming
justification for charge of favoritism toward one
faction against another.
735 [Pg. 735
includes portions
of Doc. 606, Doc.
607, Doc. 608,
and Doc. 609]
July 30
(309)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that British Government has removed
commercial airplanes from arms embargo list.
735 [Pg. 735
includes portions
of Doc. 606, Doc.
607, Doc. 608,
and Doc. 609]

Aug. 
5
(157)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Authorization to discuss with colleagues question
of 
possible 
cancelation 
of 
arms 
embargo.
Disposition, if British action can be officially
confirmed, to amend regulations to permit
commercial plane sales.
735 [Pg. 735
includes portions
of Doc. 606, Doc.
607, Doc. 608,
and Doc. 609]
Sept. 
3
(370)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
British instruction to consular officers, July 12 (text
printed), 
removing 
commercial 
planes 
from
embargo list. Delay in discussion of cancelation, in
view of absence of British officials, with whom it
seemed advisable to take up matter first, as only
other nationality scrupulously observing embargo.
736 [Pg. 736
includes portions
of Doc. 610 and
Doc. 611]
RECOMMENDATION OF THE MINISTER IN CHINA THAT AMERICAN TROOPS STATIONED AT TIENTSIN BE WITHDRAWN
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
April. 29
(562)
From the Minister in China
Observation that the situation at Tientsin, in which
American forces find themselves in a militarily
untenable position, must ultimately be resolved by
their withdrawal, if possible in conjunction with
forces of other foreign powers; but that such action
must be timed with greatest care to avoid further
incitement of Chinese nationalistic sentiment against
foreign rights and interests.
736 
[Pg.
736 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 610 and
Doc. 611]
June 7
To the Secretory of War
Transmittal of copy of despatch No. 562, with request
that no action be taken at Tientsin for the present.
743 
[Pg.
743 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 612 and
Doc. 613]
THE SPECIAL CONFERENCE ON THE CHINESE CUSTOMS TARIFF

Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Jan. 30
(24)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Probability that the powers will be asked to permit the
2½ percent surtax provided by the Washington treaty
to become effective immediately, with the provision
that the revenue therefrom be made available for the
unrestricted use of the Central Government; belief that
the powers will not recede from their position that
these funds should be impounded for future disposition
as agreed by the Conference.
743 [Pg. 743
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 612 and
Doc. 613]
Feb. 
1
(11)
To the American Delegation (tel.)
Approval of position outlined in telegram No. 24,
January 30.
744 [Pg. 744
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
613,
Doc. 614, and
Doc. 615]
Feb. 22
(25)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Reasons for rejection by powers of two resolutions
offered by Chinese delegation; opinion that if surtaxes
provided for in Washington treaty are not impounded
they will be dissipated.
744 [Pg. 744
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
613,
Doc. 614, and
Doc. 615]
Mar. 3
(26)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Information that British delegates are inactive;
expression to British of attitude that powers should
continue efforts to arrive at concord on tariff policy
toward China so that if China should go to pieces
before a tariff treaty could be ratified, onus of
disintegration would not be on powers.
745 [Pg. 745
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
615,
Doc. 
616,
Doc. 617, and
Doc. 618]
Mar. 3
(12)
To the American Delegation (tel.)
Approval of attitude expressed in telegram No. 26,
March 3.
745 [Pg. 745
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
615,
Doc. 
616,

Doc. 617, and
Doc. 618]
Apr. 26
(33)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
British suggestion of a public declaration to the effect
that further progress is impossible without a Chinese
delegation able to speak for the whole country. Belief
that such a suggestion is premature and that
delegations other than Chinese should continue efforts
to implement the Washington treaty and reach
agreement regarding interim surtaxes, likin abolition,
and debt consolidation.
745 [Pg. 745
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
615,
Doc. 
616,
Doc. 617, and
Doc. 618]
Apr. 28
(20)
To the American Delegation (tel.)
Approval of attitude outlined in telegram No. 33, April
26.
747 [Pg. 747
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 618 and
Doc. 619]
May 
5
(66)
To the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Instructions to bring informally to the attention of the
Foreign Office the fact that U. S. delegation is
prepared to go on with Tariff Conference as far as
political conditions will permit and to express hope for
continuance of British cooperation.
748 [Pg. 748
is part of Doc.
620]
May 
6
(92)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Conversation in which the British Foreign Under
Secretary stated that the British position was still
under contemplation, but that the program of debt
consolidation under foreign control seemed to be
inconsistent with the announced policy to release
China from foreign interference, and that it was his
recollection that in 1923 the present U. S. Minister in
China had agreed with him as to its inadmissibility.
749 [Pg. 749
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 620 and
Doc. 621]
May 12
(37)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Draft 
agreement 
(text 
printed) 
implementing
Washington treaty.
750 [Pg. 750
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 621 and
Doc. 622]

May 12
(38)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Recollection of U. S. Minister that the understanding
referred to in telegram No. 92, May 6, from the
Ambassador 
in 
Great 
Britain, 
was 
that 
the
consolidation of unsecured debts might be omitted by
the Conference if such consolidation could be
previously effected by a refunding operation based
upon salt surplus.
752 [Pg. 752
is part of Doc.
623]
May 17
(39)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Request for approval of draft agreement for
implementing Washington surtaxes which has now
been adopted unanimously by the foreign delegates for
reference to their respective Governments.
753 [Pg. 753
is part of Doc.
624]
May 20
(24)
To the American Delegation (tel.)
Approval of draft agreement as requested in telegram
No. 39, May 17.
754 [Pg. 754
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 625 and
Doc. 626]
May 26
(53)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Conversation in which the Japanese Foreign Minister
stated that he expected Conference to continue until a
plan was formulated which was sufficiently definite to
be presented to the Government of China when one
was established, and that he believed other powers also
expected Conference to continue.
754 [Pg. 754
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 625 and
Doc. 626]
May 28
(1045)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Conversation with a member of the Foreign Office
from which it seems evident that the British will insist
that 
Washington 
surtaxes 
be 
granted 
before
Conference adjourns and that they will not consider
favorably any scheme of foreign control of customs
revenues for debt consolidation; Foreign Office
memorandum (text printed) setting forth British views
in detail.
755 [Pg. 755
is part of Doc.
627]
June 10
(43)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that experts have agreed on a draft
758 [Pg. 758
includes

resolution 
respecting 
custodian 
banks; 
British
suggestion that when a surtax protocol was agreed
upon, it should be submitted to the Chinese
Government with the understanding that unless that
Government is able to give effect to the agreement, the
collection of surtaxes will be postponed until the
agreement can be carried out; refusal of Japanese to
consider draft resolution or British suggestion until
they hear from their Government.
portions 
of
Doc. 628 and
Doc. 629]
June 13
(44)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Statement that British seem to misunderstand purpose
of debt consolidation, which is not so much to satisfy
China’s foreign creditors as it is to reestablish China’s
credit; 
information 
that 
conferences 
on 
debt
consolidation were continued until British delegates
refused longer to sit.
(Footnote: Copy transmitted to Ambassador in Great
Britain with instructions to bring the contents
informally to the attention of the Foreign Office.)
758 [Pg. 758
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 628 and
Doc. 629]
June 19
(123)
To the American Delegation (tel.)
British feeling, expressed by former British delegate to
the Customs Conference, that the American and
Japanese plan for debt consolidation placed too heavy
a burden upon China’s customs revenues.
759 [Pg. 759
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 629 and
Doc. 630]
June 28 From the American Delegation
Summary of recent developments in the Customs
Conference, with a statement that, in view of the
failure of the Chinese Government to form a
government with which negotiations can be carried on,
it is difficult for the American delegation to take any
action in the face of a new Japanese policy of delay.
760 [Pg. 760
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 630 and
Doc. 631]
June 30
(45)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Request for instructions as to which of three possible
courses to follow in case Peking authorities agree to a
cabinet, in expectation that the powers will then
763 [Pg. 763
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 631 and
Doc. 632]

negotiate the protocol implementing the Washington
treaty.
July 
2
(33)
To the American Delegation (tel.)
View of the Department that the whole protocol ought
to be put into effect; but that if the British and
Japanese do not agree, the delegation should follow
the policy of going as far as possible in carrying out
the Washington treaty.
766 [Pg. 766
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
632,
Doc. 633, and
Doc. 634]
July 
3
(48)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Opinion that that morning’s meeting marks the close
of all possibility of making progress with work of
Conference at least until autumn.
766 [Pg. 766
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
632,
Doc. 633, and
Doc. 634]
July 8
From the American Delegation
Detailed report of the work of the Conference to date.
767 [Pg. 767
is part of Doc.
635]
July 16
(490)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Minister in
China
Request for advice as to whether or not to
acknowledge a note from the Acting Foreign Minister
of the Canton regime, July 14 (text printed), protesting
against resumption of Conference.
844 [Pg. 844
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 635 and
Doc. 636]
[July
23] (51)
From the American Delegation (tel.)
Information that representative of Peking regime had
invited delegates of foreign powers to an informal
meeting at which he proposed that Conference resume
its work about September 1; adherence by foreign
delegations to position that they would be glad to
continue as soon as delegates of Chinese Government
were in a position to resume discussions; tacit
agreement that no meeting would be called for some
weeks.
846 [Pg. 846
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
636,
Doc. 637, and
Doc. 638]
July 24
(298)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
To Canton, July 24: Instruction to present note to
Acting Foreign Minister at Canton (text printed)
846 [Pg. 846
includes
portions 
of

stating that the interest of the United States is in the
welfare of China as a whole, but that the lack of
unanimity of Chinese people is disheartening.
Doc. 
636,
Doc. 637, and
Doc. 638]
July 24
(301)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that the informal conference, July 23, was an
attempt to commit the powers to recognition of Peking
regime and compel them to accept it as competent to
represent China for purposes of the Conference.
Advice that the note sent to Acting Foreign Minister of
Canton regime was prompted by need to offset any
impression of partiality to Peking regime.
847 [Pg. 847
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 638 and
Doc. 639]
July 26
(148)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of action reported in telegram No. 298, July
24.
849 [Pg. 849
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
639,
Doc. 640, and
Doc. 641]
July 29
(495)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Minister in
China
Report that note has been delivered to Acting Foreign
Minister at Canton according to instructions in
telegram No. 298, July 24; Foreign Minister’s reply,
July 28 (text printed), containing threat that Canton
regime will adopt drastic measures should the powers
resume Tariff Conference and arrange loan for Peking
regime.
849 [Pg. 849
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
639,
Doc. 640, and
Doc. 641]
July 30
(687)
From the Minister in China
List of names of plenipotentiary representatives
appointed by Peking regime to the Special Customs
Conference.
853 [Pg. 853
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
641,
Doc. 642, and
Doc. 643]
July 31
(499)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Minister in
China
Declaration by the Kuomintang against resumption of
853 [Pg. 853
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
641,

Conference; belief that Government at Canton is
stirring up popular agitation against Conference.
Doc. 642, and
Doc. 643]
Sept. 17 From the British Embassy
Request for information as to what course U. S.
Government intends to pursue in regard to Washington
treaty and resumption of general tariff negotiations,
and on what footing it proposes to treat with the
Canton Government.
854 [Pg. 854
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 643 and
Doc. 644]
Oct. 5
To the British Embassy
Information that the U. S. Government intends to
maintain its policy of holding itself in readiness to
negotiate with any government representing China as a
whole.
855 [Pg. 855
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
644,
Doc. 645, and
Doc. 646]
Nov. 20
(566)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for instructions as to policy to pursue in case
the Peking regime requests the resumption of the
Conference; suggestion of alternative courses of
action.
855 [Pg. 855
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
644,
Doc. 645, and
Doc. 646]
Nov. 23
(278)
To the American Delegation (tel.)
Opinion that best course might be for the powers to act
independently of China to enforce surtaxes on their
own nationals; British suggestion that the 2½ percent
surtax be granted at once and without reservations,
collections 
to 
be 
made 
through 
Customs
Administration; Department’s belief that the Chinese
Government might simply be authorized to collect the
surtaxes through the Chinese Maritime Customs.
859 [Pg. 859
is part of Doc.
647]
Nov. 24
(279)
To the American Delegation (tel.)
Questions as to present status of Russo-Asiatic Bank
and reallocation of customs funds among banks in
China.
860 [Pg. 860
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
647,
Doc. 648, and
Doc. 649]

Nov. 27
(583)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that the Russo-Asiatic Bank is in process
of liquidation and that the Hongkong and Shanghai
Banking Corporation remains the sole custodian bank,
receiving all customs deposits; reasons for fearing any
immediate change in status quo.
860 [Pg. 860
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
647,
Doc. 648, and
Doc. 649]
Dec. 3
(595)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that British statement that the question of debt
consolidation wrecked the Conference can be
explained only on theory that British Government
must have either reversed itself and become unwilling
to discuss any plan of debt consolidation or it must
have been unwilling to meet the views of other
delegations in a spirit of compromise.
861 [Pg. 861
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 649 and
Doc. 650]
Dec. 8
(267)
From the Ambassador in Great Britain (tel.)
Conversation between the Counselor of the American
Embassy and the Permanent Under Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs in which the Under Secretary
reviewed the British suggestion that the 2½ percent
surtax be granted without reservation.
863 [Pg. 863
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 651 and
Doc. 652]
EFFORTS OF THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER POWERS TO MEET SITUATION CREATED BY IMPOSITION IN CHINA OF TAXES IN
CONFLICT WITH TREATY PROVISIONS
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Sept. 29
(535)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Chargé in
China
Report that British have been notified that Canton
regime intends to levy consumption and production
taxes on all merchandise passing through that port.
Opinion 
of 
British 
consul 
general 
and 
the
Commissioner of Customs that it would be better for
the powers to induce the Canton Government to collect
the taxes through existing Maritime Customs than for
863 
[Pg.
863 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 651 and
Doc. 652]

them to make a protest which would simply be ignored.
Inclination to agree with these views.
Sept. 30
(440)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, September 27: Information as given in
despatch No. 535, September 29.
866 
[Pg.
866 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 653 and
Doc. 654]
Oct. 
3
(449)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram to U. S. Minister, September 28 (text
printed), 
giving 
opinion 
that 
Canton 
situation
necessitates either decisive international action backed
by threat of naval force or the negotiation with the
Canton regime of a regional arrangement.
Telegram from U. S. Minister, September 30 (text
printed), stating belief that the powers should use force
to prevent such piecemeal repudiation of treaties,
especially since Canton authorities are no longer
interested in regional arrangement; suggestion that
Department attempt to reach agreement with Japan and
Great Britain to prevent, even by force, the levying of
the taxes.
866 
[Pg.
866 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 653 and
Doc. 654]
Oct. 
4
(451)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Indication that the Japanese Government opposes the
new taxes and believes that the Washington Conference
powers should hold a meeting.
870 
[Pg.
870 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 654 and
Doc. 655]
Oct. 
5
(217)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Department’s attitude that there is no need for holding
discussions with Great Britain and Japan concerning
proposed taxes which have been mentioned to British
only; instructions to authorize consul general at Canton
to express the concern of U. S. Government;
instructions also, in case taxes are levied, to protest to
Peking Government and authorize consul general to
protest to Canton authorities.
871 
[Pg.
871 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 655 and
Doc. 656]

Oct. 
6
(456)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from Commissioner of Customs, Canton,
October 5, to Acting Inspector General of Customs
(text printed), asking for instructions concerning
notification by Canton authorities that consumption and
production taxes are to become effective October 11;
Acting Inspector General’s inquiry as to support
Customs could expect from powers in case Canton
regime tried to force it to collect the new taxes; request
for indication of Department’s policy.
872 
[Pg.
872 is part of
Doc. 657]
Oct. 
8
(545)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Chargé in
China
Note from Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs at
Canton, October 6 (text printed), containing a
translation of mandate issued October 4 (text printed)
establishing the taxes and providing for their collection
through Ministry of Finance and also containing an
indication that cooperation of Customs is desired.
873 
[Pg.
873 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 657 and
Doc. 658]
Oct. 
8
(462)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Decision by diplomatic representatives at Peking to
refer to their Governments the questions of what action
the powers should take in reference to tax situation and
what reply could be made to the Acting Inspector
General of Customs’ inquiry as to the support the
Customs could expect from the powers; agreement to
ask for instructions before October 11 when it is hoped
another meeting may be held; draft formula for protest
(text printed).
875 
[Pg.
875 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 658 and
Doc. 659]
Oct. 13
(225)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information that telegram No. 462, October 8, did not
reach Department in time to get reply to Peking before
meeting of Legations; request for report on meeting.
877 
[Pg.
877 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
659,
Doc. 
660,
and 
Doc.
661]

Oct. 14
(477)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Statement that meeting did not take place on October
11; information that all Governments except British,
Italian, and United States have assented to draft
formula for protest.
877 
[Pg.
877 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
659,
Doc. 
660,
and 
Doc.
661]
Oct. 14
(478)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, October 13: Report that new taxes are
now being collected and that all Chinese and some
foreigners are paying them.
878 
[Pg.
878 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
661,
Doc. 
662,
Doc. 
663,
and 
Doc.
664]
Oct. 14
(479)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information that Chargé lodged protest with Ministry
of Foreign Affairs against imposition by Shantung
provincial government of a goods tax of 2 percent ad
valorem.
878 
[Pg.
878 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
661,
Doc. 
662,
Doc. 
663,
and 
Doc.
664]
Oct. 15
(483)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Senior Minister’s statement that he purposes to await
decision of Heads of Legation with regard to the illegal
taxation at Canton before taking any steps in regard to
the Shantung goods tax.
878 
[Pg.
878 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
661,
Doc. 
662,
Doc. 
663,
and 
Doc.
664]
Oct. 15
(231)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Department’s attitude that instruction No. 217, October
5, gave Chargé sufficient authorization for joining in
protest outlined in Chargé’s telegram No. 462, October
8.
879 
[Pg.
879 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
664,
Doc. 
665,

and 
Doc.
666]
Oct. 16
(485)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, October 14: Report that French and
British consuls will take no action in tax situation until
they receive instructions from their Governments.
Chargé’s intention to instruct consul general at Canton
to file protest as authorized in Department’s No. 217,
October 5, in case unanimous consent to joint protest
has not been obtained by October 20.
879 
[Pg.
879 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
664,
Doc. 
665,
and 
Doc.
666]
Oct. 16
(233)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Approval of action taken as stated in telegram No. 479,
October 14.
880 
[Pg.
880 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
666,
Doc. 
667,
Doc. 
668,
and 
Doc.
669]
Oct. 16
(234)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Approval of action proposed in telegram No. 485,
October 16.
880 
[Pg.
880 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
666,
Doc. 
667,
Doc. 
668,
and 
Doc.
669]
Oct. 16
(552)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Chargé in
China
Despatch from Acting Foreign Minister at Canton,
October 11 (text printed), requesting that American
merchants be directed to comply with new tax
regulations.
880 
[Pg.
880 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
666,
Doc. 
667,
Doc. 
668,
and 
Doc.
669]
Oct. 18
(490)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Request for authorization to instruct consul general at
881 
[Pg.
881 includes

Canton to refuse Acting Foreign Minister’s request for
list of luxuries drawn up by Tariff Conference.
portions 
of
Doc. 669 and
Doc. 670]
Oct. 19
(235)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Approval of recommendation set forth in telegram No.
490, October 18.
882 
[Pg.
882 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
670,
Doc. 
671,
Doc. 
672,
and 
Doc.
673]
Oct. 20
(494)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Résumé of tax situation at Canton as it now stands.
882 
[Pg.
882 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
670,
Doc. 
671,
Doc. 
672,
and 
Doc.
673]
Oct. 20
(495)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information that diplomatic body is meeting to
consider instructions received by British Minister, in
view of which the consul general at Canton has not
been instructed to lodge U. S. protest.
882 
[Pg.
882 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
670,
Doc. 
671,
Doc. 
672,
and 
Doc.
673]
Oct. 20
(497)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Recommendation to accept British proposal that a
protest be made to the Canton regime containing a hint
that if the new taxes were collected by the Customs and
guarantees were given that there would be no increase
in illegal taxation, the powers would be willing to make
an agreement to regularize the situation. Draft formula
for protest (text printed).
883 
[Pg.
883 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 673 and
Doc. 674]

Oct. 22
(240)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Department’s preference for protest formula given in
telegram No. 462, October 8, rather than the one given
in telegram No. 497, October 20; instructions to make
protest alone if diplomatic body cannot agree.
885 
[Pg.
885 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 674 and
Doc. 675]
Oct. 23
(507)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Question as to whether Department’s preference for
protest formula set forth in telegram No. 462, October
8, means that Department is unwilling to join in protest
as presented in telegram No. 497, October 20.
886 
[Pg.
886 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
675,
Doc. 
676,
Doc. 
677,
and 
Doc.
678]
Oct. 23
(243)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Statement that Department is unwilling to join in
protest as set forth in telegram No. 497, October 20.
886 
[Pg.
886 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
675,
Doc. 
676,
Doc. 
677,
and 
Doc.
678]
Oct. 25
(510)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Swatow, October 22: Request for instructions in
regard to extension of surtaxes proposed by Swatow
local 
authorities; 
Chargé’s 
understanding 
that
Department desires Swatow situation to be covered by
protest to Canton.
886 
[Pg.
886 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
675,
Doc. 
676,
Doc. 
677,
and 
Doc.
678]
Oct. 25
(511)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Request for instructions in connection with the new
Canton regulations for the examination of the persons,
passports, and effects of incoming and outgoing
passengers.
887 
[Pg.
887 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
678,
Doc. 
679,
and 
Doc.
680]

Oct. 25
(245)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Department’s assumption that protest against Canton
taxes will cover Swatow situation.
887 
[Pg.
887 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
678,
Doc. 
679,
and 
Doc.
680]
Oct. 26
(513)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Telegram from Commissioner of Customs, Canton, to
Acting Inspector General of Customs (text printed),
stating that existence of Maritime Customs is
threatened by independent enforcement of new taxes
by Canton officials. Conference with British Minister
in which latter urged an immediate exchange of views
among British, Japanese, and U. S. Governments in
order that decisive action may be taken.
888 
[Pg.
888 is part of
Doc. 681]
Oct. 27
(249)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Instructions to include in protest regarding new taxes a
protest against the regulations for examination of
passengers to the extent that they relate to collection of
taxes; opinion that there is no objection to reasonable
regulations for passport examination.
890 
[Pg.
890 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 682 and
Doc. 683]
Oct. 28
(516)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Opinion that the regulations for passport examination
should not be excepted from the protest against the new
regulations.
890 
[Pg.
890 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 682 and
Doc. 683]
Oct. 28
(518)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Request for instructions as to attitude U. S. consular
and naval authorities in Canton should adopt toward
the boarding of vessels and interference with
passengers and goods.
891 
[Pg.
891 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 683 and
Doc. 684]
Oct. 29
(519)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, October 28: Report that stations have
been established at Dosing and Holow at which all
steamers are required to stop and undergo inspection.
892 
[Pg.
892 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
684,

Doc. 
685,
and 
Doc.
686]
Oct. 29
(520)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Request for instructions concerning a third protest
formula agreed upon by the diplomatic body which
amends the second formula transmitted in telegram No.
497, October 20.
892 
[Pg.
892 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
684,
Doc. 
685,
and 
Doc.
686]
Oct. 30
(520
bis)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
To Canton, October 29: Authorization to join in protest
to Cantonese authorities against visit and search
regulations.
Telegram from the Commissioner of Customs at
Canton to the Inspectorate General, October 29 (text
printed), conveying information that boarding of
shipping has begun and that Canton authorities have
been informed that if practice continues, notification
will be given to public that masters or agents can give
information concerning ship or cargo only to officials
of Maritime Customs.
893 
[Pg.
893 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 686 and
Doc. 687]
Oct. 30
(521)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, October 30: Report of concurrence in
protest against inspection regulations.
894 
[Pg.
894 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
687,
Doc. 
688,
and 
Doc.
689]
Nov. 1
(523)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Canton, October 29: Explanation of inspection
regulations given by Acting Foreign Minister at
Canton.
894 
[Pg.
894 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
687,
Doc. 
688,
and 
Doc.
689]

Nov. 1
(255)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Instructions to file protest set forth in telegram No.
520, October 29, alone if other Legations cannot agree
and also to have consul general at Canton file protest
including statement that the United States cannot
consent to having U. S. vessels visited and searched
except as provided for by treaty; instructions to consult
with the commander in chief of the Asiatic Fleet
concerning means of giving protection to U. S.
shipping.
895 
[Pg.
895 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 689 and
Doc. 690]
Nov. 3
(527)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information 
that 
joint 
protest 
is 
now 
being
communicated to both the Peking and Canton
authorities and that consul general at Canton is being
instructed to make individual protest in accordance
with Department’s telegram No. 255, November 1.
896 
[Pg.
896 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 690 and
Doc. 691]
Nov. 16
(555)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, November 13: Status of visit and search
regulations.
Minister’s hope that Department will decide upon
policy of giving naval protection to U. S. shipping
despite disposition of shipowners to acquiesce in
regulations.
897 
[Pg.
897 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 691 and
Doc. 692]
Nov. 17
(566)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Minister in
China
Two notes from the Acting Foreign Minister at Canton
(texts printed): (1) To the Portuguese consul general,
November 8, returning the joint protest with the
statement that relations of the powers with the
Cantonese regime are not regulated on a basis which
can entitle them to raise questions of treaty violations;
(2) to the U. S. consul general, November 13, merely
referring him to the reply made November 8 to the
Portuguese consul general.
900 
[Pg.
900 is part of
Doc. 693]
Nov. 19
(272)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Department’s intention to provide protection for U. S.
902 
[Pg.
902 includes

commerce when protection is sought; statement that
commander in chief of naval forces should be
consulted upon arrangements.
portions 
of
Doc. 694 and
Doc. 695]
Dec. 2
(594)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for instructions concerning the intention of the
Canton Government to levy the illegal taxes at
Hankow. 
Opinion 
of 
British 
Chargé 
that 
his
Government intends to consent to the taxes if they are
collected by the Maritime Customs. Alternative
suggestion that the powers might put in operation the
Washington surtaxes.
902 
[Pg.
902 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 694 and
Doc. 695]
Dec. 4
(598)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Discussion with Inspector General of Customs, British
Chargé, and Japanese Minister, in which all except the
Japanese Minister agreed that only possible action was
for powers to allow the Washington surtaxes to be
levied throughout China by whatever authorities
happened to have control, with the sole condition that
they be collected by the Maritime Customs; agreement
of British Chargé and U. S. Minister that each would
ask his Government to exert pressure on Japanese
Foreign Office. Request for authorization to proceed
without delay.
904 
[Pg.
904 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 695 and
Doc. 696]
Dec. 4
(287)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Belief that the illegal taxes should be protested
regardless of who collects them, in order to have the
record clear when the time comes for a discussion with
a Chinese Government on the question of tariffs.
907 
[Pg.
907 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 697 and
Doc. 698]
Dec. 6
(600)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Intention to assent to procedure for protection of U. S.
shipping as outlined in communication from Southern
Patrol commander to commander in chief of the Asiatic
Fleet (text printed).
907 
[Pg.
907 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 697 and
Doc. 698]
Dec. 7
(602)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Hope that proposals outlined in telegram No. 598,
December 4, will be regarded by Department as
908 
[Pg.
908 includes
portions 
of

compatible with position set forth in its telegram No.
287, December 4.
Doc. 
698,
Doc. 
699,
Doc. 
700,
and 
Doc.
701]
Dec. 8
(290)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of arrangement outlined in telegram No. 600,
December 6.
908 
[Pg.
908 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
698,
Doc. 
699,
Doc. 
700,
and 
Doc.
701]
Dec. 8
(291)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Statement that authority to concur in proposal for
granting Washington surtaxes was given in telegram
No. 278, November 23; outline of difficulties involved
in such a course of action, and conclusion that best
course is to file usual protest and await emergence of
competent government.
(For abstract of telegram No. 278, November 23, see
page CI [Pg. CI is part of List of Papers].)
908 
[Pg.
908 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
698,
Doc. 
699,
Doc. 
700,
and 
Doc.
701]
Dec. 9
(607)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Recommendation that authorization be given to accede
to the surtax which the Peking Government wishes to
levy in place of the famine-relief surtax in order to pay
amounts in arrears to the League of Nations and to pay
salaries of representatives abroad.
910 
[Pg.
910 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 701 and
Doc. 702]
Dec. 9
(606)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that British Government has authorized
action to implement Washington surtaxes but intends to
compound with Cantonese concerning the illegal
surtaxes in case first course of action fails.
911 
[Pg.
911 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
703,
Doc. 
704,
and 
Doc.
705]

Dec. 9
(293)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Statement that U. S. Government will make no
objections to levy of surtax for purposes mentioned in
telegram No. 607, December 9.
911 
[Pg.
911 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
703,
Doc. 
704,
and 
Doc.
705]
Dec. 11
(611)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Request 
for 
immediate 
decision 
concerning
authorization to proceed in the matter of the
Washington surtaxes.
911 
[Pg.
911 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
703,
Doc. 
704,
and 
Doc.
705]
Dec. 13
(297)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Authorization to proceed as suggested in Minister’s
telegram No. 598, December 4; preference that the
Maritime Customs should decide the question as to
which of the parties at each port should receive the
revenue collected by the Customs.
912 
[Pg.
912 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
705,
Doc. 
706,
and 
Doc.
707]
Dec. 14
(613)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Question as to whether or not Embassy at Tokyo has
been authorized to support plan to have Washington
surtaxes implemented.
912 
[Pg.
912 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
705,
Doc. 
706,
and 
Doc.
707]
Dec. 14
(298)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Statement that Embassy at Tokyo has not been
authorized to support the plan because it appears from
a recent conversation with the Japanese Ambassador
that his Government is unwilling to accept the proposal
and the Department does not desire that the proposal
should be advanced unless the interested Governments
all agree.
913 
[Pg.
913 is part of
Doc. 708]

Dec. 17
(621)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Statement that the advancement of the proposal to grant
the Washington surtaxes does not rest with U. S.
Government since the British Government is going on
with it and intends shortly to present the proposal to the
diplomatic body for a vote; request for instructions as
to whether to join the British or to side with the
Japanese in obstructing the plan.
914 
[Pg.
914 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 708 and
Doc. 709]
Dec. 18
(300)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Authorization to vote with the British for the proposal
if prior consent of all interested Governments cannot be
obtained and it is brought before the diplomatic body
for a vote.
918 
[Pg.
918 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 710 and
Doc. 711]
Dec. 19
(628)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that, at a meeting of the interested Chiefs
of Mission on December 18, the British Chargé
presented a statement, the general purport of which is
that the powers should grant the Washington surtaxes
immediately and unconditionally, accept Chinese
“tariff autonomy,” and cease to insist on the strict letter
of treaty rights.
918 
[Pg.
918 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 710 and
Doc. 711]
Dec. 20
(301)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that a news despatch from Peking has been
printed in New York Times which gives the impression
that the British attitude toward Washington surtaxes is
more liberal than that of United States; suggestion that
it might be considered wise to make U. S. attitude
public.
919 
[Pg.
919 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 712 and
Doc. 713]
Dec. 22
(632)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Assumption that there is no occasion for action
suggested in telegram No. 301, December 20, since the
larger proposals set forth in the British statement
overshadowed the question of granting the Washington
surtaxes; belief that the larger proposals may not be
wise, but that, since the United States cannot be less
919 
[Pg.
919 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 712 and
Doc. 713]

liberal, it would be advisable to cooperate with the
British.
Dec. 23
(308)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions to support British program in conferences
of diplomatic body. Statement of intention to make an
address soon expressing the willingness of the U. S.
Government 
to 
negotiate 
with 
a 
government
representing China for the purpose of revising existing
treaties.
922 
[Pg.
922 is part of
Doc. 714]
Dec. 23
(816)
From the British Ambassador
Telegram from the British Foreign Secretary to the
British Minister in China, December 2 (text printed),
setting forth the principles which the British
Government considers should guide the policy of the
Washington treaty powers in China.
923 
[Pg.
923 is part of
Doc. 715]
Dec. 28
(644)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Advice not to commit the United States to any further
concessions than those contemplated in the Washington
Conference and the Special Customs Conference.
929 
[Pg.
929 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
715,
Doc. 
716,
and 
Doc.
717]
Dec. 29 From the Consul General at Hankow (tel.)
Indication by Chinese Foreign Minister at Canton that
he is anxious that no statement be made by the
Department on the subject of the 2½ percent surtaxes
until an announcement which he is making is received
at Washington; statement that Canton Government is
not in favor of British statement.
929 
[Pg.
929 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
715,
Doc. 
716,
and 
Doc.
717]
Dec. 29
(311)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for comments on statement of U. S. position in
regard to China as set forth in proposed reply (text
printed) to British memorandum of December 23.
930 
[Pg.
930 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 717 and
Doc. 718]
Dec. 30
(647)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Hankow, December 28: Information that taxes
934 
[Pg.
934 includes

now being levied at Canton are to be enforced at
Hankow from January 1, 1927; request for instructions.
To Hankow, December 30: Instructions to make no
protest against new taxes pending further instructions
in view of the fact that the Department has agreed to
British program to put Washington surtaxes into effect
unconditionally but does not wish its position to be
made public until the powers have reached agreement.
portions 
of
Doc. 718 and
Doc. 719]
Dec. 31 From the Chinese Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs at
Hankow (tel.)
Protest against British proposal to enforce Washington
surtaxes and allow the proceeds therefrom to be paid to
the local authorities at each port.
935 
[Pg.
935 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 719 and
Doc. 720]
Dec. 31 Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far
Eastern Affairs
Statement 
by 
Japanese 
Ambassador 
that 
his
Government thought that Washington surtaxes should
not be implemented except under conditions as
stipulated in Washington treaty; Japanese suggestion
that Tariff Conference be resumed informally with
representatives of both Chinese factions present.
936 
[Pg.
936 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 720 and
Doc. 721]
1927
Jan. 
3
(1)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for suggestions concerning reply to British as
quoted in Department’s telegram No. 311, December
29; desire to show willingness of this Government to
make ample concessions to China while not entirely
scrapping Washington treaties and Conference.
937 
[Pg.
937 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 722 and
Doc. 723]
Jan. 
5
(10)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that draft reply contained in telegram No. 311,
December 29, is inadvisable in that it might be
interpreted as a competitive protestation of sympathy
which actually offered less than the British proposal;
belief that best course would be to acquiesce in the
British proposal without demur or publicity; draft reply
(text printed).
937 
[Pg.
937 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 722 and
Doc. 723]

PROTESTS BY THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER POWERS AGAINST CHINESE FINANCIAL MEASURES DIVERTING REVENUES FROM
PAYMENT OF FOREIGN LOANS IN DEFAULT
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Mar. 11
(508)
From the Minister in China
Notes exchanged between the British, French, and U.
S. Ministers and the Chinese Foreign Office,
December 12 and 31, 1925, February 10 and March 5,
1926 (texts printed), concerning the default in the
Hukuang bond payment.
940 
[Pg.
940 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
723
and 
Doc.
724]
Mar. 18
(512)
From the Minister in China
Information that Chinese Government intends to
utilize surplus customs revenues as security for an
issue of Treasury notes and is making no provision for
meeting unsecured foreign obligations; transmittal of
protest made February 6 and reply of Chinese,
February 11, to the effect that such utilization “does
not concern or hinder foreign creditors” (texts printed).
944 
[Pg.
944 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
724
and 
Doc.
725]
[Mar.
18]
From the American, British, French, and Japanese
Ministers to the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Protest against the issuance of a further internal loan
secured upon surplus customs revenues; statement
that, since every new lien upon these revenues
necessarily postpones the payment of the foreign debt,
the Ministers regard as unacceptable the Chinese
assertion that foreign creditors are not adversely
affected thereby.
947 
[Pg.
947 is part of
Doc. 726]
[Apr.19] From the American, British, and French Ministers to
the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Protest against the failure of the Chinese Government
to provide funds for the payment of the Hukuang loan;
request that the necessary funds be made available
from the existing customs revenues.
948 
[Pg.
948 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
727
and 
Doc.
728]
June 
4
(114)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram received by American Group from their
948 
[Pg.
948 includes

representative in Peking (text printed) containing
information that Chinese Foreign Office has requested
diplomatic body to release to them customs funds to
meet internal obligations and that diplomatic body has
replied that they do not wish to interfere in disposal of
surplus revenue so long as they are assured that funds
are available to service such foreign loans as are
secured on the customs revenues; request for
comments for communication to American Group who
consider reply of diplomatic body as a reversal of
position.
portions 
of
Doc. 
727
and 
Doc.
728]
June 
8
(242)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Statement 
that 
holders 
of 
foreign 
obligations
antedating consolidation of internal loans in 1921 have
only a moral and not a legal claim on customs
revenues; opinion of Ministers that request of Chinese
Government could not have been declined or made
conditional upon the satisfaction of such unrelated
claims.
949 
[Pg.
949 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
728
and 
Doc.
729]
June 13
(245)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Inquiry as to whether U. S. Government would be
willing to join the British, French, and Japanese in a
move to force the Military Governor of Chihli to
accept Central Government’s offer of a subsidy by a
threat to use military force to prevent his interference
in the Salt Administration.
950 
[Pg.
950 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
729
and 
Doc.
730]
June 15
(120)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Statement that U. S. Government cannot participate in
military action for the protection of the salt revenues.
951 
[Pg.
951 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
730
and 
Doc.
731]
June 22
From the American Group
Information that funds have been received from China
for the service of the Hukuang loan and that
announcement has been made that coupons from
952 
[Pg.
952 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
732

bonds of the German issue which matured June 15,
1920, and June 15, 1925, will be paid.
and 
Doc.
733]
July 
27
(681)
From the Minister in China
Report that an agreement has been practically
concluded between the Military Governor of Chihli
and the Central Government whereby the Military
Governor is given a portion of the salt revenue in
return for his guarantee not to interfere with its
collection.
952 
[Pg.
952 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
732
and 
Doc.
733]
July 
30
(686)
From the Minister in China
Review of the administration of the Maritime Customs
in China; statement that the powers have and exercise
a trusteeship over the whole customs revenue, but in
respect to obligations that require only a portion of the
whole, and that the powers have stated that they
exercise no control over the funds remaining after
these obligations have been met.
953 
[Pg.
953 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
733
and 
Doc.
734]
Aug. 24
(346)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Note to Chinese Foreign Office (text printed)
protesting against proposed issuance of new domestic
loan bonds secured on surplus customs revenues and
insisting that such funds should be used to meet
obligations due to American citizens.
957 
[Pg.
957 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
734
and 
Doc.
735]
Sept. 
9
(382)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that a demand is being made that funds
from the customs revenues be used to repay a local
loan; opinion that compliance with the demand would
mean the end of the Customs Administration and a
scramble among local leaders for control of revenues
of the customhouses.
959 
[Pg.
959 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
735
and 
Doc.
736]
Sept. 
3
(743)
From the Minister in China
Note 
from 
the 
British, 
French, 
and 
U. 
S.
representatives to the Chinese Foreign Office,
September 1 (text printed), formally demanding that
after the charges now being served by the customs
revenues have been met, the claims of the bondholders
960 
[Pg.
960 is part of
Doc. 737]

of the Hukuang loan shall be met before any new
capital charge is placed upon that revenue.
Oct. 13
From the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the
American Legation
Note from the Ministry of Finance (text printed)
reiterating the statement that the issuance of new
domestic loan bonds secured on the surplus customs
funds would not affect foreign creditors.
961 
[Pg.
961 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
737
and 
Doc.
738]
Oct. 30
(254)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Receipt of information that Chinese Finance Ministry
plans still another domestic loan to be secured on the
surplus customs revenues; authorization to make a
protest similar to that set forth in telegram No. 346,
August 24, if report is true.
962 
[Pg.
962 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
738,
Doc. 
739,
Doc. 
740,
and 
Doc.
741]
Nov. 
4
(528)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Opinion that report may be true; statement that protest
will be made if the occasion warrants.
962 
[Pg.
962 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
738,
Doc. 
739,
Doc. 
740,
and 
Doc.
741]
Dec. 21
(870)
From the Minister in China
Joint memorandum from the American, British,
French, and Japanese Ministers to the Chinese Foreign
Office, November 20 (text printed), reaffirming their
opposition to further hypothecation of customs
revenues for floating new internal loans as long as no
steps have been taken to make good the defaults in
foreign obligations.
962 
[Pg.
962 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
738,
Doc. 
739,
Doc. 
740,
and 
Doc.
741]
 
DISINCLINATION OF THE UNITED STATES TO INTERVENE TO PREVENT PARALYZING OF CHINESE CUSTOMS SERVICE AT HANKOW BY
STRIKE

Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Nov. 
27
(579)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for instructions as to whether the U. S.
Government would be willing to cooperate with
other powers in using force if necessary to
protect the customhouse at Hankow from
striking employees.
964 
[Pg. 
964
includes portions of
Doc. 741 and Doc.
742]
Nov. 
29
(286)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that the United States has no right to
intervene since the Maritime Customs is a
Chinese national service.
966 
[Pg. 
966
includes portions of
Doc. 742, Doc. 743,
and Doc. 744]
THE COMMISSION ON EXTRATERRITORIALITY IN CHINA, PROVIDED FOR BY RESOLUTION V OF THE WASHINGTON CONFERENCE
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Jan. 
5
(6)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information 
concerning 
the 
Commission 
on
Extraterritoriality; suggestion that this information be
presented informally to the Chinese Foreign Office.
966 [Pg. 966
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
742,
Doc. 743, and
Doc. 744]
Jan. 11
(16)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that it is unnecessary to present information
contained in Department’s telegram No. 6, January 5,
in view of full discussions which have already taken
place.
967 [Pg. 967
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 744 and
Doc. 745]
Feb. 27
(96)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Chinese suggestion that Commission be empowered
to 
agree 
upon 
procedure 
for 
abolition 
of
extraterritoriality. Recommendation that such action
not be taken without a formally expressed opinion of
the Commissioners; belief that unanimous sentiment
968 [Pg. 968
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
745,
Doc. 746, and
Doc. 747]

is against modification of treaties at present in view of
the revolutionary conditions.
Mar. 
2
(52)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Chinese Foreign Office to Chinese
Minister, February 26 (text printed), requesting that
definite arrangements concerning extraterritoriality be
made by the Commission. Secretary’s note to Chinese
Minister, March 1 (text printed), replying that he
desires 
to 
have 
before 
him 
report 
and
recommendations of Commission before considering
the request.
968 [Pg. 968
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
745,
Doc. 746, and
Doc. 747]
Mar. 
4
(110)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Recommendation that position set forth in telegram
No. 52, March 2, be adhered to until report of the
Commission is received.
970 [Pg. 970
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 748 and
Doc. 749]
Mar. 25
(150)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from U. S. Commissioner Strawn (text
printed) giving list of matters which the Chinese
Commissioner has submitted for the consideration of
the Commission.
970 [Pg. 970
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 748 and
Doc. 749]
Mar. 25
(74)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
For Strawn: Instructions to make no commitments on
the subject but to place no obstacles in the Chinese
Commissioner’s way in submitting views or data
which his Government may desire to have the
Commission consider.
971 [Pg. 971
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
749,
Doc. 750, and
Doc. 751]
Apr. 16
(10)
From the American Commissioner on Extraterritorial
Jurisdiction in China
Report of the activities of the Commission from April
5 to 16; opinion that since the Chinese Government
has failed to provide transportation, the Commission
should give up idea of tour of inspection and proceed
to work on report; American Commissioner’s forecast
of general purport of report.
971 [Pg. 971
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
749,
Doc. 750, and
Doc. 751]

Apr. 30
(11)
From the American Commissioner on Extraterritorial
Jurisdiction in China
Report of activities of Commission from April 16 to
30; information that discussion of draft report is going
forward while the matter of travel is in abeyance.
976 [Pg. 976
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 751 and
Doc. 752]
May 11
(12)
From the American Commissioner on Extraterritorial
Jurisdiction in China
Report of activities of Commission from May 1 to 11;
statement that there was a discussion of the outline of
the report and recommendation to be made by the
Commission and that the tour of inspection was begun
May 10.
977 [Pg. 977
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 752 and
Doc. 753]
June 11
(117)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
For Strawn: Attitude that Commissioner should make
recommendations unhampered as to detail by
instructions from Department; desire to give up
extraterritoriality within reasonable time.
978 [Pg. 978
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 753 and
Doc. 754]
Sept. 17
(412)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
From Strawn: Summary of the Commission’s report
which 
was 
signed 
September 
16 
by 
the
Commissioners of all the participating powers
including China.
979 [Pg. 979
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 754 and
Doc. 755]
Nov. 22
(276)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions to inform Chinese Foreign Office that the
U. S. Government proposes to give the report to the
press for publication on November 29.
982 [Pg. 982
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 755 and
Doc. 756]
Nov. 27
(580)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Suggestion by Chinese Foreign Office, November 26
(text printed), that the recommendations of the
Commission be published without the findings upon
which they were based.
(Footnote: Information that Foreign Office released
the recommendations for publication on November
29.)
983 [Pg. 983
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
756,
Doc. 757, and
Doc. 758]

Nov. 27
(285)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Statement that Department is publishing report on
November 29 and that other Governments have been
notified.
983 [Pg. 983
includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
756,
Doc. 757, and
Doc. 758]
ABROGATION BY CHINA OF THE SINO-BELGIAN TREATY OF NOVEMBER 2, 1865
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Aug. 17
(164)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that report has been published stating that
China has notified Belgium that abrogation of her
commercial treaties and extraterritorial rights will be
effective October 29 and stating that treaties of other
governments will follow as dates for extension arrive;
request for confirmation of report.
984 
[Pg.
984 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
758,
Doc. 
759,
and 
Doc.
760]
Aug. 18
(58)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Confirmation by the Belgian Foreign Office of the fact
that China has notified Belgium concerning the
abrogation of her treaty although Belgium alone has
that right. Foreign Minister’s assertion to Chinese that
if modus vivendi is not signed before end of present
month, whole treaty matter will be submitted to Court
of 
International 
Justice; 
intentions 
of 
Belgian
Government to ask U. S., British, and possibly French
help in obtaining satisfactory modus vivendi.
984 
[Pg.
984 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
758,
Doc. 
759,
and 
Doc.
760]
Aug. 19
(337)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that Chinese have assumed right to abrogate
Belgian and French treaties and intend to take similar
action in regard to a treaty with Japan; assertion that
U. S. treaty of 1903 would apparently become subject
to revision or termination January 13, 1934.
985 
[Pg.
985 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 760 and
Doc. 761]

Aug. 24
(344)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that Belgian Government is requesting
Washington Conference powers to make collective
representations to Chinese Government; suggestion
that Secretary reply that such representations will be
made only if the Chinese offer unsatisfactory terms for
the modus vivendi.
986 
[Pg.
986 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 761 and
Doc. 762]
Aug. 25
(585)
From the Ambassador in Belgium
Note verbale from the Belgian Foreign Office, August
21 (text printed), requesting the aid of the United
States in inducing China to effect an acceptable modus
vivendi and enclosing the note which the Belgian
Foreign Minister had sent to the Chinese Minister in
Belgium August 3 (text printed).
987 
[Pg.
987 is part of
Doc. 763]
Aug. 27
(356)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Suggestion that if any action is taken on Belgian
request it should be in the form of a protest against
China’s violation of Belgian treaty rights.
990 
[Pg.
990 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
763,
Doc. 
764,
and 
Doc.
765]
Sept. 7
(66)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Information that Belgian Foreign Office is dissatisfied
with terms of draft modus vivendi presented by the
Chinese on September 3.
990 
[Pg.
990 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
763,
Doc. 
764,
and 
Doc.
765]
Sept. 8
(44)
To the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Instructions to advise the Foreign Office informally
that the U. S. Government questions the advisability of
its taking action requested by the Belgian Government.
991 
[Pg.
991 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
766,
Doc. 
767,
and 
Doc.
768]

Nov. 
6
(77)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Statement that the Foreign Office has notified the
Chinese Government that the Belgian Government will
submit the question of abrogation to the Court of
International Justice.
991 
[Pg.
991 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
766,
Doc. 
767,
and 
Doc.
768]
Nov. 
9
(535)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that on November 5 the Belgian Minister
addressed an aide-mémoire to the Chinese Foreign
Office rejecting the Chinese proposal and inviting the
Chinese to join in a compromise and submit the matter
to the Court of International Justice, to which the
Chinese replied on November 6 with a Presidential
order abrogating the treaty as of October 27, 1926.
991 
[Pg.
991 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
766,
Doc. 
767,
and 
Doc.
768]
Nov. 
9
(536)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Texts of the Belgian Minister’s aide-mémoire of
November 5, the Chinese Foreign Office reply of
November 6, and the Presidential order of November
6.
992 
[Pg.
992 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 768 and
Doc. 769]
Nov. 12
(544)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that it would be unwise for the Washington
Conference powers to protest to China; suggestion that
Secretary intimate that the United States has no
sympathy with the Chinese in the doctrine of
international irresponsibility, which doctrine has stood
in the way of U. S. recognition of the Russian regime.
995 
[Pg.
995 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 769 and
Doc. 770]
Nov. 15
(267)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of opinion concerning protest by the powers;
belief that suggested intimation would be unwise.
998 
[Pg.
998 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 771 and
Doc. 772]
Nov. 19
(563)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Explanation that intimation was intended as a friendly
word of warning to China as she stands at the
crossroads where she must choose between a
998 
[Pg.
998 includes
portions 
of

constructive policy and the Soviet policy of tearing up
treaties.
Doc. 771 and
Doc. 772]
Nov. 23
(80)
From the Ambassador in Belgium (tel.)
Statement 
that 
Chinese 
Minister 
submitted 
a
memorandum to the Foreign Office, November 22,
refusing to submit the question of the Belgian treaty to
the Court of International Justice. Preparation of the
Foreign Office to submit it to the Court without
China’s acquiescence.
(Footnote: Information that on November 25, 1926,
the Belgian Government submitted the matter to the
Court, but on February 14, 1929, requested that it be
struck from the list, as the matter had been settled by a
preliminary treaty between Belgium and China, signed
November 22, 1928.)
1001 
[Pg.
1001 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 
772,
Doc. 
773,
and 
Doc.
774]
CHINESE PROTEST AGAINST THE ADHERENCE OF CERTAIN POWERS TO THE NINE-POWER TREATY CONCERNING CHINA, SIGNED
FEBRUARY 6, 1922
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Dec. 23
(589)
From the Ambassador in Germany
Foreign Office communication, December 17, 1925 (text
printed), declaring that Germany, subject to ratification,
adheres to the Nine-Power Treaty.
(Footnote: Excerpt from telegram No. 3589, August 19,
1940, from Chargé in Germany: “ratification of the Nine
Power Treaty by Germany did not take place and hence
Germany did not adhere to that treaty.”)
1001 [Pg.
1001
includes
portions of
Doc. 
772,
Doc. 
773,
and 
Doc.
774]
1926
Jan. 
9
(11)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Protest 
of 
Chinese 
Minister 
against 
Germany’s
adherence on the ground that Germany is not a power
possessing special treaty rights in China. Secretary’s
explanation that the United States had acted according to
provisions of article 8 of the treaty in asking Germany to
1002 [Pg.
1002
includes
portions of
Doc. 
774

adhere and that treaty was solely for the benefit of
China. Information that Chinese Minister reported to his
Government along these lines (substance printed).
and 
Doc.
775]
Jan. 16
(319)
To the Ambassador in Germany
Instructions to ascertain if presumption is correct that
Foreign Minister’s statement that Germany’s adherence
is subject to ratification means that it must receive
approval of the German legislative bodies; opinion that
if this is true, the note of December 17 does not
constitute complete adherence and does not warrant
notification to other signatory powers of Germany’s
adherence.
1003 [Pg.
1003
includes
portions of
Doc. 
775
and 
Doc.
776]
Jan. 16 From the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the
American Minister in China
Reasons why Chinese Government believes that
Germany is not among those nations that may adhere to
the treaty; request that these reasons be communicated to
the U. S. Government in order that they may be brought
to the attention of the German Government and that the
invitation may be withdrawn.
1004 [Pg.
1004
includes
portions of
Doc. 
776
and 
Doc.
777]
Jan. 20
(21)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions to inform Foreign Minister that in 1925 the
United States issued invitations to adhere to the Nine-
Power Treaty to certain powers, including Germany;
that, since these invitations were issued in accordance
with the obligations imposed by article 8 of the treaty,
they cannot be withdrawn; and that this Government
believes that it is to China’s interest that all the powers
having treaty relations with China should subscribe to
the principles and policies set forth in this treaty.
1005 [Pg.
1005
includes
portions of
Doc. 
777
and 
Doc.
778]
Jan. 22 From the Chinese Minister
Memorandum (text printed) suggesting that invitations
issued by the United States to Bolivia, Chile, Persia,
Peru, and Switzerland to adhere to the treaty be recalled.
1007 [Pg.
1007
includes
portions of
Doc. 
778

and 
Doc.
779]
Jan. 23
(43)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for authorization to include in note conveying
the substance of telegram No. 21, January 20, a
statement (text printed) containing the intimation that
should he make an issue of the situation, the Chinese
Foreign Minister might risk alienation of some degree of
sympathy on the part of the United States.
1008 [Pg.
1008
includes
portions of
Doc. 
780
and 
Doc.
781]
Jan. 25
(29)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Qualified approval of suggestion made in telegram No.
43, January 23. Transmittal of substance of Chinese
Minister’s note of January 22.
1008 [Pg.
1008
includes
portions of
Doc. 
780
and 
Doc.
781]
Jan. 27
(50)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Suggestion that the Secretary reply by a single note to
the Chinese memoranda of January 16 and January 22,
in order to avoid any appearance of differences between
the Secretary and the American Minister; apprehension
that the Chinese may be seeking to develop such
differences. Belief that a firm U. S. attitude would
prevent Chinese Foreign Minister from making popular
issue of situation.
1009 [Pg.
1009
includes
portions of
Doc. 
781
and 
Doc.
782]
Feb. 
3
(64)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Excerpts from a publication by a news agency close to
the Foreign Minister criticizing motives of the United
States in inviting Germany to adhere to the treaty.
Opinion that, although opportunity to forestall agitation
has passed, its development may be arrested by a
sufficiently definite refusal by the United States to
reconsider its action.
1010 [Pg.
1010
includes
portions of
Doc. 
782
and 
Doc.
783]
Feb. 
4
(36)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that a note had been prepared covering
Germany and all other cases but that the Chinese
1012 [Pg.
1012
includes

Minister, upon being informed of its substance, had
asked that it not be delivered inasmuch as he was again
requesting his Government to withdraw its request.
Statement that the note will now be delivered.
portions of
Doc. 
784
and 
Doc.
785]
Feb. 
6
(66)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Concurrence in Secretary’s proposal to deliver note to
Chinese Minister without awaiting further action by him.
1012 [Pg.
1012
includes
portions of
Doc. 
784
and 
Doc.
785]
Feb. 6
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far
Eastern Affairs
Explanation by the Secretary, in conversation with the
Chinese Minister, that the note could no longer be
withheld since statements had been published in Peking
which impugned the motives of the United States.
Request by the Minister that he be given until February
8; agreement by the Secretary that note be withheld until
then.
1013 [Pg.
1013 is part
of 
Doc.
786]
Feb. 
6
(760)
From the Ambassador in Germany
Report of statement by Chief of Asiatic Division in the
Foreign Office that the Nine-Power Treaty would be
submitted to the Reichstag for ratification, that he did
not know when this would take place, but that he would
notify the Ambassador when the Reichstag was
approached on the subject.
1014 [Pg.
1014 is part
of 
Doc.
787]
Feb. 9
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far
Eastern Affairs
Conversation between the Secretary and the Chinese
Minister in which the Minister read a telegram from his
Government dated February 8 (text printed), to the effect
that the Chinese Government would not insist that the
United States withdraw the invitations; statement by the
Secretary that it only remained for the Chinese
Government to withdraw the memoranda addressed to
1015 [Pg.
1015 is part
of 
Doc.
788]

the Department and to the American Minister; assertion
by Chinese Minister that he had already drafted
proposals to that effect for communication to his
Government and that he had also drafted a telegram (text
printed) which he proposed that the United States should
send to the Chinese Government.
Feb. 23
(46)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information 
that 
the 
Secretary 
is 
temporarily
withholding Department’s reply at the urgent request of
the Chinese Minister who hopes shortly to obtain
permission to withdraw note.
1017 [Pg.
1017
includes
portions of
Doc. 
788,
Doc. 
789,
and 
Doc.
790]
Feb. 25
(91)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Fear that the attitude of the Foreign Minister does not
justify the hope of the Chinese Minister.
1017 [Pg.
1017
includes
portions of
Doc. 
788,
Doc. 
789,
and 
Doc.
790]
Mar. 1
To the Chinese Minister
Acknowledgment of receipt of the Minister’s note of
January 22 embodying the Chinese Government’s views
in regard to the adherence of non-signatory powers to
the Nine-Power Treaty. Transmittal of a memorandum
(text printed) setting forth the reasons why the United
States cannot act in accordance with the suggestion of
the Chinese Government that the United States withdraw
the invitations which it had issued to Bolivia, Chile,
Germany, Persia, Peru, and Switzerland.
1018 [Pg.
1018
includes
portions of
Doc. 
790
and 
Doc.
791]
Mar. 4
(53)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that on February 27 the Chinese Minister
stated that his Government had disapproved his proposal
to withdraw its notes on the question of adherence to the
1022 [Pg.
1022
includes
portions of

Nine-Power Treaty. Transmittal of text of Department’s
reply to Chinese Minister’s note of January 22 in order
that U. S. Minister may make an identical reply to the
memorandum of January 16 from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs.
Doc. 
791
and 
Doc.
792]
Mar. 8
(117)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that Minister has transmitted to the Foreign
Office a copy of the Department’s reply of March 1 to
the Chinese Minister with the statement that it embodies
the reply which the Secretary wished him to make to the
Chinese Government’s note of January 16 in regard to
Germany and one dated March 4 in regard to Bolivia.
1023 [Pg.
1023
includes
portions of
Doc. 
793
and 
Doc.
794]
RENDITION OF THE SHANGHAI MIXED COURT TO THE KIANGSU PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Oct. 
8
(197)
From the Minister in China
Acknowledgment of the Department’s views that the
function of the foreign assessor in the International
Mixed Court at Shanghai is the same as in other parts of
China; that is, that he merely attends court as the
representative of the consul general and is under his
instructions. Presentation of arguments advanced in
support of the general belief in China that the Mixed
Court is the survival of an earlier procedure and that the
assessor has a judicial status. Statement that this is
brought to the attention of the Department in view of the
negotiations now in progress for rendition of the
Shanghai Mixed Court to the Chinese authorities.
1023 [Pg.
1023
includes
portions of
Doc. 
793
and 
Doc.
794]
Nov. 25 From the Chinese Minister of Foreign A fairs to the
Senior Minister
Proposal concerning the rendition of the Mixed Court
and the reorganization of the judicial system in the
International Settlement of Shanghai.
1026 [Pg.
1026 is part
of 
Doc.
795]

1926
May 1
(213)
To the Minister in China
Department’s opinion that general impression in China
as to origin of Mixed Court is incorrect; view that this
Government has never regarded American assessors as
having judicial status in Chinese courts.
1027 [Pg.
1027
includes
portions of
Doc. 
795
and 
Doc.
796]
May 22
(595)
From the Minister in China
Report of appointment by the interested Foreign
Ministers and the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
commissions to draft an agreement upon terms for the
rendition of the Mixed Court; expression of regret that
the commissions have been unable to reach an
agreement due to the Chinese insistence that the
reconstituted court consist partly of a purely Chinese
court, which would alter the mode of administration of
the International Settlement.
1029 [Pg.
1029 is part
of 
Doc.
797]
May 29
(232)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Summary of progress of negotiations for rendition of
Mixed Court.
1030 [Pg.
1030
includes
portions of
Doc. 
797
and 
Doc.
798]
July 23
(297)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that agreement has been reached upon terms
of rendition (substance printed) which now only requires
approval of interested Legations; opinion that the
proposed agreement is acceptable and will have a
salutary effect on Chinese public opinion.
1031 [Pg.
1031
includes
portions of
Doc. 
798
and 
Doc.
799]
July 26
(147)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Department’s approval of the agreement for rendition
summarized in telegram No. 297, July 23.
1032 [Pg.
1032
includes
portions of
Doc. 
799

and 
Doc.
800]
July 30
(308)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Request for approval of proposed courses of action in
case the French, Italians, or Norwegians attempt to
obstruct rendition or in case the authorities at Peking
refuse to ratify the agreement.
1033 [Pg.
1033 is part
of 
Doc.
801]
July 31
(151)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Recommendation for modification of proposed course
of action in case French attempt to block rendition;
approval of other proposals.
1034 [Pg.
1034
includes
portions of
Doc. 
802,
Doc. 
803,
and 
Doc.
804]
Aug. 14
(327)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report that Ministers are now in agreement except for
Italian Minister who awaits instructions; information
that Shanghai consular body has been authorized to sign
draft agreement outlined in telegram No. 297, July 23,
but that actual rendition is to await exchange of notes.
1034 [Pg.
1034
includes
portions of
Doc. 
802,
Doc. 
803,
and 
Doc.
804]
Sept. 1
(364)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that Chinese have signed rendition
agreement and that all consuls concerned have either
signed it or promised to do so. Fear that Italian eleventh-
hour demands may delay exchange of notes; statement
that Italian demands have been referred to Shanghai
consuls for settlement.
1034 [Pg.
1034
includes
portions of
Doc. 
802,
Doc. 
803,
and 
Doc.
804]
Aug. 31 Provisional Agreement
For the rendition of the Shanghai Mixed Court.
1035 [Pg.
1035
includes
portions of
Doc. 
804

and 
Doc.
805]
Dec. 27
(641)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
To Shanghai, December 24: Suggestions as to ways of
meeting Italian demands. Belief that Italian Minister is
weakening.
1039 [Pg.
1039 is part
of 
Doc.
806]
Dec. 29
(645)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that the Italian Minister has accepted
compromise proposals; expectation that rendition can be
effected January 1.
1040 [Pg.
1040
includes
portions of
Doc. 
807,
Doc. 
808,
and 
Doc.
809]
1927
Jan. 
4
(5)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Statement that consul general at Shanghai has reported
that rendition of Mixed Court was effected by exchange
of notes December 31, 1926, and that first session of
Provisional Court will be held January 4.
1040 [Pg.
1040
includes
portions of
Doc. 
807,
Doc. 
808,
and 
Doc.
809]
CONTINUED SUPPORT BY THE UNITED STATES TO THE FEDERAL TELEGRAPH COMPANY IN EFFORTS TO OBTAIN EXECUTION OF ITS
CONTRACT WITH THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Jan. 
7
(9)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Conversation with Japanese Ambassador in which
Ambassador urged that U. S. Government give
consideration to the Japanese proposal of a consortium
arrangement for operation of wireless telegraphy in
China under which monopoly claims would be
relinquished and control of operations would be placed
1040 [Pg.
1040
includes
portions of
Doc. 
807,
Doc. 
808,

in the hands of the Chinese Government; Ambassador’s
belief that agreement between the Governments of Japan
and the United States would help to persuade the
Chinese Government to accept proposal. Instruction to
Minister to canvass situation in regard to probabilities of
Chinese ever fulfilling Federal contract. Request for
views 
on 
advisability 
of 
accepting 
consortium
arrangement.
and 
Doc.
809]
Jan. 13
(24)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Opinion that to acquiesce in the proposal for a radio
consortium would be a mistake since the Chinese
apparently would not agree to it and the only result
would be to destroy the American position under the
Federal contract; belief that consortium would not be
economically sound; recommendation that Department
reject the consortium proposal until Japanese are able to
give assurances that Chinese have changed their stand on
the subject.
1042 [Pg.
1042
includes
portions of
Doc. 
809
and 
Doc.
810]
Jan. 14
(25)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Views of Colonel Davis, representative in China of the
Radio Corporation of America (text printed), concerning
consortium, transmitted for communication to Harbord,
president of the Corporation.
1045 [Pg.
1045
includes
portions of
Doc. 
810
and 
Doc.
811]
Jan. 16
(28)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Receipt of information that Japan has reasserted her
claim to 30-year monopoly by protesting to Chinese
Government against transaction of business with France
and Germany through other than Japanese wireless
stations.
1047 [Pg.
1047
includes
portions of
Doc. 
812
and 
Doc.
813]
Jan. 20
(35)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report on conversation with Chinese Foreign Minister
Janu- 18, in which the Foreign Minister was
noncommittal; and on informal conversations with
1047 [Pg.
1047
includes
portions of

Saburi, head of the Commercial Department of the
Japanese Foreign Office.
Doc. 
812
and 
Doc.
813]
Jan. 23
(27)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that the Department awaits results of
informal conversations with Saburi; and that if Japanese
Embassy should revive question, the Department will
reject consortium proposal.
1049 [Pg.
1049
includes
portions of
Doc. 
813,
Doc. 
814,
and 
Doc.
815]
Jan. 27
(31)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Receipt of a letter from Harbord in which he adverts to
the fact that an agreement has been made by the Minister
and the Chinese Foreign Minister for negotiations to take
place between the Americans, Japanese, and Chinese and
suggests that he extend invitation to representatives of
Japanese 
company 
and 
Chinese 
Ministry 
of
Communications 
to 
meet 
in 
New 
York 
City.
Department’s proposal to ask Harbord to come to
Washington for consultation.
1049 [Pg.
1049
includes
portions of
Doc. 
813,
Doc. 
814,
and 
Doc.
815]
Jan. 30
(60)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Concurrence in the Department’s proposal. Belief that
there is danger in treating the matter as though
negotiations were already in progress between the Radio
Corporation and the Japanese.
1050 [Pg.
1050
includes
portions of
Doc. 
815
and 
Doc.
816]
Feb. 10
(147)
To the Minister in China
Explanation of the status of the negotiations on the
subject of the radio situation in China as given to the
British Ambassador in answer to the Ambassador’s
questions asked during the course of a conversation on
February 4.
(Footnote: The same, on same date, to the Ambassador
in Japan and to the Chargé in Great Britain.)
1051 [Pg.
1051
includes
portions of
Doc. 
816
and 
Doc.
817]

Feb. 11 From Major General James G. Harbord
Acceptance of Secretary’s invitation to come to
Washington and hope that the Department will push
matter to a conclusion at an early date.
1052 [Pg.
1052
includes
portions of
Doc. 
817
and 
Doc.
818]
Mar. 6
(114)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
To Tokyo, March 5: Answer to a telegram giving
information of recent newspaper comment on the
wireless question.
1053 [Pg.
1053 is part
of 
Doc.
819]
Mar. 30
(194)
To the Minister in China
Conversation with the British Ambassador, March 25, in
which the Ambassador said that he thought that if the
United States would urge China to enter into the
consortium, China would agree. Statement that the
Secretary made no promise as to what the U. S.
Government would do.
(Footnote: The same, on same date, to the Chargé in
Great Britain.)
1054 [Pg.
1054
includes
portions of
Doc. 
820
and 
Doc.
821]
Apr. 7
(28)
To the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Instructions that the Department prefers that no
discussions of the wireless question be initiated at Tokyo
at present.
1054 [Pg.
1054
includes
portions of
Doc. 
820
and 
Doc.
821]
Apr. 16
(37)
From the Ambassador in Japan (tel.)
Refusal to discuss topic of wireless with Japanese
Foreign Minister; informal request by Foreign Minister
that the U. S. Minister ask the Department if it could not
reply to the Japanese memorandum of June 1, 1925.
1055 [Pg.
1055
includes
portions of
Doc. 
822
and 
Doc.
823]
Apr. 16 Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far
Eastern Affairs
1055 [Pg.
1055

Inquiry by the Japanese Ambassador as to new
developments in the matter of the Federal contract; reply
that there were none because of political situation in
China and because the U. S. Government yet wanted to
know the Chinese reply to the Japanese proposal of a
consortium; Ambassador’s statement that no reply had
been received and opinion that none would be received
until the powers agreed on a proposition. Denial that
there is any American opposition to the operation of the
Japanese station in China.
(Footnote: Copies sent to the Ambassador in Japan and
to the Minister in China, April 23.)
includes
portions of
Doc. 
822
and 
Doc.
823]
May 14
(96)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Résumé of radio situation in China; consideration of
reply to Japanese memorandum of June 1, 1925, to the
effect that if the Chinese have no objections to a radio
consortium of the Japanese, British, French, and
American interests, U. S. Government will not object;
intention of Radio Corporation to recall Davis and,
failing to bring about definite action within 6 months, to
recommend to the Federal Telegraph Company that it
declare the Republic of China in default; alternative
proposal that Minister notify Chinese that U. S.
Government is ready to accept suggestions made by
Chinese Provisional Chief Executive in 1925. Request
for comments and suggestions.
1058 [Pg.
1058
includes
portions of
Doc. 
823
and 
Doc.
824]
May 14
(97)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Instructions to inform the Chinese Government that U.
S. Government hopes to receive a decision on the
Federal contract by June 30 but that, if by that time no
action has been taken to carry out the contract, the U. S.
Government, while reserving all rights, will permit
American interests to work out arrangements with
interests of other countries for the operation of radio
stations in China, subject to the single provision that the
Department will not support any arrangement involving
a monopoly.
1061 [Pg.
1061 is part
of 
Doc.
825]

May 19
(215)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Telegram from Davis for the Radio Corporation (text
printed) expressing doubt that a Chinese Government
will exist in the near future to which the U. S. Minister
could present an ultimatum, also giving information that
Davis will leave Peking about June 30.
1062 [Pg.
1062
includes
portions of
Doc. 
825,
Doc. 
826,
and 
Doc.
827]
June 11
(243)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that no action has been taken on telegrams
No. 96 and No. 97 of May 14 since there is no one in
charge of the Ministry of Communications; opinion that
it would be unwise to adopt either procedure since either
one would mean abandoning U. S. rights under the
Federal contract; request for authorization to be less
specific; belief that Japanese insistence upon recognition
of their claim to monopoly indicates that open-door
policy is at stake; suggestion that if a reply is made to
Japanese 
it 
should 
be 
made 
upon 
basis 
of
recommendation in Minister’s telegram No. 24, January
13.
1062 [Pg.
1062
includes
portions of
Doc. 
825,
Doc. 
826,
and 
Doc.
827]
July 15
(141)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that the Radio Corporation agrees with
suggestions in telegram No. 243, June 11, in regard to
the communication to Chinese Government; instructions
to be guided accordingly.
1066 [Pg.
1066
includes
portions of
Doc. 
827,
Doc. 
828,
and 
Doc.
829]

Aug. 19
(335)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of a conversation with Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs, August 18, which seemed to give some
hope of an understanding; assertion that, in view of the
indeterminate status of the Cabinet, no more categorical
statement was made than to intimate that the moment is
nearing when the Radio Corporation will have to make
arrangements elsewhere if the Chinese fail to make use
of the opportunity open to them.
1066 [Pg.
1066
includes
portions of
Doc. 
827,
Doc. 
828,
and 
Doc.
829]
Aug. 21 Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State
Conversation with British Ambassador in which the
Ambassador was told that the Assistant Secretary had
nothing new to say concerning the Federal contract; the
Ambassador’s intimation that the consortium would
eliminate Japanese and American monopoly, and
suggestion that he submit an aide-mémoire on British
position.
1067 [Pg.
1067
includes
portions of
Doc. 
829
and 
Doc.
830]
Aug. 27 From the British Ambassador
Memorandum (text printed) giving reasons why the
British Government considers that the Federal contract
involves a virtual monopoly; statement that, if the
Federal contract is carried out, the British Government
may be obliged to take concerted action with the other
powers concerned for the protection of British interests.
1068 [Pg.
1068
includes
portions of
Doc. 
830
and 
Doc.
831]
Sept. 1
(365)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of a Chinese Cabinet decision that further
consideration should not be given to the Federal contract
until a “recognized” government is established; opinion
that U. S. company can no longer rely on Peking
authorities; request for authorization to discuss the
matter with the local Shanghai authorities.
1075 [Pg.
1075
includes
portions of
Doc. 
831
and 
Doc.
832]
Sept. 7
(184)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Department’s unwillingness to authorize Minister to
discuss matter with local Shanghai authorities.
1077 [Pg.
1077
includes
portions of
Doc. 
832

and 
Doc.
833]
Sept. 25 Memorandum by the Secretary of State
Conversation with the Japanese Ambassador in which
the 
Ambassador 
expressed 
his 
Government’s
disappointment in not having received a reply to a note
of almost a year ago; statement that Japan is not
committed to the proposition it has made but is prepared
to consider any proposal in harmony with the general
ideas expressed therein.
1078 [Pg.
1078
includes
portions of
Doc. 
834
and 
Doc.
835]
Sept. 29
(437)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Information that the Japanese Minister has instructions
to take up wireless question with U. S. Chargé and the
Chinese; and that the Chinese Acting Foreign Minister
intends to invite the U. S. Chargé Japanese Minister, and
probably Chinese Minister of Communications to an
unofficial dinner to discuss the matter.
1078 [Pg.
1078
includes
portions of
Doc. 
834
and 
Doc.
835]
Sept. 30
(210)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Instructions to refrain from comment if the unofficial
dinner is given but to report to the Department any
proposals or suggestions made; statement that the
Department expects to go over the situation with General
Harbord shortly, after which it will be in a position to
give necessary instructions.
1080 [Pg.
1080
includes
portions of
Doc. 
835,
Doc. 
836,
and 
Doc.
837]
Oct. 11 Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far
Eastern Affairs
Conversation with the Japanese Ambassador in which
the Ambassador expressed disappointment that he had
been unable to accomplish anything in regard to the
wireless situation in China for more than a year and was
informed that the Department hopes to be able to reply
within a few days to the Embassy’s note of June 1, 1925.
1080 [Pg.
1080
includes
portions of
Doc. 
835,
Doc. 
836,
and 
Doc.
837]
Oct. 13
(474)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Report of various indications that now is a propitious
1081 [Pg.
1081
includes

time to make a further attempt to have the Federal
contract executed.
portions of
Doc. 
837
and 
Doc.
838]
Oct. 16
(232)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Statement that, after a conference with General Harbord
and Colonel Davis, the Department is now preparing a
reply to the Japanese Embassy’s note of June 1, 1925;
indication as to substance of the reply.
1082 [Pg.
1082
includes
portions of
Doc. 
839
and 
Doc.
840]
Oct. 28 To the Japanese Ambassador
Reply to the Ambassador’s memorandum of June 1,
1925; review of entire situation, concluding with the
statement that, if the Governments of China and Japan
approve, the Radio Corporation of America will invite
representatives 
of 
the 
Chinese 
Ministry 
of
Communications and the Japanese and U. S. companies
to meet in New York City to work out a solution of the
difficulties; two enclosures (texts printed) setting forth
the views of the U. S. interests and their opinion that the
most desirable type of consortium would be one in
which the Japanese and U. S. companies developed their
projects separately but coordinated their operating
efforts.
(Footnote: Copies sent to the Ambassadors in Great
Britain and France, November 4, 1926.)
1082 [Pg.
1082
includes
portions of
Doc. 
839
and 
Doc.
840]
Oct. 28
(251)
To the Chargé in China (tel.)
Transmittal of text of the memorandum sent to the
Japanese Ambassador October 28; instructions to leave a
copy with the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs
accompanied by a memorandum stating the situation in
brief and concluding with a request for an early
indication of the attitude of the Chinese officials; further
instructions to state orally that the U. S. company hopes
that the Ministry of Communications will not use this
1091 [Pg.
1091
includes
portions of
Doc. 
840
and 
Doc.
841]

proposal as an excuse for further delay in the execution
of the Federal contract.
Nov. 4
(529)
From the Chargé in China (tel.)
Report that instructions have been carried out and that
Foreign Minister states that he will take up the matter
immediately with a view to making an early reply.
1092 [Pg.
1092
includes
portions of
Doc. 
841,
Doc. 
842,
and 
Doc.
843]
 
DISAPPROVAL BY THE DEPARTMENT OP STATE OP PROPOSED GRANT OF OIL MONOPOLY BY THE CANTON GOVERNMENT TO THE
STANDARD OIL COMPANY
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Dec. 21
(352)
From the Consul General at Canton to the Minister in
China
Information from a Standard Oil Company official that
the Canton authorities, after stating that they expect to
continue the oil monopoly, have proposed an agreement
with the Standard Oil Company whereby that company
would supply most, if not all, the oil and gasoline for
the Canton district and might at the same time
undertake the distribution of petroleum products under
the local government’s supervision; opinion of the
company’s manager in Canton that the proposal will not
be considered since its acceptance would be construed
as approval of the monopoly and since it would give the
other companies a right to protest.
1092 [Pg.
1092
includes
portions of
Doc. 
841,
Doc. 
842,
and 
Doc.
843]
1926
Jan. 
7
(10)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, January 5: Information that Standard Oil
Company 
is 
seriously 
considering 
the 
Canton
Government’s proposal; opinion that such a step would
1094 [Pg.
1094
includes
portions of

be unfortunate.
To Canton, January 7: Instruction to advise the local
representative of the company that the Legation could
not countenance such an arrangement, which is contrary
to treaty provisions and the established policy of the U.
S. Government as concerns monopolies.
Doc. 
843
and 
Doc.
844]
Jan. 11
(14)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Approval of instructions to Canton as transmitted in
telegram No. 10, January 7.
1095 [Pg.
1095
includes
portions of
Doc. 
845,
Doc. 
846,
and 
Doc.
847]
Jan. 30
(59)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that an oil monopoly similar to that in
operation at Canton has been instituted at Swatow.
1095 [Pg.
1095
includes
portions of
Doc. 
845,
Doc. 
846,
and 
Doc.
847]
Mar. 16
(131)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Report of a tentative agreement between the Standard
Oil Company and the Canton Government whereby the
company will allow local authorities to tax oil in
violation of treaty provisions; suggestion that matter be
taken up with the Standard Oil Company in the sense
that it would be regrettable if American interests were to
undermine the efforts made by the U. S. Government to
prevent illegal taxation of American trade in China.
1095 [Pg.
1095
includes
portions of
Doc. 
845,
Doc. 
846,
and 
Doc.
847]
Apr. 
6
(77)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Assertion that the Department prefers to take no action
in the matter in the absence of a request from the
interested firm.
1096 [Pg.
1096
includes
portions of
Doc. 
847,

Doc. 
848,
and 
Doc.
849]
June 7
(241)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, June 5: Statement that the Canton
Government has ordered the abolition of the oil
monopoly on June 15 but that apparently the high stamp
tax will be retained.
1096 [Pg.
1096
includes
portions of
Doc. 
847,
Doc. 
848,
and 
Doc.
849]
July 
6
(274)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
From Canton, July 2: Report that the Standard Oil
Company is about to resume sale of oil under the
agreement to allow taxation by Canton authorities.
1097 [Pg.
1097
includes
portions of
Doc. 
850
and 
Doc.
851]
 
ATTITUDE OF THE UNITED STATES TOWARD THE DEMAND OF THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT FOR THE RECALL OF THE SOVIET
AMBASSADOR IN CHINA
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Aug. 18
(331)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Question by a member of the Chinese Foreign Office
staff as to the U. S. Minister’s attitude in case the
Foreign Office gave the Soviet Ambassador his
passport and, in case he refused to leave, insisted
upon dealing with his staff only; reply that the Soviet
Ambassador’s status is a matter concerning only the
Chinese and the Russians.
1097 
[Pg.
1097 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 850 and
Doc. 851]
Aug. 19
(168)
To the Minister in China (tel.)
Assertion that no doubt should be left in the minds of
1098 
[Pg.
1098 includes
portions 
of

the Chinese that the status of the Soviet Ambassador
concerns only China and the Soviet Government.
Doc. 851 and
Doc. 852]
Sept. 
1
(367)
From the Minister in China (tel.)
Information that the Soviet Ambassador is to be
withdrawn in a few days.
(Footnote: The Soviet Ambassador in China sailed
from Shanghai September 26, 1926.)
1099 
[Pg.
1099 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 853 and
Doc. 854]
RIGHT OF AMERICAN CITIZENS TO BRING SUITS IN CHINESE COURTS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OF CHINA
Date and
number
Subject
Page
1926
Oct. 
22
(788)
From the Chargé in China
Information that an American citizen may bring suit
in China against the Government of China either in
the Higher Court of Justice or the District Court of
Justice; opinion that it would be difficult to obtain a
favorable judgment or to secure its execution.
1099 
[Pg.
1099 
includes
portions of Doc.
853 and Doc.
854]
STATUS OF PERSONS OF CHINESE RACE IN CHINA CLAIMING AMERICAN CITIZENSHIP
Date
and
number
Subject
Page
1925
Jan. 5
To the Consul in Chargé at Hongkong
Instructions concerning the procedure to be followed
in the cases of children of native-born American
citizens of Chinese descent who are residing in China
and may claim American citizenship under section
1993 of the Revised Statutes of the United States.
1100 
[Pg.
1100 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 854 and
Doc. 855]
1926
Feb. 20
(159)
To the Minister in China
Transmittal of copy of Department’s instruction of
January 5, 1925, with instructions to circularize to
consular officers in China.
1101 
[Pg.
1101 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 855 and
Doc. 856]

Apr. 19
(202)
To the Minister in China
Instruction to advise the consul general at Canton to
take no further action in the matter of the arrest by
Canton military authorities of Chu Shea-wai, an
American citizen of Chinese race, in view of the fact
that the Department considers it doubtful that he is any
longer entitled to the protection of the U. S.
Government; views of the Department which are to be
followed when similar cases arise in the future.
1102 
[Pg.
1102 is part
of Doc. 857]
May 20
(227)
To the Minister in China
Instructions to be circularized to all consular officers
in China as a supplement to the Department’s
instruction No. 159, February 20, concerning the
procedure to be followed in the cases of children of
native-born American citizens of Chinese descent who
are residing in China.
1103 
[Pg.
1103 includes
portions 
of
Doc. 857 and
Doc. 858]

General:
Contents
Bolivia and Paraguay (Documents 363-366)
Colombia and Peru (Documents 367-376)
Costa Rica and Panama (Documents 377-378)
Dominican Republic and Haiti (Documents 379-383)

Proposal of the United States to
adhere, with reservations, to the
protocol of the Permanent Court of
International Justice1
1 For previous correspondence concerning United States adherence to the
protocol, see Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 1 ff. For text of protocol,
see ibid., 1920, vol. I, p. 17.
[1] Senate Resolution No. 5, January 27 (Legislative Day January 16,
1926), 69th Congress, 1st Session, Advising and Consenting, With
Reservations, to the Protocol of December 16, 1920
January 16, 1926
[2] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Western European
Affairs (Castle) of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State,
Senator Lenroot, Senator Pepper, and Mr. Castle, February 5, 1926
February 5, 1926
500.C114/465
[3] The Secretary of State to the Austrian Minister (Prochnik)
Washington, February 12, 1926.
500.C114/445a

[4] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Hart)
Washington, February 12, 1926.
500.C114/445b
[5] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
Washington, February 12, 1926.
500.C114/445d
[6] The Latvian Minister (Seya) to the Secretary of State
Washington, February 15, 1926.
500.C114/445
[7] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
Washington, March 2, 1926.
500.C114/388
[8] The Cuban Chargé (Barón) to the Secretary of State
Washington, March 17, 1926.
500.C114/445aa
[9] The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
Geneva, March 18, 1926—8 p.m. [Received March 18—5:32 p.m.]
500.C114/474: Telegram

[10] The Costa Rican Minister (Oreamuno) to the Secretary of State
Washington, January [March?] 26, 1926.
500.C114/445hh
[11] The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
Berne, March 31, 1926. [Received April 13.]
500.C114/490
[12] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Geneva (Tuck)
Washington, April 3, 1926—5 p.m.
500.C114/482: Telegram
[13] The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
Geneva, April 6, 1926—5 p.m. [Received April 6—3:38 p.m.]
500.C114/488: Telegram
[14] The Secretary of State to the Costa Rican Minister (Oreamuno)
Washington, April 9, 1926.
500.C114/482
[15] The Greek Minister (Simopoulos) to the Secretary of State
Washington, April 9, 1926.
500.C114/44511

[16] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
Washington, April 17, 1926—2 p.m.
500.C114/490: Telegram
[17] The Costa Rican Minister (Oreamuno) to the Secretary of State
Washington, April 21, 1926.
500.C114/498
[18] The Chargé in Liberia (Clark) to the Secretary of State
Monrovia, May 12, 1926. [Received June 17.]
500.C114/445c
[19] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, May 27, 1926.
500.C114/445a
[20] The Greek Minister (Simopoulos) to the Secretary of State
Washington, June 28, 1926.
500.C114/44511
[21] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs (Stabler)
[Washington,] August 4, 1926.
500.C114/445w

[22] The Albanian Minister (Konitza) to the Secretary of State
Washington, August 20, 1926.
500.C114/445b
[23] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
Brussels, August 23, 1926—4 p.m. [Received August 23—1:45 p.m.]
500.C114/445d: Telegram
[24] The Dominican Chargé (Vasquez) to the Secretary of State
Washington, August 30, 1926.
500.C114/445j
[25] The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
Geneva, September 14, 1926. [Received September 28.]
500.C114/565
[26] The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
Geneva, September 20, 1926—2 p.m. [Received September 20—1:50 p.m.]
500.C114/558: Telegram
[27] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Grew)
[Washington,] November 4, 1926.
500.C114/445h

[28] The Assistant Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs
(Richardson) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Harrison)
[Washington,] November 5, 1926.
500.C114/584
[29] The Secretary of State to the Assistant Chief of the Division of
Western European Affairs (Richardson)
[Washington,] November 8, 1926.
500.C114/584
[30] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
Washington, November 12, 1926.
500.C114/445cc
[31] The Secretary of State to the Minister of the Irish Free State
(Smiddy)
Washington, November 12, 1926.
500.C114/445bb
[32] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, December 23, 1926.
500.C114/4451
[33] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State

Washington, December 31, 1926.
500.C114/4451
[34] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
London, April 25, 1927. [Received May 5.]
500.C114/445cc

[Document 1]
Senate Resolution No. 5, January 27 (Legislative Day January
16, 1926), 69th Congress, 1st Session, Advising and Consenting,
With Reservations, to the Protocol of December 16, 19202
January 16, 1926
Whereas the President, under date of February 24, 1923, transmitted a
message to the Senate,3 accompanied by a letter from the Secretary of State,
dated February 17, 1923,4 asking the favorable advice and consent of the
Senate to the adherence on the part of the United States to the protocol of
December 16, 1920, of signature of the statute for the Permanent Court of
International Justice, set out in the said message of the President (without
accepting or agreeing to the optional clause for compulsory jurisdiction
contained therein), upon the conditions and understandings hereafter stated,
to be made a part of the instrument of adherence: Therefore be it Resolved
(two-thirds of the Senators present concurring), That the Senate advise and
consent to the adherence on the part of the United States to the said protocol
of December 16, 1920, and the adjoined statute for the Permanent Court of
International Justice (without accepting or agreeing to the optional clause
for compulsory jurisdiction contained in said statute), and that the signature
of the United States be affixed to the said protocol, subject to the following
reservations and understandings, which are hereby made a part and
condition of this resolution, namely:
1. That such adherence shall not be taken to involve any legal
relation on the part of the United States to the League of Nations
or the assumption of any obligations by the United States under
the treaty of Versailles.
2. That the United States shall be permitted to participate, through
representatives designated for the purpose and upon an equality
with the other states, members, respectively, of the Council and
Assembly of the League of Nations, in any and all proceedings of
either the council or the assembly for the election of judges or

deputy judges of the Permanent Court of International Justice or
for the filling of vacancies.
3. That the United States will pay a fair share of the expenses of
the court as determined and appropriated from time to time by the
Congress of the United States.
4. That the United States may at any time withdraw its adherence
to the said protocol and that the statute for the Permanent Court of
International Justice adjoined to the protocol shall not be
amended without the consent of the United States.
5. That the court shall not render any advisory opinion except
publicly after due notice to all states adhering to the court and to
all interested states and after public hearing or opportunity for
hearing given to any state concerned; nor shall it, without the
consent of the United States, entertain any request for an advisory
opinion touching any dispute or question in which the United
States has or claims an interest.
The signature of the United States to the said protocol shall not be affixed
until the powers signatory to such protocol shall have indicated, through an
exchange of notes, their acceptance of the foregoing reservations and
understandings as a part and a condition of adherence by the United States
to the said protocol.
Resolved further, As a part of this act of ratification that the United States
approve the protocol and statute hereinabove mentioned, with the
understanding that recourse to the Permanent Court of International Justice
for the settlement of differences between the United States and any other
state or states can be had only by agreement thereto through general or
special treaties concluded between the parties in dispute; and Resolved
further, That adherence to the said protocol and statute hereby approved
shall not be so construed as to require the United States to depart from its
traditional policy of not intruding upon, interfering with, or entangling itself
in the political questions of policy or internal administration of any foreign
state; nor shall adherence to the said protocol and statute be construed to

imply a relinquishment by the United States of its traditional attitude toward
purely American questions.
2 Resolution reprinted from Congressional Record, vol. 67, pt. 3, p. 2824.
3 Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, p. 17.
4 Ibid. , p. 10.

500.C114/465
[Document 2]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Western European
Affairs (Castle) of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State,
Senator Lenroot, Senator Pepper, and Mr. Castle, February 5,
1926
February 5, 1926
The Secretary read to Senators Lenroot and Pepper5 the note which had
been prepared to the League of Nations giving information concerning the
passage by the Senate of a resolution authorizing the adherence of the
United States to the World Court with reservations. The Secretary explained
that the idea was to inform the League of this and let the League
communicate the reservations to the different nations which have signed the
protocol of the Court, on the understanding that when these nations notified
us direct of their adherence and we had acknowledged the communications,
this would constitute the exchange of notes contemplated by the Senate
reservations. Both Senator Lenroot and Senator Pepper thought that this
method of procedure was unwise inasmuch as there might be criticism of
the Department for asking the League to notify the different nations. They
felt that we ought to write direct to the different nations, sending a certified
copy of the resolution, as this was what the Senate obviously had in mind.
They both felt that we should, of course, send a notification to the League
which would be merely a notification with the statement that we had
communicated with the different nations. The Secretary agreed to this and
said that notes to the different nations would immediately be prepared. We
discussed at some length the wording of these notes, to which wording the
Senators agreed.
They also agreed that the note to the League should be modified at the end
by making the statement that we had ourselves asked the governments of
the powers signatory to the protocol, if they so wished, to signify to this

government their acceptance in writing of the conditions, reservations and
understandings.
W[ILLIAM] R. C[ASTLE], Jr.
5 Senator Irvine L. Lenroot of Wisconsin, and Senator George Wharton
Pepper of Pennsylvania, members of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee.

500.C114/445a
[Document 3]
The Secretary of State to the Austrian Minister (Prochnik)6
WASHINGTON, February 12, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to inform you that the Senate of the United States of
America, on January 27, 1926, gave its advice and consent to the adherence
on the part of the United States to the Protocol of Signature of the Statute
for the Permanent Court of International Justice, dated December 16, 1920,
and the adjoined Statute for the Permanent Court of International Justice,
without accepting or agreeing to the Optional Clause for Compulsory
Jurisdiction, contained in the said Statute, on the condition of the
acceptance by the Powers signatory to the Protocol of the conditions,
reservations and understandings contained in the Senate Resolution, a
certified true copy of which is enclosed.7
I have the honor, therefore, to request you to be good enough to ascertain
whether your Government will accept the conditions, reservations and
understandings contained in the Resolution as a part and a condition of the
adherence of the United States to the said Protocol and Statute, and to
inform me in writing of such acceptance.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
6 Identical notes, on the same date, to the diplomatic representatives in
Washington of Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Finland, France, Great Britain (for Great Britain and the
Governments of Australia, Canada, India, New Zealand, and the Union of
South Africa), Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Netherlands, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Persia, Poland, Portugal,

Rumania, Salvador, Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Siam,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
7 Ante, p. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1].

500.C114/445b
[Document 4]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Albania (Hart)8
WASHINGTON, February 12, 1926.
No. 25
SIR: You should address the following note to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs: [Here follows the text of the note, which is the same as the note of
February 12 to the Austrian Minister, printed supra.]
Upon the receipt of a reply from the Albanian Government you will
communicate a brief resume by telegram and a certified true copy of the
note by mail.
I am [etc.]
[FRANK B. KELLOGG]
8 Same, mutatis mutandis, on the same date, to the American Chargé in
Liberia as Department’s No. 270.

500.C114/445d
[Document 5]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)9
WASHINGTON, February 12, 1926.
No. 226
SIR: I am enclosing, for transmission to Baron Raymond de Waha, still
accredited as Chargé d’Affaires of Luxemburg to the United States, a note10
concerning the conditions, reservations and understandings contained in the
Resolution of the Senate, dated January 27, 1926, for the adherence by the
United States to the Protocol of Signature and Statute of the Permanent
Court of International Justice.
I am [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
9 Also Minister to Luxemburg.
10 Text identical with that of the note to the Austrian Minister, February 12,
p. 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3].

500.C114/445
[Document 6]
The Latvian Minister (Seya) to the Secretary of State11
WASHINGTON, February 15, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of February
12, 1926, together with the certified true copy, enclosed therewith, of the
Senate Resolution in regard to the adherence on the part of the United
States to the Protocol of Signature of the Statute for the Permanent Court of
International Justice.
I have not failed to inform my Government of the conditions, reservations,
and understandings contained in the said Resolution, and I will be glad to
bring its views to your knowledge as soon as an answer will be received at
this Legation.
Accept [etc.]
C. L. SEYA
11 Simple acknowledgments similar to the Latvian note were received from
the following Governments through their representatives in Washington:
Bolivia, Feb. 22; China, Mar. 8; Colombia, Feb. 15; Haiti, Feb. 16;
Lithuania, Feb. 15; Panama, Feb. 15; Paraguay, Feb. 20; Salvador, Feb. 15;
Venezuela, Feb. 16. No replies were received from the Governments of
Bulgaria, Canada, and Chile.
On Feb. 24, 1926, the Brazilian Ambassador informed the Secretary of
State that a message had been received from the Brazilian Minister for
Foreign Affairs stating that a written acceptance of the entry of the United
States into the World Court on the terms communicated by the Secretary
would be sent by Brazil. No further communication on the note of Feb. 12,
1926, however, appears to have been received.

500.C114/388
[Document 7]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
WASHINGTON, March 2, 1926.
No. 388
SIR: There is enclosed, for transmission in the usual manner, a Note to the
Secretary General of the League of Nations, regarding the resolution of the
Senate concerning the conditions of the adhesion by this Government to the
Protocol and Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice.
I am [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
[Enclosure]
The Secretary of State to the Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond)
WASHINGTON, March 2, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the communication of this Department,
dated August 15, 1921,12 acknowledging the receipt of a certified copy of
the Protocol of Signature relating to the Statute of the Permanent Court of
International Justice, and take pleasure in informing you that the Senate of
the United States of America, on January 27, 1926, gave its advice and
consent to the adherence on the part of the United States to the Protocol of
Signature of the Statute for the Permanent Court of International Justice,
dated December 16, 1920, and the adjoined Statute for the Permanent Court
of International Justice, without accepting or agreeing to the Optional
Clause for Compulsory Jurisdiction, contained in the said Statute, on the
condition of the acceptance by the Powers signatory to the Protocol of the
conditions, reservations and understandings contained in the Senate

Resolution, which reads as follows: [Here follows text of Senate Resolution
No. 5, printed ante, page 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1].]
I have the honor, therefore, to inform you that the signature of the United
States will not be affixed to said Protocol until the Governments of the
Powers signatory thereto shall have signified in writing to the Government
of the United States their acceptance of the foregoing conditions,
reservations and understandings as a part and a condition to the adherence
of the United States to the said Protocol and Statute.
I have addressed a communication to the representative of each of the
Governments of the Powers signatories of the Protocol asking these several
Governments to be good enough to ascertain and to inform me in writing
whether they will accept the conditions, reservations and understandings
contained in the resolution as a part and condition of the adherence of the
United States to the said protocol and statute.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
12 Foreign Relations, 1920, vol. I, p. 32.

500.C114/445aa
[Document 8]
The Cuban Chargé (Barón) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, March 17, 1926.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to inform you that my Government, upon reading
the resolution of the Senate of the United States of America of January 27,
1926, by which it gave its advice and consent to the adhesion of the United
States to the protocol of signature of the statute for the Permanent Court of
International Justice dated December 16, 1920, and the appended statute for
the Permanent Court of International Justice, authorizes me to accept, as I
hereby do, in its name, the conditions, reservations and understandings
contained in the said resolution as part and condition of the adhesion of the
United States to the said protocol and statutes.
I avail myself [etc.]
JOSÉ T. BARÓN

500.C114/474: Telegram
[Document 9]
The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, March 18, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received March 18—5:32 p.m.]
On suggestion of Chamberlain13 the question of United States participation
in Permanent Court was placed on Council’s agenda this afternoon and that
body adopted his proposal, relating to the consideration of our
Government’s reservations, which contains the suggestion that a reply
should be made by all governments which have received copy of Senate
resolution of March 5, 1925,14 stressing the difficulty of proceeding by way
of a mere exchange of notes and the real need of a general agreement.
Adopted proposal also contains suggestion that an invitation might be
addressed by Council to all these governments and to the United States to
appoint a delegate to participate in the discussion of reservations and in the
framing of a “new agreement” at a meeting to be held in Geneva on
September 1, 1926.
The general opinion prevails here that Chamberlain’s proposal was made
only after he had received assurance from the British Ambassador in
Washington that such a course would meet with our Government’s
approval.
TUCK
13 Sir Austen Chamberlain, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
and representative on the Council of the League of Nations.
14 Senate Resolution No. 5, adopted, with modifications, Jan. 27, 1926,
printed ante, p. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1].

500.C114/445hh
[Document 10]
The Costa Rican Minister (Oreamuno) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, January [March?] 26, 1926.
MR. SECRETARY: I have had the honor to receive and to forward to my
Government the note of the 12th of February of this year by which your
Excellency was pleased to inform me that on January 27 the Senate of the
United States had given its advice and consent to the adhesion of the United
States to the Protocol of Signature to the Statute of the Permanent Court of
International Justice of the 16th of December, 1920, and the Statute of the
Permanent Court of International Justice without accepting or agreeing to
the elective clause of obligatory jurisdiction contained in the said Statute on
the condition that the Powers that had signed the Protocol would accept the
conditions, reservations and understandings set forth in the resolution of the
Senate on the subject.
 
In this connection your Excellency wants to know whether my Government
accepts the conditions, reservations and understandings to the said
resolution.
The Government of Costa Rica will cease to be a member of the League of
Nations on January 1, 1927, and, taking into account that that date is very
close, it has instructed me to say to your Excellency that it does not believe
it is its duty to decide in regard to the desired acceptance.
Be pleased [etc.]
RAFAEL OREAMUNO

500.C114/490
[Document 11]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, March 31, 1926.
[Received April 13.]
No. 792
SIR: With reference to my telegram No. 74, of March 31, 11 a.m.,17 relating
to American adherence to the Protocol of Signature of the Statute of the
Permanent Court of International Justice, I have the honor to enclose the
original communication, dated March 29, 1926, addressed to the Secretary
of State by Sir Eric Drummond, Secretary General of the League of
Nations, inviting the Government of the United States to send a delegation
to meet in Geneva, on September 1, 1926, with delegations of the
governments of the States actually signatories of the Protocol, for the
purpose of discussing “any questions which it may be proper for them to
discuss in this connection and for the purpose of framing any new
agreement which may be found necessary to give effect to the special
conditions on which the United States are prepared to adhere to the
Protocol”.
The enclosure to Sir Eric’s communication, namely, an extract from the
minutes of the seventh meeting of the thirty-ninth session of the Council of
the League, held at Geneva on March 18th, containing the statement of Sir
Austen Chamberlain, British representative on the Council, which was
adopted by that body on that date and which embodies the proposal for the
conference in question, is also transmitted herewith.17 There is moreover
enclosed a copy of the communication addressed by the Secretary General,
under date of March 29, 1926, to the governments adhering to the Protocol,
inviting them to send delegations to Geneva for the purpose above
indicated.17

The communication addressed to the Secretary of State, with its enclosures,
was received this morning. As pointed out in my telegram under reference,
Mr. Bullard, an American member of the Secretariat of the League,
telephoned me shortly after its receipt with a view to arranging for a
simultaneous release to the press at Washington and Geneva of the text of
this communication. It was agreed at that time that I would take steps by
telegraph to arrange, if possible, that twenty-four hours notice be given to
the Secretariat before release should be made by the Department. However,
about thirty minutes later Mr. Bullard telephoned again to inform me that he
had just learned from Mr. Sharkey, of the Associated Press, that somehow
the text of this invitation had already been obtained by the Geneva
correspondents. He was at the moment unable to understand how this leak
occurred, but said he would endeavor to find out and accordingly inform
me. Mr. Bullard expressed his profound regret for this slip and requested
that I explain it as such to the Department.
I have [etc.]
ALAN F. WINSLOW
[Enclosure]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, 29 March, 1926.
21/50215/20002
SIR: I have the honour to refer to your letter of March 2nd, 1926,18
communicating to me, as Secretary-General of the League of Nations, the
terms of the resolution adopted by the Senate of the United States of
America on January 27th, 1926, with regard to the eventual adhesion of the
United States to the Protocol of signature of the Statute of the Permanent
Court of International Justice, and informing me that you had addressed a
communication to the representatives of the Governments of the States
signatories of that Protocol enquiring whether they would accept the
conditions, reservations and understandings required by the Senate’s
resolution. As I informed you in my letter of acknowledgement dated

March 18th, 1926,19 I communicated copies of your letter to the
Governments of the Members of the League.
I now take pleasure in informing you that at a meeting of the Council of the
League of Nations held on March 18th, 1926, the British representative put
before the Council, in regard to the subject dealt with in your letter, a
statement and proposals which were adopted by the Council.
I have the honour to enclose an extract from the Council’s minutes
containing the statement and proposals to which I refer.19
You will observe from this extract that the Council, desirous of facilitating
common action by the signatories of the Protocol in question with regard to
the adhesion of the United States to that instrument, and after consideration
of the technical aspects of the subject, has taken a decision that invitations
shall be issued to the Governments of the States actually signatories of the
Protocol and to the Government of the United States to appoint delegations
to meet in Geneva on September 1st of the current year for the purpose of
discussing any questions which it may be proper for them to discuss in this
connection and for the purpose of framing any new agreement which may
be found necessary to give effect to the special conditions on which the
United States are prepared to adhere to the Protocol.
Under the terms of the Council’s decision the invitation to the meeting is
addressed to the signatory States in their capacity as such signatories and to
the United States of America. I have conveyed the invitation to the
Governments of the former States.
I have now the honour to convey to you the above invitation of the Council
for consideration by your Government and to request that you will be so
good as to Inform me whether your Government will find it possible to be
represented at the meeting in question.
I have [etc.]
ERIC DRUMMOND

17 Not printed.
17 Not printed.
17 Not printed.
18 Ante, p. 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7].
19 Not printed.
19 Not printed.

500.C114/482: Telegram
[Document 12]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Geneva (Tuck)
WASHINGTON, April 3, 1926—5 p.m.
Endeavor to ascertain informally whether a state member of the League and
signatory of the Protocol of the Permanent Court of International Justice
would automatically lose its status as a signatory of the Protocol by
withdrawing from the League. If not, what steps would be necessary for its
withdrawal from the Permanent Court?
KELLOGG

500.C114/488: Telegram
[Document 13]
The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, April 6, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received April 6—3:38 p.m.]
Substance Department’s telegram of April 3, 5 p.m., informally brought to
the attention of member of judicial section [of] Secretariat, who stated, as
his personal opinion, that while there exist no express provisions in the
protocol and in the absence of precedent, he considered it very doubtful
whether member state of League, signatory of Court protocol, would
automatically be deprived of its status of signatory of protocol by
withdrawal from League.
Assuming this to be the case, member state, in order to withdraw from
Permanent Court, might resort to one of two methods: (a) denunciation of
protocol; (b) invite other signatories to release it from its obligations in this
connection these conditions [sic].
TUCK

500.C114/482
[Document 14]
The Secretary of State to the Costa Rican Minister (Oreamuno)
WASHINGTON, April 9, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note dated January
[March ?] 26, 1926, in reply to a note of my Government of February 12,
1926, concerning the reservations and understandings contained in the
Resolution of the Senate of the United States of January 27, 1926, giving its
advice and consent to the adherence of the United States to the Protocol of
Signature and Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice. It is
noted that your Government, in view of the fact that it will cease to be a
Member of the League of Nations on January 1, 1927, does not feel that it is
its duty to decide in regard to the desired acceptance. My Government
would be grateful to be informed whether Costa Rica intends likewise to
withdraw its acceptance of the Protocol of Signature and Statute of the
Permanent Court of International Justice at the same time as it withdraws
from the League of Nations.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

500.C114/44511
[Document 15]
The Greek Minister (Simopoulos) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, April 9, 1926.
No. 558
SIR: In reply to your communication dated February 12, 1926, I have the
honor to inform you that my Government, having taken cognizance that, on
January 27, 1926, the Senate of the United States of America gave its
advice and consent to the adherence on the part of the United States to the
Protocol of Signature of the Statute for the Permanent Court of International
Justice, dated December 16, 1920, and the adjoined Statute for the
Permanent Court of International Justice, without accepting or agreeing to
the Optional Clause for Compulsory Jurisdiction, contained in the said
Statute, on the condition of the acceptance by the Powers signatory to the
Protocol of the conditions, reservations and understandings contained in the
Senate Resolution, has the honor to accept the conditions, reservations and
understandings contained in said resolution as a part and a condition of the
adherence of the United States to the said Protocol and Statute.
Accept [etc.]
CH. SIMOPOULOS

500.C114/490: Telegram
[Document 16]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
WASHINGTON, April 17, 1926—2 p.m.
63. Your 74, March 31, 11 a.m.21 and despatch No. 792, March 31. Please
transmit in usual manner to the Secretary General of the League of Nations
the following communication, original of which will follow by mail,
informing him that text will be given to the press here on Monday morning,
April 19:
“I have the honor to acknowledge your communication of March
29, 1926, in which you enclose an extract from the minutes of the
meeting of the Council of the League proposing that invitations
be issued to the governments of the States actual signatories of
the Protocol of the Permanent Court of International Justice and
to the Government of the United States to appoint delegates to
meet in Geneva on September 1st of the current year for the
purpose of discussing any questions which it may be proper for
them to discuss in this connection and for the purpose of framing
any new agreement which may be found necessary to give effect
to the special conditions on which the United States is prepared to
adhere to the Protocol. I further note your statement that
invitations have been issued to the various States signatory to the
Protocol and you now extend an invitation to the United States for
such purpose. I am also advised that in the invitation sent to the
States other than the United States the League has asked them to
indicate to the United States Government the difficulty of treating
the American reservations to adhesion to the Protocol of the
Permanent Court by direct exchange of notes and to point out the
need for a general agreement.
While acknowledging the courtesy of the invitation of the League
of Nations to attend such a meeting, I do not feel that any useful

purpose could be served by the designation of a delegate by my
Government to attend a Conference for this purpose. The Senate
gave its consent to the adherence of the United States to the
Statute of the Permanent Court with certain specific conditions
and reservations set forth in the Resolution, which I forwarded to
you as the depository of the Protocol. These reservations are plain
and unequivocal and, according to their terms, they must be
accepted by the exchange of notes between the United States and
each one of the forty-eight states signatory to the Statute of the
Permanent Court before the United States can become a party and
sign the Protocol. The Resolution specifically provided this mode
of procedure.
I have no authority to vary this mode of procedure or to modify
the conditions and reservations or to interpret them and I see no
difficulty in the way of securing the assent of each signatory by
direct exchange of notes as provided for by the Senate. It would
seem to me to be a matter of regret if the Council of the League
should do anything to create the impression that there are
substantial difficulties in the way of such direct communication.
This Government does not consider that any new agreement is
necessary to give effect to the conditions and reservations on
which the United States is prepared to adhere to the Permanent
Court. The acceptance of the reservations by all the nations
signatory to the Statute of the Permanent Court constitute such an
agreement. If any machinery is necessary to give the United
States an opportunity to participate through representatives for the
election of judges, this should naturally be considered after the
reservations have been adopted and the United States has become
a party to the Statute of the Permanent Court of International
Justice. If the States signatory to the Statute of the Permanent
Court desire to confer among themselves, the United States would
have no objection whatever to such a procedure, but, under the
circumstances it does not seem appropriate that the United States
should send a delegate to such a Conference.
Accept, Sir, etc. Signed, Frank B. Kellogg.”

Kertoce

“1 Not printed.

500.C114/498
[Document 17]
The Costa Rican Minister (Oreamuno) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, April 21, 1926.
MR. SECRETARY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the
ninth instant in which Your Excellency, referring to my note of the 26th of
January [March?], expresses Your Government’s desire to be informed as to
whether the Government of Costa Rica proposes to withdraw its acceptance
of the Protocol of Signature and of the Statute of the Permanent Court of
International Justice and also how it notified its decision to withdraw from
the League of Nations.
In reply, I have the honor to say to Your Excellency under instructions from
my Government that the Congress of Costa Rica did not give its approval to
the Protocol of Signature or the Statute of the Permanent Court of
International Justice and that therefore my Government considers that Costa
Rica has not been and is not now a member of the Court.
Be pleased [etc.]
J. RAFAEL OREAMUNO

500.C114/445c
[Document 18]
The Chargé in Liberia (Clark) to the Secretary of State
MONROVIA, May 12, 1926.
[Received June 17.]
No. 370

Diplomatic
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction No. 270 of
February 12, 1926,22 and, in confirmation of my telegram of this date,23 to
enclose herewith in duplicate a certified true copy of the Liberian
Government’s reply to my note of May 7, 1926, with reference to the
acceptance by the Liberian Government of the conditions, reservations and
understandings contained in the Senate Resolution of January 27, 1926.
I have [etc.]
REED PAIGE CLARK
[Enclosure]
The Liberian Secretary of State (Barclay) to the American Chargé (Clark)
MONROVIA, May 11, 1926.
459/D
SIR: I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your despatch dated May 7,
1926, by which I am advised for the information of the Liberian
Government that the Senate of the United States have given their advice
and consent to the adherence on the part of the United States to the Protocol
of Signature of the Statute for the Permanent Court of International Justice,
dated December 16, 1920 and the adjoined Statute for the Court of
International Justice, without accepting the optional clause for compulsory
jurisdiction contained in said Statute, under certain conditions, reservations
and understandings and subject to the condition that Powers Signatory to
the said Protocol accept such conditions reservations and understandings.
In reply to this despatch I have the honour to say that the Government of the
Republic of Liberia for and on behalf of said Republic accept so far as they
relate to questions which may arise between the Republic of Liberia and the
United States the conditions, reservations and understandings contained in
the Senate’s Resolution as a part and a condition of the adherence of the
United States to the said Protocol and Statute.

I have [etc.]
EDWIN BARCLAY
22 See footnote 8, p. 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5].
23 Not printed.

500.C114/445a
[Document 19]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State24
WASHINGTON, May 27, 1926.
No. 1333/80
EXCELLENCY: The Federal Government of the Republic of Austria having taken
cognizance of Your Excellency’s esteemed note of February 12th, 1926, and
enclosures dealing with a resolution passed on January 27th, 1926, by
which the Senate of the United States gave its advice and consent to the
adherence on the part of the United States to the Protocol of Signature of
the Statute for the Permanent Court of International Justice dated December
16th, 1920, and the adjoined Statute of the Permanent Court of International
Justice has now instructed me to bring the following to Your Excellency’s
kind attention.
As the Austrian Government attaches the greatest importance to the
adherence on the part of the United States to the Protocol of Signature of
the Statute for the Permanent Court of International Justice, it is disposed to
fully and unrestrictedly accept the conditions, reservations and
understandings contained in the above mentioned Senate Resolution.
By a careful examination of these reservations, however, the question was
raised, whether their acceptance would not be tantamount to a modification
of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice. On the
solution of this question depends the decision, whether or not an acceptance
of the afore referred to reservations on the part of the Federal Government
would be subject to the consent and approval by the National Council of the
Republic of Austria.
The Government of the United States is well aware that the Signatory-
Powers of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice are

contemplating to hold a Conference which will have to define its attitude
regarding the said question in doubt.
The Federal Government of Austria, therefore, believes that it should not
anticipate the results of this Conference but reserve its final answer until a
later date.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK
24 Notes similar to the Austrian note were received from Finland (June 3)
and Persia (Aug. 10), through their representatives in Washington. No
further replies appear to have been received from the Governments of
Austria, Finland, and Persia.

500.C114/44511
[Document 20]
The Greek Minister (Simopoulos) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, June 28, 1926.
No. 840
EXCELLENCY: Referring to my communication No. 558 of April 9, 1926,
concerning the acceptance on the part of my Government of the conditions
and reservations under which the Government of the United States of
America would consent to adhere to the Protocol of Signature of the Statute
of the Permanent Court of International Justice, I have the honor to inform
you that in view of the fact that the Government of the United States of
America has made its adherence to the aforesaid protocol subject to the
condition of the acceptance by all the signatory powers to the conditions,
reservations and understandings set forth to this effect, my Government felt
that it should accept the invitation to participate in the Conference which is
to be held for this purpose at Geneva, September 1, 1926, with a view of
facilitating the common action of the interested Powers.
Accept [etc.]
CH. SIMOPOULOS

500.C114/445w
[Document 21]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs (Stabler)
[WASHINGTON,] August 4, 1926.
The Uruguayan Chargé called today and said that he desired to see
Secretary Kellogg on Diplomatic Day and that he wished Mr. Stabler to be
present as he wished to tell him that his Government desired him to advise
the Secretary that it accepts in principle the suggestion which had been
made by the United States in regard to the Permanent Court of Justice; that
this was an informal statement inasmuch as according to the Uruguayan
Constitution formal acceptance of the invitation to take part in the Court
had to wait action of the Uruguayan Congress.25
JORDAN HERBERT STABLER
25 No further communication appears to have been received from the
Uruguayan Government.

500.C114/445b
[Document 22]
The Albanian Minister (Konitza) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, August 20, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to confirm that my Government has approved the
United States reservations for adherence to the Permanent Court of
International Justice. The Albanian delegate to the League of Nations has
received instructions in accordance with this decision.
I beg [etc.]
FAIK KONITZA

500.C114/445d: Telegram
[Document 23]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
BRUSSELS, August 23, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received August 23—1:45 p.m.]
60. Department’s instruction 226, February 12. In a note dated August 21st
the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg accepts conditions and reserves contained
in Senate resolution for the adherence of the United States to the Permanent
Court of International Justice.
PHILLIPS

500.C114/445j
[Document 24]
The Dominican Chargé (Vasquez) to the Secretary of State
[Translation26 ]
WASHINGTON, August 30, 1926.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: In reply to your note of February 12, last, I have the honor
to inform Your Excellency that by a telegram received on this date I am
instructed to advise your Department that the Dominican Government will
vote for the adhesion of the United States to the Protocol of Signature and
Bylaws of the Court of International Justice, with the five reservations
adopted in the Senate resolution, and that instructions to that effect have
been sent to the Dominican delegate in the Assembly of the League of
Nations.
I avail myself [etc.]
M. L. VASQUEZ
26 File translation revised.

500.C114/565
[Document 25]
The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, September 14, 1926.
[Received September 28.]
No. 269 Political
SIR: I have the honor to report as follows: The Conference of States
signatories to the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice
held its first session on September 1, 1926, at the International Labor
Office, and adjourned indefinitely until later in the month, after having held
six meetings, the last of which occurred on the afternoon of September 3,
1926.
It will be remembered that the Conference had been convened by the
Council, acting in accordance with its resolution of March 18, 1926,
subsequent to a communication from the Secretary of State of the United
States concerning the adhesion of the United States to the Statute of the
Permanent Court, subject to certain reservations.
The Conference elected as its President Professor Van Eysinga
(Netherlands) and as Vice Presidents Mr. Zumeta (Venezuela) and Sir
Francis Bell (New Zealand). 39 of the 48 signatories to the Statute of the
Court were represented. The large majority of these representatives were
also delegates to the Seventh Assembly of the League of Nations.
In connections with the debates occurring in the six meetings of the
Conference, I would respectfully refer the Department to the following
telegrams from this office:27
September 1, 1926, 4 p.m.
September 3, 1926, 7 p.m.

September 4, 1926, 11 a.m.
September 6, 1926, 3 p.m.
September 11, 1926, 3 p.m.
In his opening speech, the President recalled the events which had preceded
and made necessary the convocation of the Conference, and reminded his
colleagues that it was exclusively a Conference of the representatives of the
signatories of the Court Statute and that it did not sit in any other capacity.
He underlined the importance which the adhesion of the United States to
the Court Statute would have for the subsequent development of this
institution and was of the opinion that its task should consist, above all, in
satisfying the desires of the Government of the United States. The
Conference should, he believed, take care that this adhesion should take
place in conformity with the constitution of the League of Nations. He then
proposed that the discussion should bear in the first place on the substance
of the question and secondly on the form. The Conference then proceeded
to a first reading of the reservations formulated by the United States Senate
with regard to its adhesion to the Court, As reported in the first of my
telegrams above mentioned, the Conference was unanimously of the
opinion that there was no substantial objection to the first, second and third
reservations.
With regard to the fourth reservation, Sir John Foster (Canada) stated that
he believed that the second part of this reservation (requiring American
consent for amending the Statute of the Court) seemed to contain an
inhibition against future amendments which might be judged essential to
the well working of the Court by a majority. He believed, in view of these
possibilities, that it was necessary to know what was intended by this
American reservation. He stated further that as the reservation now stands,
if it ever became patent to the 55 members of the League that changes were
necessary, they might be prohibited from bringing about such changes
through the lack of consent of the United States.
The Serbian representative expressed the opinion that if the United States
was asking the right to take part in deliberations, her demand was very
justifiable, but if she were asking power of veto, it was an altogether

different matter. This point was responsible for a discussion on the manner
in which non-League Court members should take part in the changes of the
Court Statute.
The Uruguayan representative believed that the situation was badly in need
of clarifying, and was not certain whether one member alone could veto or
whether the modification required a simple majority. He believed that if
League members can veto, there will be no question as to the right of the
United States to do the same. In this opinion the Venezuelan representative
concurred.
Mr. Dinichert (Switzerland) expressed the opinion that the Protocol had the
value of a treaty and cannot be modified without the consent of all
signatories.
In support of the Canadian thesis, Sir Cecil Hurst (Great Britain)
endeavored to create the impression that the entire discussion would appear
to center about the United States’ right of veto in the event she should leave
the Court. He declared that in such a case, no country could undertake to
have the slightest influence in decisions of Court members.
Mr. Rollin (Belgium) who, incidentally, played one of the most important
parts in the discussions and who was undoubtedly one of the most
intelligent and indefatigable collaborators in the Conference, stated, with
regard to the first part of the fourth amendment, that he understood that the
United States was asking equal treatment. As regards the possibility of the
United States leaving the Court when it wished, that unquestionably gave
her favored treatment since States members of the League could not do the
same thing; for, as League members, they continue to pay a share of the
Court expenses, to elect judges, and on occasion to ask the Court for
opinions. He believed, however, that the Conference of the Court
signatories had everything to gain in giving the United States favorable
treatment and nothing to lose.
The representative of Uruguay believed that the Conference should consider
the position of League members in procedure involved in amending the
Protocol of the Court. He asked whether, in the opinion of the Conference,

unanimity was required or not. Personally, he believed that the votes of all
members were required.
The Serbian representative pointed out that all decisions in the League were
taken by unanimity, but that questions of procedure were settled by majority
vote. He did not believe that the Conference was competent to settle the
question, and thought that it should refer it to the Assembly and Council.
The President brought the first meeting to a close with the suggestion that
the discussions should be resumed on the following morning with regard to
the fifth reservation. He considered the first part of this reservation already
met by Court rules. The second part contained a point which touched most
closely on the constitutional law of the League of Nations. The reservation
he believed was undoubtedly inspired by the desire to place the United
States on an equal footing with other nations. He deplored the absence of an
American representative who might clarify the situation.
The four remaining meetings of the Conference were devoted entirely to a
discussion of the second part of the fifth reservation. Its general discussion
evoked a prolonged analysis.
The Swedish representative went so far as to suggest that the American
reservations should be met by counter-reservation on the part of the Court
signatories. The delegates of Great Britain, France, Italy, Belgium,
Czechoslovakia, Uruguay and Poland showed a most conciliatory spirit and
favored the granting of every possible concession to meet America’s views.
 
The importance of Sweden’s attitude must not be under-estimated,
especially in view of the character of the man who represented her at the
Conference. Unden’s28 uncompromising attitude, both in the Mosul affair,29
and in the blocking of Spain and Brazil’s claims for permanent seats on the
Council, are only too well known to the League. …
Sir John Foster (Canada) was of the opinion that while America demanded
something, it was not as much as had been expected. He believed, however,
that great attention should be given when a country outside of the League

passes a mandatory statute directed against a court of law. The Council and
the Assembly were free to make any request to the Court they pleased. He
considered it the duty of the Court to seek information, and it was not for
the Council and the Assembly of the League to tell the Court if the United
States had an interest in the case. This the Court could do itself. In short, he
opposed the reservation as a direction by the United States to the Court, and
emphasized the necessity for Senate action if the United States gave consent
and the subsequent delay attendant thereto. He believed that the
reservations were prepared on the principle of equality of treatment which
was stressed by Senator Walsh in Senate debates. The United States should
be put on the same plane, as regards obligations and privileges, as other
members.
Sir Francis Bell (New Zealand) devoted a long speech to prove that the
United States was asking preferential treatment and that the power of veto
should not exist. In his opinion, League Council members were not at
Geneva entirely as representatives of governments to protect their own
countries, but were also there to protect the world and all countries. No
member who exercized the right of veto to protect his own country could
retain a seat on the Council and therefore a nation, not on the Council,
should not enjoy such a right.
It became evident during the last three meetings of the Conference that two
very definite points of view had developed. The first, headed by Great
Britain, France and Italy, wished to have the Council propose to the United
States adhesion to the Court on exactly the same footing as Council
members. The second, headed by Belgium, wished to ask the Permanent
Court for a ruling as to Council procedure in asking an advisory opinion. If
it were then found that the American reservations demanded preferential
treatment for the United States, it was hoped that the Senate would be
willing to remodel the reservations. The first school, on the other hand,
believed that a Court ruling has but little value, as there still exists the
obstacle created by the right of abstention from voting of parties directly
interested in the question, and the right of veto in questions in which the
United States is interested is claimed in the reservation.

Sir Cecil Hurst (Great Britain) analysed the equality basis, contending that
the United States sought a privileged position in not being represented on
the Council and not sharing its responsibility. He opposed the Belgian
proposal on the ground that the Court and the League were too young to
have a jurisprudence definitely established at this stage. (It was pointed out
at the time that this opinion is very much in keeping with British tradition
on common law.) He considered that the right of veto in matters requiring
unanimous decision must be based on participation in Council meetings and
the exercize of the right of vote in that meeting only after all the difficulties
of the situation had been explained.
At this juncture, Mr. Pilotti (Italy) made a proposal suggesting that the
United States be asked to come in to the Court on a footing of equality. If
this proposition satisfied the United States, everything would be in order. If,
on the other hand, it did not, the Conference would have to apply to the
Court as to whether a decision of the Council to apply for an advisory
opinion required unanimity or merely a majority vote. This suggestion
received the strong backing of France.
On the last day on which the Conference met, much attention was devoted
to the proposal, made by the Polish representative, as a solution of the
problem. It was to the effect that the American Senate’s reservations should
first be accepted and then a special Conference should be called to extend
the Statutes of the Permanent Court to meet the situation created by the
American demands. At such a special conference, the United States should
be represented. He believed that the work of meeting the American
demands was divided into two stages. The first was the acceptance of the
reservations and the second their codification, that is the drawing up of
legal formulae required to meet the reservations. Therefore, it was most
necessary to meet the second stage with a special conference to which the
United States should be invited.
At this point, Sir Cecil Hurst (Great Britain) intervened, stating that the
Polish proposal, in his opinion, was not complete. How could the United
States, (he asked), denounce statutes as provided in the fourth reservation,
once it had taken part in modifying them? If this happened, League

members would be left with a modified protocol, in the event of America’s
withdrawal.
 
The Polish representative replied that the Conference ought not to discuss
the United States’ leaving the Court before it had entered it. He added that
Secretary Kellogg’s letter to the League stated that if any machinery was
necessary to give the United States the right to participate in the election of
the Court judges, it should be established after the reservations were
accepted and the United States was a member. This same procedure could
be followed to meet other American demands. He believed that the way was
paved for the Belgian proposal, which had been heard earlier in the session,
and which had brought up the question of the form of the procedure which
might be followed to meet the reservations. He stated, with regard to
reservation 2, concerning the election of judges, that although the Covenant
did not refer to the assistance of non members of the League at the Council
or Assembly, it did not forbid it, and cited instances in which non member
States had assisted.
Mr. Dinichert (Switzerland), referring to the Belgian proposal, believed that
the question of form was more difficult than that of substance, but that the
Conference should not consider the United States as a member of the
League, but as a State participating in the work of the Court. In his opinion,
there were three possible methods of procedure. The first was for the
Conference to ask an interpretative resolution from the Assembly as to
whether it was necessary to interpret the Covenant. The second, if the
United States was not satisfied with the present position, the signatories of
the Court might ask it to modify its statutes. Thirdly, as suggested by the
Polish representative, a Conference might be called to complete or modify
the Statutes.
The favorable consideration granted to the Polish proposal was undoubtedly
due to the realizing of the delegates to the Conference that there exists a
growing opposition, in the American Congress, against the United States’
participation in the Court and that there exists a strong possibility that
adhesion might be defeated if the question were returned to the Senate.
While the Conference actually adjourned on the grounds that the members

present were delegates to the Assembly, there is reason to believe that they
were glad of an opportunity to postpone further immediate action and
observe the reaction in the American press to the questions so far under
discussion.
The Belgian representative, in discussing the problems raised by the fifth
reservation, said that if the United States had a real interest in any question,
it is an indisputable fact that the Court could only give an advisory opinion
with the consent of the United States. It was only right that if America did
not take part in the discussion, it could not be bound by an opinion. Also, its
intervention might force the Court to declare incompetence. He cited as a
precedent the case of Eastern Carelia when, owing to a protest by the Soviet
authorities, the Court refused to take jurisdiction.30 He argued that the
United States would possess the same right of protest. He believed that in
this reservation, the United States did not ask any new privilege, but only
preserved a privilege which it already possessed. The difficulty lay in the
word “claims”. The United States appeared not only to be asking the right
to intervention when a question concerned her, but was also asking that the
fact of an intervention, without any proof of actual interest, should in itself
be regarded as preventing the Court from giving an advisory opinion. It was
a question if the Conference could go that far. The reservation was
addressed not only to the Council and to the Assembly, but to the Court. It
was impossible to declare the Court incompetent; neither a single member,
nor all of them, could do this. A country could appear before the Court and
give its views, but could not declare the Court incompetent. With regard to
the right of veto, he stated that the comparison is not between the rights that
the United States now desires and the rights already possessed by Council
members, but that the comparison lies between the rights which the United
States was claiming by reservation and the power which members of the
Council might exercize improperly and unfairly. If a Council member were
interested, it could not vote; but by declaring an interest in the case, it could
vote and block a decision. If the American reservation said “claims and has
interest”, there will be no difficulty; presuming the Court agreed that the
United States had an interest.
In conclusion, he asked if it could not justly be said to the United States “If
you claim this right which you say Council members possess, as there is

doubt as to the actual rights possessed by Council members under their
procedure, and as there is doubt as to whether the unanimity vote does exist
in this particular case; we are prepared to ask the Court for an opinion on
this point so that they can tell us what the position really is”.
The Venezuelan representative said that his government would omit no
endeavor to secure the adherence of the United States to the Court. While
the United States might find itself in a privileged position, he asked whether
such a privilege did not derive from a high significance which should be
attached to the adhesion to the Court Statutes of the most powerful
democracy in the world. He believed that the fifth reservation could only be
considered in connection with everything implied by the first reservation.
The obligations and rights established by the Versailles treaty could not be
modified according to the first reservation. The relations of the League and
the Court could not be changed by an adhesion expressly given outside the
constitutional charter of the League.
The Norwegian representative believed that the United States reservation
was acceptable when the United States was party to a dispute. It became
more difficult to admit the power of veto when it was not a party, especially
when the Council might ask an advisory opinion by a majority vote. He did
not believe that the Swedish proposal for counter-reservations to the
American reservations was necessary, because a League member was
protected by actual law. The United States, through reservation 4, reserved
itself the right to withdraw from an arrangement. It followed that Court
signatories, on their side, could withdraw also. Consequently, the “juridical
consequence” of the fourth reservation might be drawn and accepted
without it being necessary to formulate reservations opposing the American
conditions.
The Rumanian delegate said that his country was quite ready to accept the
reservation if it read in the sense that the United States simply desired to
retain and exercize the same rights as other non member States on a footing
of equality. He then made the important suggestion that a sub-committee be
drawn up to define the exact meaning of the second part of the fifth
reservation. The sub-committee of 14 members was then appointed,
composed of the representatives of the following countries:

Belgium.
Canada.
Italy.
Poland.
Uruguay.
Sweden.
Holland.
Great Britain.
France.
Japan.
Czechoslovakia.
Switzerland.
Rumania.
Venezuela.
With the exception of the representatives of Sweden and Canada, who
condemned the American Senate reservations as efforts to secure for the
United States a privileged position unenjoyed by any member of the League
of Nations, it may be said, en resumé, that the Conference of Signatories of
the Statute of the Permanent Court gave the most sincere evidence of their
desire to meet the American demands and to assure the entrance of the
United States into the Permanent Court. The Swedish and Canadian
attitude, although outbalanced by the conciliatory spirit displayed by such
countries as Great Britain, France, Italy, Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Uruguay
and Poland, who favored the utmost concessions to meet the American
demands; must not be overlooked.

As reported in my telegram of September 11, 1926,31 it is most difficult to
obtain any accurate reports with regard to the work of the sub-committee
appointed by the Conference. This body was sworn to secrecy by its
President. I learn, however, from a reliable source, that the sub-committee
has appointed a drafting committee which at present is working on the
outstanding difficulty of the fifth reservation. This difficulty lies in the
words “has or claims” which, it is contended by the majority of the
delegates to the Conference, would impair the sovereignty of the Court,
since it is considered that the Court alone is competent to settle on claims of
interest.
The statement appearing in the press recently, attributed to the President of
the United States, wherein he stated that the fifth reservation was framed
with the sole purpose of giving the United States an equality with Council
member States, has aroused a great deal of interest among the delegates to
the Conference. It has been suggested by some of these representatives that
if the American President would make this statement officially, a great
obstruction to the acceptance of this reservation would be removed. I also
learn that a number of delegates favor a moderate delay in the work of the
sub-committee in the hope that such an official declaration will be
forthcoming.
An endeavor will be made to keep the Department informed of the activities
of the Sub-Committee, but in view of the strictly private nature of its
sessions, it may be difficult to obtain much accurate information.
I have [etc.]
S. PINKNEY TUCK
27 None printed.
28 Professor O. Undén.
29 The controversy between Great Britain and Turkey over the former
Ottoman vilayet of Mosul; see League of Nations, Question of the Frontier
Between Turkey and Iraq: Report submitted to the Council by the
Commission instituted by the Council Resolution of September 30th, 1924
(C.400.M.147.1925.VII.).

30 See Publications of the Permanent Court of International Justice,
Collection of Advisory Opinions, Series B, No. 5, and Acts and Documents
relating to Judgments and Advisory Opinions Given by the Court, Series C,
No. 3 vols. I and II (Leyden, A. W. Sijthoff’s Publishing Co., 1922).
31 Not printed.

500.C114/558: Telegram
[Document 26]
The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, September 20, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received September 20—1:50 p.m.]
I learn on good authority that a formula accepting Senate reservations on
which drafting committee appointed by subcommittee conference
signatories Statute Permanent Court has been working past week has been
practically completed. This formula, it is understood, provides welcoming
United States into Court with explanation rather than interpretation of fifth
reservation and will state in substance that, as provided for in reservation,
United States will enjoy same rights as most-favored members of League
and, as nonmember of League, will keep the right of a nonmember nation
not to appear (right such as Russia exercised dealing Eastern Carelian case).
It is reported that every possible concession is being made to frame reply
which will satisfy United States demands and at same time safeguard
interest of Court signatories. Formula now in hands of subcommittee of 14
which will report it this week for final approval to conference.32
TUCK
32 See League of Nations, Minutes of the Conference of States Signatories
of the Protocol of Signature of the Statute of the Permanent Court of
International Justice, Held at Geneva from September 1st to 23rd, 1926
(v.Legal.1926.v.26).

500.C114/445h
[Document 27]
Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Grew)
[WASHINGTON,] November 4, 1926.
The Colombian Minister called and said that he wished to advise me
informally that the American note regarding the adherence on the part of the
United States to the Protocol of Signature of the Statute for the Permanent
Court of International Justice has been submitted by the Colombian
Government to the Colombian Congress which has not yet acted upon it.
The Minister said that this fact would shortly be communicated to us in a
formal note.33
J[OSEPH] C. G[REW]
33 No further communication appears to have been received from the
Colombian Government.

500.C114/584
[Document 28]
The Assistant Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs
(Richardson) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Harrison)
[WASHINGTON,] November 5, 1926.
MR. HARRISON: The following comments may be of interest to you and the
Secretary in regard to the recent Conference of States Signatories of the
Protocol of Signature of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International
Justice.
The following states attended the Conference and signed the Draft Protocol
of Execution,33a although they had previously accepted the Senate
reservations in direct communication addressed to this Government:
Albania
Luxemburg
Greece.
The Greek Government accepted the reservations by a note dated April 8
[9], but subsequently by a note dated June 28, advised this Government that
it would attend the Geneva Conference.
The Dominican Government in a note dated August 30 appears to have
attempted to accept the Senate reservations. It attended the Conference at
Geneva and signed the Draft Protocol of Execution with the reservation
noted in your Memorandum.34
Liberia accepted the Senate reservations in a note dated May 11.
Presumably this explains the failure of its delegate to sign the Protocol of
Execution at Geneva.

Uruguay indicated through a statement made by the Uruguayan Chargé
d’Affaires on August 5 [4?] to the Secretary that its government accepted
the Senate reservations in principle but that formal acceptance could not be
given pending ratification by the Uruguayan legislature. This perhaps
explains Uruguay’s abstention from sign ing the Protocol of Execution.
The following states which are signatories of the Protocol of Signature of
the Statute of the Permanent Court did not attend the Geneva Conference:
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Haiti
Paraguay
Salvador.
Of the above states, Cuba alone has accepted the Senate reservations.
Since the passage of the Senate resolution Abyssinia and the Irish Free State
have ratified the Protocol of Signature of the Statute of the Permanent
Court.
The Abyssinian ratification was deposited July 16.
Notification was given of the Irish Free State ratification August 21, 1926.
It is curious to note that a representative of the Irish Free State attended the
Geneva Conference and signed the Draft Protocol of Execution, although

no note has been addressed by this Government to the British Government
on behalf of the Irish Free State or to the Legation of the Irish Free State in
Washington.
Abyssinia did not attend the Geneva Conference. We have addressed no
note to Abyssinia.
It would seem that, in order to carry out the terms of the Senate resolution
of January 27, 1926, an exchange of notes should be attempted with both
the Irish Free State and Abyssinia. The phraseology of the resolution is
“The signature of the United States to the said Protocol shall not be affixed
until the powers signatory to such Protocol shall have indicated through an
exchange of notes their acceptance of the foregoing reservations, etc.”
As the signature of the United States will take place some time in the future,
if ever, it seems to me that “the powers signatory” would be those powers
which are signatories at the time of signature or adherence by the United
States.
An interesting consideration is that Chile apparently has never ratified the
signature of its government to the Protocol of Signature of the Statute of the
Permanent Court. The Senate resolution contemplates acceptance of the
senate reservations by “signatories”. The position may well be taken by
Chile that, not actually being a party to the Permanent Court Protocol, it
cannot properly accept or decline to accept our reservations.
While some of the above considerations are academic, the situation which
they outline appears to me to be somewhat hopeless quite aside from the
replies which will presumably be given by the powers that recently
conferred at Geneva. I should be glad to have an opportunity to talk this
matter over with you shortly and especially to ascertain your views as to
whether we should not, for the sake of making the record complete, address
notes to the governments of Abyssinia and the Irish Free State.
A despatch from Tuck35 states that:
1) The South African delegate had to leave Geneva before he
could sign the draft Protocol of Execution.

2) The Chinese delegate had no authority from his government to
sign.
D[ORSET] R[ICHARDSON]
33a Op. cit., p. 81.
34 Not printed.
35 Not printed.

500.C114/584
[Document 29]
The Secretary of State to the Assistant Chief of the Division of
Western European Affairs (Richardson)
[WASHINGTON,] November 8, 1926.
DEAR MR. RICHARDSON: I have read the attached memorandum on the World
Court.36 As I remember, I looked it up last year with Senator Pepper, Mr.
Lenroot and others and, under the Resolution of the Senate, we cannot sign
the Protocol until every nation signatory to the original Statute of the World
Court has accepted the reservations. It does not make any difference
whether they ratified it by their Congress, Senate or other body. There is no
use of communicating with the governments that have accepted. Every one
of them must accept or we cannot join and the President will in no way
recommend any change in the situation.
F[RANK] B. K[ELLOGG]
36 Supra.

500.C114/445cc
[Document 30]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
WASHINGTON, November 12, 1926.
No. 742
SIR: Abyssinia having recently adhered to the Protocol of Signature of the
Statute for the Permanent Court of International Justice, it appears to be
necessary for this Government, in compliance with the Senate Resolution of
January 27, 1926, to ascertain whether the Abyssinian Government will
accept the conditions, reservations and understandings set forth in the
above-mentioned Senate Resolution in regard to the adherence of the
United States to the said Protocol of Signature.
There is accordingly transmitted herewith a Memorandum, with its
enclosure, in this connection, which you are requested to ask the British
Foreign Office to cause the British Diplomatic Representative in Abyssinia
to present to the Abyssinian Government, on behalf of the United States.
The British Diplomatic Representative in Abyssinia should request that the
reply of the Abyssinian Government in this matter be in writing.
I am [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
[Enclosure—Memorandum]
The Government of the United States of America has noted that on July 12,
1926, 
His 
Excellency 
the 
Minister 
Plenipotentiary, 
Diplomatic
Representative of the Ethiopian Empire to the League of Nations, signed
the Protocol of Signature of the Statute for the Permanent Court of
International Justice. The Senate of the United States of America, on

January 27, 1926, gave its advice and consent to the adherence on the part
of the United States to the said Protocol of Signature of the Statute for the
Permanent Court of International Justice, dated December 16, 1920, and the
adjoined Statute for the Permanent Court of International Justice, without
accepting or agreeing to the Optional Clause for Compulsory Jurisdiction,
contained in the said Statute, on the condition of the acceptance by the
Powers signatory to the Protocol of the conditions, reservations and
understandings contained in the Senate Resolution, a certified true copy of
which is attached.
The Government of the United States of America therefore desires to
ascertain whether the Imperial Ethiopian Government will accept the
conditions, reservations and understandings contained in the Resolution as a
part and a condition of the adherence of the United States to the said
Protocol and Statute.
WASHINGTON, November 12, 1926.

500.C114/445bb
[Document 31]
The Secretary of State to the Minister of the Irish Free State
(Smiddy)
WASHINGTON, November 12, 1926.
SIR: Having noted that the Minister for External Affairs of the Irish Free
State, by a letter dated August 21, 1926, notified the Secretary General of
the League of Nations that the Irish Free State is to be included among
those Members of the League of Nations which have ratified the Protocol of
Signature of the Statute for the Permanent Court of International Justice,
done at Geneva, December 16, 1920, I have the honor to inform you that
the Senate of the United States of America, on January 27, 1926, gave its
advice and consent to the adherence on the part of the United States to the
said Protocol of Signature, and the adjoined Statute for the Permanent Court
of International Justice, without accepting or agreeing to the Optional
Clause for Compulsory Jurisdiction, contained in the said Statute, on the
condition of the acceptance by the Powers signatory to the Protocol of the
conditions, reservations and understandings contained in the Senate
Resolution, a certified true copy of which is enclosed.
I have the honor, therefore, to request you to be good enough to ascertain
whether the Irish Free State will accept the conditions, reservations and
understandings contained in the Resolution as a part and a condition of the
adherence of the United States to the said Protocol and Statute, and to
inform me in writing of such acceptance.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

500.C114/4451
[Document 32]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State37
WASHINGTON, December 23, 1926.
No. 817
SIR: I have the honour, on instructions from His Majesty’s Government, to
communicate herewith a note on the subject of the proposal which the
United States Government have made with regard to the accession of the
United States to the protocol of Signature of the Statute of the Permanent
Court of International Justice.
This note embodies the decisions arrived at by the League Conference
which was held at Geneva in September last to consider the United States
reservations to the Protocol of the Statute of the Permanent Court of
International Justice and is in the form recommended by its president.
I have [etc.]
ESME HOWARD
[Enclosure]
British Note Replying to the American Note of February 12, 1926, Regarding the Accession of the
United States to the Protocol of Signature of the Permanent Court of International Justice
With reference to the note from the United States Government of February
12th, 1926, His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain have the honour to
state that they have learned with the deepest interest of the proposal which
the United States have made with regard to their accession to the Protocol
of Signature of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice,
and they have examined the matter at a conference of Governments of
States signatories of the Protocol.

His Majesty’s Government are happy to be able to say that consideration of
the five reservations subject to which the signature of the United States
would be affixed to the Protocol, and of the method of satisfying these
reservations, has resulted in the following conclusions: RESERVATION I
His Majesty’s Government agree that the accession of the United States to
the Protocol of December 16th, 1920, and the Statute of the Permanent
Court of International Justice annexed thereto shall not be taken to involve
any legal relation on the part of the United States to the League of Nations
or the assumption of any obligations by the United States under the Treaty
of Peace of Versailles of June 28th, 1919.
RESERVATION II
His Majesty’s Government agree that the United States may participate,
through representatives designated for the purpose and upon an equality
with the other States Members of the League of Nations represented in the
Council or in the Assembly, in any and all proceedings of either the Council
or the Assembly for the election of judges or deputy-judges of the
Permanent Court of International Justice or for the filling of vacancies.
 
RESERVATION III
His Majesty’s Government agree that the United States pay a fair share of
the expenses of the Court as determined and appropriated from time to time
by the Congress of the United States.
RESERVATION IV
A. His Majesty’s Government agree that the United States may at any time
withdraw its accession to the Protocol of December 16th, 1920.
In order to assure equality of treatment, it seems natural that the signatory
States, acting together and by not less than a majority of two-thirds, should
possess the corresponding right to withdraw their acceptance of the special
conditions attached by the United States to its accession to the said Protocol

in the second part of the fourth reservation and in the fifth reservation. In
this way the status quo ante could be re-established if it were found that the
arrangement agreed upon was not yielding satisfactory results.
It is to be hoped, nevertheless, that no such withdrawal will be made
without an attempt by a previous exchange of views to solve any difficulties
which may arise.
B. His Majesty’s Government agree that the Statute of the Permanent Court
of International Justice annexed to the Protocol of December 16th, 1920,
shall not be amended without the consent of the United States.
RESERVATION V
A. In the matter of advisory opinions, and in the first place as regards the
first part of the fifth reservation, the Government of the United States will,
no doubt, have become aware, since the despatch of their note of February
12th, 1926, of the provisions of articles 73 and 74 of the Rules of Court as
amended by the Court on July 31st, 1926 (Annex A). His Majesty’s
Government believe that these provisions are such as to give satisfaction to
the United States, having been made by the Court in exercise of its powers
under article 30 of its Statute. Moreover, they will be disposed to study with
the United States the possible incorporation of certain stipulations of
principle on this subject in a protocol of execution such as is set forth
hereafter (Annex B), notably as regards the rendering of advisory opinions
in public.
B. The second part of the fifth reservation suggests to His Majesty’s
Government that a distinction should be drawn between advisory opinions
asked for in the case of a dispute to which the United States are a party and
that of advisory opinions asked for in the case of a dispute to which the
United States are not a party but in which it claims an interest, or in the case
of a question other than a dispute in which the United States claim an
interest.
As regards disputes to which the United States are a party, His Majesty’s
Government may perhaps confine themselves to a reference to the
jurisprudence of the Court, which has already had occasion to pronounce

upon the matter of disputes between a Member of the League of Nations
and State not belonging to the League. His Majesty’s Government hope that
they may consider that this jurisprudence, as formulated in Advisory
Opinion No. 5 (Eastern Carelia), given on July 23rd, 1923, meets the desire
of the United States.
As regards disputes to which the United States are not a party but in which
they claim an interest, and as regards questions other than disputes in which
the United States claim an interest, His Majesty’s Government, in
agreement with the Governments of the other signatory States, understand
the object of the United States to be to assure to themselves a position of
equality with States represented either on the Council or in the Assembly of
the League of Nations. With this principle His Majesty’s Government are
quite prepared to agree. But the fifth reservation appears to rest upon the
presumption that the adoption of a request for an advisory opinion by the
Council or Assembly requires a unanimous vote. No such presumption,
however, has so far been established. It is therefore impossible to say with
certainty whether in some cases, or possibly in all cases, a decision by a
majority is not sufficient. In any event, His Majesty’s Government are
disposed to guarantee to the United States a position of equality in this
respect—that is to say, in any case where a State represented on the Council
or in the Assembly would possess the right of preventing by opposition, in
either of these bodies, the adoption of a proposal to request an advisory
opinion from the Court, the United States shall enjoy an equivalent right.
His Majesty’s Government attach great importance to the value of the
advisory opinions which the Court may give as provided for in the
Covenant. They are confident that the Government of the United States
entertain no desire to diminish the value of such opinions in connection
with the functioning of the League of Nations. Yet the terms employed in
the fifth reservation are of such a nature as to lend themselves to a possible
interpretation which might have that effect. The Members of the League of
Nations would exercise their rights in the Council and in the Assembly with
full knowledge of the details of the situation which has necessitated a
request for an advisory opinion, as well as with full appreciation of the
responsibilities which a failure to reach a solution would involve for them
under the Covenant of the League of Nations. A State which is exempt from

the obligations and responsibilities of the Covenant would occupy a
different position. It is for this reason that the procedure to be followed by a
non-member State, in connection with requests for advisory opinions is a
matter of importance, and, in consequence, His Majesty’s Government
would desire that the manner in which the consent provided for in the
second part of the fifth reservation will be, given should form the object of
a supplementary agreement which would ensure that the peaceful settlement
of future differences between Members of the League of Nations would not
be made more difficult.
His Majesty’s Government venture to anticipate that the above conclusions
will meet with acceptance by the United States. They observe that the
application of some of the reservations of the United States would involve
the conclusion of an appropriate agreement between the United States and
the other States signatories of the Protocol of December 16th, 1920, as was
indeed envisaged by the Secretary of State of the United States in his reply
to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations dated April 17th, 1926.
To this end, His Majesty’s Government will be prepared to conclude with
the other States signatories of the Protocol of December 16th, 1920, and the
United States, a protocol of execution which, subject to such further
exchange of views as the Government of the United States may think
useful, might be in the form set out below (Annex B).
ANNEX A
Extract From the Revised Rules of Court of the Permanent Court of
International Justice (Articles 71, 73 and 74, as printed herewith, were
amended on July 31st, 1926).
ARTICLE 71
Advisory opinions shall be given after deliberation by the full Court. They
shall mention the number of the judges constituting the majority.
Dissenting judges may, if they so desire, attach to the opinion of the Court
either an exposition of their individual opinion or the statement of their
dissent.

ARTICLE 72
Questions upon which the advisory opinion of the Court is asked shall be
laid before the Court by means of a written request, signed either by the
President of the Assembly or the President of the Council of the League of
Nations, or by the Secretary-General of the League under instructions from,
the Assembly or the Council.
 
The request shall contain an exact statement of the question upon which an
opinion is required, and shall be accompanied by all documents likely to
throw light upon the question.
ARTICLE 73
1. The Registrar shall forthwith give notice of the request for an advisory
opinion to the members of the Court, to the Members of the League of
Nations, through the Secretary-General of the League, and to any States
entitled to appear before the Court.
The Registrar shall also, by means of a special and direct communication,
notify any Member of the League or States admitted to appear before the
Court or international organisations considered by the Court (or, should it
not be sitting, by the President) as likely to be able to furnish information
on the question, that the Court will be prepared to receive, within a time
limit to be fixed by the President, written statements, or to hear, at a public
sitting to be held for the purpose, oral statements relating to the question.
Should any State or Member referred to in the first paragraph have failed to
receive the communication specified above, such State or Member may
express a desire to submit a written statement or to be heard; and the Court
will decide.
2. States, Members and organisations having presented written or oral
statements or both shall be admitted to comment on the statements made by
other States, Members or organisations, in the form, to the extent and within
the time limits which the Court or, should it not be sitting, the President

shall decide in each particular case. Accordingly, the Registrar shall in due
time communicate any such written statements to States, Members and
organisations having submitted similar statements.
ARTICLE 74
Advisory opinions shall be read in open court, notice having been given to
the Secretary-General of the League of Nations and to the representatives of
States, of Members of the League and of international organisations
immediately concerned. The Registrar shall take the necessary steps in
order to ensure that the text of the advisory opinion is in the hands of the
Secretary-General at the seat of the League at the date and hour fixed for
the meeting held for the reading of the opinion.
Signed and sealed original copies of advisory opinions shall be placed in
the archives of the Court and of the Secretariat of the League. Certified
copies thereof shall be transmitted by the Registrar to States, to Members of
the League, and to international organisations immediately concerned.
 
Any advisory opinion which may be given by the Court, and the request in
response to which it is given, shall be printed and published in a special
collection for which the Registrar shall be responsible.
ANNEX B

Preliminary Draft of a Protocol
The States signatories of the Protocol of Signature of the Permanent Court
of International Justice dated December 16th, 1920, and the United States
of America, through the undersigned duly authorised representatives, have
agreed upon the following provisions regarding the adherence by the United
States of America to the said protocol, subject to the five reservations
formulated by the United States.
ARTICLE 1
The United States shall be admitted to participate, through representatives
designated for the purpose and upon an equality with the signatory States
Members of the League of Nations, represented in the Council or in the
Assembly, in any and all proceedings of either the Council or the Assembly
for the election of judges or deputy judges of the Permanent Court of
International Justice, provided for in the Statute of the Court. The vote of
the United States shall be counted in determining the absolute majority of
votes required by the Statute.
ARTICLE 2
No amendment of the Statute annexed to the Protocol of December 16th,
1920, may be made without the consent of all the Contracting States.
ARTICLE 3
The Court shall render advisory opinions in public session.
ARTICLE 4
The manner in which the consent provided for in the second part of the fifth
reservation is to be given will be the subject of an understanding to be
reached by the Government of the United States with the Council of the
League of Nations.
The States signatories of the Protocol of December 16th, 1920, will be
informed as soon as the understanding contemplated by the preceding

paragraph has been reached.
Should the United States offer objection to an advisory opinion being given
by the Court, at the request of the Council or the Assembly, concerning a
dispute to which the United States is not a party or concerning a question
other than a dispute between States, the Court will attribute to such
objection the same force and effect as attaches to a vote against asking for
the opinion given by a Member of the League of Nations either in the
Assembly or in the Council.
ARTICLE 5
Subject to the provisions of article 7 below, the provisions of the present
protocol shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of the Statute
annexed to the Protocol of December 16th, 1920.
ARTICLE 6
The present protocol shall be ratified. Each State shall forward the
instrument of ratification to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations,
who shall inform all the other signatory States. The instruments of
ratification shall be deposited in the archives of the Secretariat of the
League of Nations.
The present protocol shall come into force as soon as all the States which
have ratified the Protocol of December 16th, 1920, including the United
States, have deposited their ratifications.
ARTICLE 7
The United States may at any time notify the Secretary-General of the
League of Nations that it withdraws its adherence to the Protocol of
December 
16th, 
1920. 
The 
Secretary-General 
shall 
immediately
communicate this notification to all the other States signatories of the
protocol.
In such case the present protocol shall cease to be in force as from the
receipt by the Secretary-General of the notification by the United States.

On their part, each of the Contracting States may at any time notify the
Secretary-General of the League of Nations that it desires to withdraw its
acceptance of the special conditions attached by the United States to its
adherence to the Protocol of December 16th, 1920, in the second part of its
fourth reservation and in its fifth reservation. The Secretary-General shall
immediately give communication of this notification to each of the States
signatories of the present protocol. The present protocol shall be considered
as ceasing to be in force if and when, within one year from the receipt of the
said notification, not less than two-thirds of the Contracting States other
than the United States shall have notified the Secretary-General of the
League of Nations that they desire to withdraw the above-mentioned
acceptance.
 
ARTICLE 8
The present protocol shall remain open for signature by any State which
may in the future sign the Protocol of Signature of December 16th, 1920.
Done at , the day of , 19 , in a single copy, of which the French and English
texts shall be both authoritative.
37 Similar notes, mutatis mutandis, were received from the following
Governments through their representatives in Washington: Australia
(transmitted through the British Ambassador), Feb. 16, 1927; Belgium, Jan.
22, 1927; Czechoslovakia, Dec. 10, 1926; Denmark, Jan. 28, 1927; Estonia,
Feb. 8, 1927; France, Dec. 23, 1926; Hungary, Jan. 27, 1928; Irish Free
State, Mar. 12, 1927; Italy, Mar. 15, 1927; Japan, Dec. 31, 1926;
Netherlands, Jan. 15, 1927; Norway, Dec. 29, 1926; Poland, Jan. 15, 1927;
Portugal, Jan. 11, 1927; Rumania, Feb. 19, 1927; Kingdom of the Serbs,
Croats and Slovenes, Dec. 18, 1926; Siam, Feb. 15, 1927; Union of South
Africa (transmitted through the British Ambassador), Jan. 17, 1927; Spain,
May 12, 1927; Sweden, Dec. 30, 1926; Switzerland, Jan. 17, 1927.

500.C114/4451
[Document 33]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, December 31, 1926.
No. 828
SIR: With reference to my note No. 817 of December 23rd, I have the honour
to inform you, on instructions from His Britannic Majesty’s Principal
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, that the Government of India desire
to associate themselves with the views expressed by His Majesty’s
Government in Great Britain on the reservations attached to the accession
of the United States to the protocol of the statute of the Permanent Court of
International Justice.38
I have [etc.]
ESME HOWARD
38 On Apr. 4, 1927, the British Ambassador transmitted a similar note (No.
219), mutatis mutandis, on behalf of the Government of New Zealand.

500.C114/445cc
[Document 34]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
LONDON, April 25, 1927.
[Received May 5.]
No. 1811
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction No. 742 of
November 12, 1926, by which the Embassy is directed to transmit a
memorandum, with its enclosure, to the British Foreign Office with the
request that it be forwarded to the British Diplomatic Representative in
Abyssinia for presentation to the Abyssinian Government on behalf of the
United States. The memorandum and its enclosure referred to the Senate
Resolution of January 27, 1926, in connection with the adherence of the
United States to the Protocol of Signature of the Statute for the Permanent
Court of International Justice.
 
I now have the honor to inform you that the Department’s instructions were
promptly carried out. I beg to forward herewith a copy, in triplicate, of an
informal note from the Foreign Office together with its enclosure, being a
copy of a note from the Government of Abyssinia to the British Minister at
Addis Ababa.
I have [etc.]
For the Ambassador:
F. A. STERLING
Counselor of Embassy
[Enclosure]

Mr. R. L. Craigie, of the American and African Department, British Foreign Office, to the
Counselor of the American Embassy (Sterling)
FOREIGN OFFICE, S. W. 1., 22 April, 1927.
No. W3450/62/98
DEAR STERLING: With reference to my letter of the 26th November last,39 I
enclose a copy of a note addressed by the Abyssinian Government to our
Minister at Addis Ababa on the subject of the reservations attached by the
United States Government to their accession to the protocol of the
Permanent Court of International Justice.
Yours sincerely,
R. L. CRAIGIE
[Subenclosure]
The Regent of Ethiopia (Ras Taffari) to the British Minister in Ethiopia (Bentinck)
ADDIS ABABA, 21 March, 1927.
No. 147
AFTER GREETINGS: I have received your letter of February 24th 1927 regarding the
note from the United States Government on the subject of the Protocol of
Permanent Court of International Justice. As we have asked certain
questions from the Secretariat of the League of Nations and it is necessary
for us to wait for the answer, we are unable to give you the right answer to
your letter. I have therefore to inform you that it is impossible to give you a
definite reply on the subject at the present moment.40
SEAL OF RAS TAFFARI
39 Not printed.
40 No further communication was received from the Ethiopian Government.

Participation of the United States in
the 
work 
of 
the 
Preparatory
Commission for the Disarmament
Conference41
41 For proceedings of the sessions of the Preparatory Commission and
related documents, see League of Nations, Documents of the Preparatory
Commission for the Disarmament Conference entrusted with the
Preparation for the Conference for the Reduction and Limitation of
Armaments, Series I (C.9.M.5.1926.IX), Series II (C.425.M.158.1926.IX),
Series III (C.740.M.279.1926.IX).
[35] The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
Berne, December 13, 1925. [Received December 24.]
500.A15/21
[36] Message of the President of the United States to Congress, January
4, 1926
The White House, Washington , January 4, 1926.
500.A15/216
[37] The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
Tokyo, January 5, 1926. [Received February 24.]
500.A15/152

[38] The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
Berne, January 16, 1926—noon. [Received 2:40 p.m.]
500.A15/63: Telegram
[39] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
Washington, January 20, 1926—4 p.m.
500.A15/63: Telegram
[40] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
Washington, January 22, 1926—5 p.m.
500.A15/79a: Telegram
[41] The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
Geneva, January 22, 1926—7 p.m. [Received January 22—4:35 p.m.]
500.A15/76: Telegram
[42] The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
Geneva, January 23, 1926—1 a.m. [Received 8:44 a.m.]
500.A15/78: Telegram
[43] The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
Berne, January 28, 1926—noon. [Received January 23—10:52 a.m.]
500.A15/80: Telegram

[44] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
Washington, January 29, 1926—7 p.m.
500.A15/21: Telegram
[45] The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
Berne, February 1, 1926. [Received February 1—10:10 a.m.]
500.A15/98: Telegram
[46] The Secretary of State to the Minister, in Switzerland (Gibson)
Washington, February 6, 1926—6 p.m.
500.A15/128a: Telegram
[47] The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
Berne, February 9, 1926—5 p.m. [Received 5:30 p.m.]
500.A15/131: Telegram
[48] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
Washington, February 11, 1926.
500.A15/138a
[49] The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
Berne, February 18, 1926—6 p.m. [Received February 18—5:18 p.m.]
500.A15/145: Telegram

[50] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
London, February 27, 1926—1 p.m. [Received 2:20 p.m.]
500.A15/157: Telegram
[51] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh)
Washington, March 2, 1926—6 p.m.
500.A15/152: Telegram
[52] The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
Berne, March 18, 1926—7 p.m. [Received March 18—5:35 p.m.]
500.A15/173: Telegram
[53] The Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling) to the Secretary of State
London, March 20, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 9:28 p.m.]
840.00/33: Telegram
[54] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With
the French Ambassador (Bérenger)
[Washington,] March 25, 1926.
500.A15/184
[55] The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
Berne, March 25, 1926. [Received April 5.]

500.A15/196
[56] The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
Berne, March 29, 1926—5 p.m. [Received 5:35 p.m.]
500.A15/187: Telegram
[57] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
Washington, March 30, 1926—6 p.m.
500.A15/187: Telegram
[58] The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
Berne, April 2, 1926—10 p.m. [Received April 3—3:04 p.m.]
500.A15/194: Telegram
[59] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
Washington, April 7, 1926—4 p.m.
500.A15/196: Telegram
[60] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
Washington, April 8, 1926—noon.
500.A15/196: Telegram
[61] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
Washington, April 8, 1926—4 p.m.

500.A15/204a: Telegram
[62] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Whitehouse)
Washington, April 12, 1926—4 p.m.
500.A15/208a: Telegram
[63] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
Paris, April 13, 1926—noon. [Received April 13—11:35 a.m.]
500.A15/209: Telegram
[64] The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
Tokyo, April 13, 1926—6 p.m. [Received April 13—9:25 a.m.]
500.A15/210: Telegram
[65] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
London, April 14, 1926—noon. [Received April 14—10:10 a.m.]
500.A15/211: Telegram
[66] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Whitehouse)
Washington, April 15, 1926—5 p.m.
500.A15/209: Telegram
[67] The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
Paris, April 16, 1926—6 p.m. [Received 10:45 p.m.]

500.A15/217: Telegram
[68] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
Brussels, April 17, 1926—noon. [Received April 17—11:04 a.m.]
500.A15/219: Telegram
[69] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France
(Herrick)
Washington, April 20, 1926—6 p.m.
500.A15/221a: Circular telegram
[70] The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of State
Prague, April 22, 1926—5 p.m. [Received April 22—2:15 p.m.]
500.A15/223: Telegram
[71] The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
Berne, April 22, 1926—5 p.m. [Received 6:25 p.m.]
500.A15/224: Telegram
[72] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
Washington, April 23, 1926.
500.A15/242a
[73] Memorandum by the Department of State

undated
500.A15/242b
[74] The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
Berne, April 24, 1926—noon. [Received April 24—9:47 a.m.]
500.A15/229: Telegram
[75] The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
Geneva, May 15, 1926—7 p.m. [Received May 16—10:30 a.m.]
500.A15/256: Telegram
[76] The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
Geneva, May 15, 1926—11 p.m. [Received May 16—3:22 p.m.]
500.A15/257: Telegram
[77] The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
Geneva, May 18, 1926—2 p.m. [Received 5:30 p.m.]
500.A15/264: Telegram
[78] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh)
Washington, May 21, 1926—7 p.m.

500.A15/271: Telegram
[79] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh)
Washington, May 22, 1926—11 a.m.
500.A15/271: Telegram
[80] The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
Tokyo, May 25, 1926—5 p.m. [Received May 25—3:33 p.m.]
500.A15/280: Telegram
[81] The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
Tokyo, May 25, 1926—6 p.m. [Received 12:05 p.m.]
500.A15/279: Telegram
[82] The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
Geneva, June 11, 1926—4 p.m. [Received June 12 (?)—12:38 a.m.]
500.A15/318: Telegram
[83] The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
Geneva, September 16, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 8:40 p.m.]
500.A15/367: Telegram
[84] The Secretary of State to the American Delegate on the
Preparatory Commission (Gibson)

Washington, September 18, 1926—2 p.m.
500.A15/367: Telegram
[85] The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
Geneva, September 20, 1926—11 a.m. [Received 2:05 a.m. (p.m.?)]
500.A15/369: Telegram
[86] The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
Geneva, September 21, 1926—2 p.m. [Received 6:30 p.m.]
500.A15/374: Telegram
[87] The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
Geneva, September 21, 1926—5 p.m. [Received September 22—12:20
a.m.]
500.A15/376: Telegram
[88] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith)
Washington, October 2, 1926—1 p.m.
500.A15/386: Telegram
[89] The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
Montevideo, October 7, 1926—7 p.m. [Received 8:30 p.m.]

500.A15/391: Telegram
[90] The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
Geneva, December 9, 1926—noon. [Received December 9—10 a.m.]
500.A15/421: Telegram

500.A15/21
[Document 35]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, December 13, 1925.
[Received December 24.]
No. 744
SIR: With reference to my telegram No. 146 of December 13, 12 noon,42 I
have the honor to enclose a communication from M. Scialoja, Acting
President of the Council of the League of Nations, dated December 12,
1925, addressed to the Secretary of State inviting the Government of the
United States, on behalf of the Council of the League to send
representatives to sit on the Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament
Conference which meets at Geneva on February 15, 1926, in accordance
with a decision of the Council of December 12, 1925. The enclosures to this
invitation, namely the report on the Preparatory Commission prepared by
M. Beneš (Document C 792(2)M.277 1925.IX) adopted by the Council on
December 12th, and the list of questions to be examined by the Preparatory
Commission for the Disarmament Conference (Document C.793(2)M.278
1925.IX) also prepared by M. Beneš, adopted by the Council on December
12th, are transmitted with this despatch.43
As stated in my telegram under reference, I have been informed by a
member of the Secretariat that it is its intention to give the text of this
invitation to the press, probably on December 16th, at which time the
similar invitation addressed to the Union of the Socialist Soviet Republics,
and also despatched on December 12th, shall have reached its destination.
I have [etc.]
ALAN F. WINSLOW
[Enclosure]

The Acting President of the Council of the League of Nations (Scialoja) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, 12 December, 1925.
SIR: In the name of the Council of the League of Nations, I have the honour
to invite the Government of the United States of America to send
representatives to sit on the Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament
Conference which has been set up by the Council by a decision of to-day’s
date and which is to meet in Geneva on February 15th, 1926.
Particulars regarding the composition and working of this Commission are
to be found in a document enclosed with this letter.44 The following nations,
in addition to the States Members of the Council, will be invited to send
Representatives to the Preparatory Commission:—
Bulgaria,
Finland,
Germany,
Netherlands,
Poland,
Roumania,
Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes,
Union of the Socialist Soviet Republics.
The Commission will have at its disposal the advice of the Technical
(military and civilian) Organisations of the League of Nations, as well as
that of any other qualified authorities which in the opinion of the
Commission it may be advisable to consult on any of the subjects which
may come under its consideration.
Its task will consist in the preparation of a Conference for disarmament
which it is intended to call together at the earliest possible date. Its

deliberations will be directed to such matters as the various factors upon
which the power of a country in time of war depends; the question as to
whether it is practicable to limit the ultimate war strength of a country, or
whether measures of disarmament should be confined to the peace strength;
the various forms which reduction or limitation may take in the case of
land, sea and air forces, and the relative advantages or disadvantages of
each of these different forms; the standards by which it is possible to
measure the armaments of one country against the armaments of another;
the possibility of ascertaining that the armed force of a country is organised
for purely defensive purposes, or on the contrary in a spirit of aggression;
the principles on which it may be possible to draw up a scale of armaments
for the various countries, and the factors which may enter into the
establishment of such principles—such as population, resources,
geographical situation, communications, vulnerability of frontiers, delays
that are necessary in order to transform peace armaments into war
armaments, degree of security etc; the criteria, if any, by which it may be
possible to distinguish between civil and military aircraft; the estimation of
the military value of commercial fleets; the relations between regional
security and regional disarmament and between regional disarmament and
general disarmament. The full particulars as to the programme of the
Preparatory Commission will be found in a document enclosed with this
letter.44
 
As a result of the long and continuous study which it has devoted to this
question, the Council is unanimously of the opinion that, owing to the
political, economic and technical complexity of the problem which it raises,
the question of disarmament can hardly be approached with any certain
hope of complete solution unless it is considered in its entirety and with the
co-operation of all nations. The matters for examination touch upon all the
aspects of the question and affect the interests of all the nations of the
world; and the methods and machinery for dealing with them should, in the
Council’s opinion, be not less universal. On these general grounds, as well
as on the more special grounds of the high importance of the United States
in such matters, the Council attaches the greatest possible value to the co-
operation of the Government of the United States, not only in the

Conference which it is its intention to call together, but also in the
preparatory work which, in its opinion, is indispensable for the success of
that Conference. The Council believes that the time has come for studying
the practical possibilities of the reduction and limitation of armaments
under the guidance and responsibility of the Governments and expresses the
hope that at the moment when all the nations of the world are conscious of a
common need, it will be able to count on the full and direct co-operation of
the Government of the United States for a work which so closely concerns
the peace of the world.
I have [etc.]
VITTORIO SCIALOJA
42 Not printed.
43 Enclosures not printed; see League of Nations, Documents of the
Preparatory Commission, Series I, pp. 44–48.
44 Not printed.
44 Not printed.

500.A15/216
[Document 36]
Message of the President of the United States to Congress,
January 4, 192646
TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES: In the message which I had occasion recently to
submit to you,47 I called attention to the agreements recently entered into by
a number of European governments under which guaranties of peace were
provided and I took occasion to point out that the natural corollary to these
treaties should be further international agreements for the limitation of
armaments, a work that was so successfully begun at the Washington
conference.
The Government of the United States has now been invited by the Council
of the League of Nations to send representatives to sit upon a “Preparatory
commission for the disarmament conference, being a commission to
prepare for a conference on the reduction and limitation of armaments,”
which has been set up by the council and which is to meet in Geneva,
Switzerland, in February, 1926. The purpose of this commission, it is stated,
is to make preparations for a conference for disarmament which it is the
announced purpose of the council to call at an early date.
It is proposed that the deliberations of the commission shall be directed to
such matters as the several factors upon which the power of a country in
time of war depends; whether limitation of the ultimate war strength of a
country is practicable or whether disarmament should be confined to the
peace strength alone; the relative advantages or disadvantages of each of the
various forms which reduction or limitation of armament may take in the
case of land, sea, and air forces; the standard of measurement of the
armament of one country against the armament of another; the possibility of
ascertaining whether the armed force of a country is organized in a spirit of
aggression or for purely defensive purposes; the consideration of the
principles upon which a scale of armament for various countries can be
drawn up and the factors which enter into the establishment of those

principles, such as communication, resources, geographical situation,
population, the vulnerability of frontiers, necessary delays in the
transforming of peace armaments into war armaments; criteria, if any, by
which it may be possible to distinguish between civil and military aircraft;
the military value of commercial fleets; the relation between regional
security and disarmament and between regional disarmament and general
disarmament.
The matters to be examined by the preparatory commission will, it is stated,
touch upon all aspects of the question of disarmament and affect the
interests of all of the nations of the world. The council believes that the time
has come for studying the practical possibilities of the reduction and
limitation of armaments, and expresses the hope that at this time when all of
the nations of the world are convinced of a common need, it will be able to
count upon the cooperation of the Government of the United States in a
work which so closely concerns the peace of the world.
This is neither the time nor the place to discuss the agenda of the
preparatory commission or to assess the prospects of any conference or
conferences on disarmament or limitation of armament which may later be
convened. It is quite sufficient to note at this stage that the United States is
merely invited to participate in a preliminary inquiry which may prepare the
way for steps of a more definite and formal nature. Whether the conditions
and circumstances will prove such as to make it desirable for the United
States to attend any conference or conferences which may eventually take
place as a result of the labors of the preparatory commission or otherwise is
a question which need not now be considered. It is my judgment that so far
as this preliminary inquiry is concerned, we ought to give our aid and
cooperation to the fullest extent consistent with the policies which we have
adopted.
The general policy of this Government in favor of disarmament and
limitation of armament can not be emphasized too frequently or too
strongly. In accordance with that policy any measure having a reasonable
tendency to bring about these results should receive our sympathy and
support. The conviction that competitive armaments constitute a powerful
factor in the promotion of war is more widely and justifiably held than ever

before, and the necessity for lifting the burden of taxation from the peoples
of the world by limiting armaments is becoming daily more imperative.
Participation in the work of the preparatory commission involves no
commitment with respect to attendance upon any future conference or
conferences on reduction and limitation of armaments; and the attitude of
this Government in that regard can not be defined in advance of the calling
of such meetings. For this reason I deem it advisable to ask the Congress at
this time only for such appropriation as may be required to defray the
expenses of our participation in the work of the preparatory commission. I
therefore recommend that there be appropriated the sum of $50,000 to
cover the expenses of participation, in the discretion of the Executive, in the
work of the preparatory commission.
CALVIN COOLIDGE
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Washington , January 4, 1926.
46 House Document No. 183, 69th Cong., 1st sess.
47 See Annual Message of the President to the Congress of the United
States, Dec. 8, 1925, Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. VII, XII.

500.A15/152
[Document 37]
The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
TOKYO, January 5, 1926.
[Received February 24.]
No. 39
SIR: I have the honor to inform the Department that it will be a great help to
the Embassy if one or more copies might be sent of the list of subjects to be
discussed at the preliminary conference on disarmament scheduled to be
held at Geneva in April or May.
On the assumption that the Department would wish to be informed in
general of the attitude of the Japanese Government towards the conference,
the Embassy has, on one or two occasions, discreetly endeavored to
ascertain this. Mr. Debuchi, Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs, in a talk with
a member of the Embassy staff, made the observation, when the subject of
the Geneva Conference was mentioned, that in his own opinion, while it
had been; found possible to reach a ratio as to the Naval Armaments
necessary for certain countries, it would be a practical impossibility to do
the same thing in connection with land armaments.
However, in order to discuss the question more intelligently and, as already
stated, to ascertain this Government’s view vis-à-vis the questions to be
discussed, knowledge of the program of subjects to be dealt with at the
conference is essential.
I have [etc.]
CHARLES MACVEAGH

500.A15/63: Telegram
[Document 38]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, January 16, 1926—noon.
[Received 2:40 p.m.]
13. There are indications of disposition to postpone meeting of Preparatory
Commission (1) in the hope that some way will be found for overcoming
present obstacles to participation of Soviets; (2) to line up delegates for or
against discussion naval disarmament. Obviously postponement could
[not?] be announced on these grounds and it has been intimated to me that
postponement if taken will be based on lateness of our answer and necessity
for full previous consultation with our delegates. This line is taken in
important article in Journal de Geneva today which states that American
representation is one of the factors prompting postponement; that it is
believed we will send strong delegation of important public men with the
intention of playing a dominant role and that it will be necessary to reach
general agreement with American delegation on principal questions before
conference can begin.
It has been suggested that we are holding back announcement with the idea
of coming in with strong delegation when it is too late for other countries to
strengthen their representation.
Believe it is important to announce our delegation as soon as possible in
order to preclude our being held publicly responsible for postponement.
GIBSON

500.A15/63: Telegram
[Document 39]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, January 20, 1926—4 p.m.
8. Your No. 13, January 16, noon.
(1) 
The 
President, 
having 
requested 
a 
congressional
appropriation, does not wish to appoint delegation on Preparatory
Commission and have his action regarded as indication that he is
going to proceed without congressional action. The end sought is
too important to risk any misunderstanding here over method of
procedure; realization of any disarmament program can only be
achieved through cooperation of Executive and Congress.
(2) House resolution to authorize appropriation of $50,000 was
passed January 18 with only one vote against it. I think the Senate
will consider the resolution and pass it by February 1.48 I have
heard of no serious opposition to it. At this time the Department is
not disposed, therefore, to suggest that it desires a postponement.
If certain powers were to make any attempt to place upon us
responsibility for a postponement which they desire for reasons
having nothing to do with our attitude, we should have an
adequate answer. President’s attitude toward participation in
Preparatory Commission’s work was clearly set forth in his
message to Congress on January 4, so there can be no
misapprehension regarding our position. The President does not
wish to send formal acceptance until Congress has acted.
(3) It does not seem at all necessary that there should be
preliminary 
agreements 
between 
representatives 
of 
this
Government and foreign delegations prior to the assembly of the

Preparatory Commission. While purpose of this preliminary work
is to facilitate informal exchange of views, that can just as well
take place after February 15.
(4) It is true that in the case of this Government the time was
brief, as it has not participated in the meetings which preceded the
invitation and as it received the documentation necessary for the
preparation of instructions only a short time before the meeting
was called. Work on preparation of instructions is now
proceeding, however, in consultation with War and Navy
Departments and will be completed in ample time to send the
instructions to you before February 15. If other powers should
now desire postponement, we do not object; but we do not
propose a postponement and the onus for one should not be
placed on us.
(5) As you are aware, the Department does not intend to send
large delegation to Geneva and probably only technical military
and naval assistants will be sent from here, consisting probably of
an admiral and a general with possibly technical aides.
(6) At your discretion you may indicate orally to Drummond49
substance of paragraphs (2) and (3); you may add that it is
probable that any personnel which may be sent from here will be
of technical character.
KELLOGG
48 The resolution was passed by the Senate January 29 and was approved
February 1; 44 Stat, (pt. 2) 3.
49 Sir Eric Drummond, Secretary General of the League of Nations.

500.A15/79a: Telegram
[Document 40]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, January 22, 1926—5 p.m.
10. The protracted debate in the Senate on the World Court issue50 may
delay action on the appropriation for the Disarmament Commission beyond
February 1. For this reason it is important that Department be informed at
earliest possible date whether repeated press rumors of postponement of
Preparatory Commission’s meeting are accurate and if they are, when
definite notification of postponement will be received and the new date
fixed.
KELLOGG
50 See pp. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1] ff.

500.A15/76: Telegram
[Document 41]
The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, January 22, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received January 22—4:35 p.m.]
In conversation with Drummond this afternoon at request of Legation at
Berne I indicated to him informally the substance of paragraphs 2 and 3 of
the Department’s number 8 of January 20, 4 p.m. to the Legation with
regard to the composition of the various delegations. He stated that the
majority would not include more than one or two principal delegates at the
most, citing England, France and Czechoslovakia as examples.
In any case he spoke very frankly regarding the possibility of postponement
of the Preparatory Commission, stating that both France and Italy favored
postponement for the following reasons:
1. If Preparatory Commission meets on February 15th France
fears that Germany may adopt attitude that she is already
disarmed and expects other countries to do as much. Germany
would find it mom difficult to take this line when once in the
League.
2. The negotiations now proceeding between Berne and Moscow
will find, it is hoped, a solution to prevent deadlock. Russia has
not yet answered invitation definitely.
If Preparatory Commission postponed, it will probably meet first week in
May. Briand51 apparently does not wish to make definite request for
postponement until he has had an opportunity to interview Chamberlain.52
England at present against postponement but willing to discuss matter.
Drummond considers strong chance exists for postponement; from purely
League point of view hopes this will occur as he would like to see both
Germany as a League member and Russia taking part.

TUCK
51 Aristide Briand, French Minister for Foreign Affairs.
52 Sir Austen Chamberlain, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

500.A15/78: Telegram
[Document 42]
The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, January 23, 1926—1 a.m.
[Received 8:44 a.m.]
Referring to my telegram of January 22, 6 [7] p.m. The Department should
not construe my second paragraph [sentence?] as meaning that countries
named therein are to have two delegates. On the contrary, so far as known
by Drummond, no country is sending more than one delegate with technical
advisers. My reference to two delegates was meant to indicate that if the
Department considered it desirable to appoint a substitute delegate this
would not be so disproportionate as to cause resentment. Drummond
reiterates his hope that our delegation would be restricted to approximately
same limits as other powers.
TUCK

500.A15/80: Telegram
[Document 43]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
BERNE, January 28, 1926—noon.
[Received January 23—10:52 a.m.]
18. Department’s No. 10, January 22, 5 p.m. Drummond tells me that so far
no Government has requested postponement although there are indications
that both France and Italy would welcome such action. He feels that the
chances are slightly against postponement, and has promised to keep me
fully and promptly informed of any developments.
GIBSON

500.A15/21: Telegram
[Document 44]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
WASHINGTON, January 29, 1926—7 p.m.
14. Your December 13, [1925,] Noon,53 and despatch of the same date.
You may communicate the following to the Secretary General, indicating
that it is being given publicity here.
 
“To the President of the Council of the League of Nations: The
President has authorized me to state that the Government of the
United States accepts the invitation extended by the Council of
the League of Nations to send representatives to sit on the
Preparatory Commission which is to meet in Geneva on February
15, 1926, to consider questions relating to the limitation of
armaments. Frank B. Kellogg, Secretary of State.”
KELLOGG
53 Not printed.

500.A15/98: Telegram
[Document 45]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, February 1, 1926.
[Received February 1—10:10 a.m.]
28. Following telegram just received from Drummond who is
communicating it to the press.
“Members Council, France, Italy, Japan, Czechoslovakia,
Uruguay, ask postponement meeting Preparatory Disarmament
Commission to date to be fixed by Council in March, but in any
case not later than 15th May. Have requested other members
Council to give prompt opinion. Shall not fail to inform you of
decision taken.54 Will be glad forward President Council any
proposals you wish to submit. Drummond.”
GIBSON
54 On Feb. 6 the Secretary General informed the members of the
Preparatory Commission that the meetings fixed for Feb. 15 and 16 had
been adjourned and that the question of dates had been placed on the
agenda of the March session of the Council (file No. 500.A15/151, encl.).

500.A15/128a: Telegram
[Document 46]
The Secretary of State to the Minister, in Switzerland (Gibson)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 6, 1926—6 p.m.
22. An Associated Press report dated February 3 from Geneva states that the
American delegation will be requested to participate as temporary members
of the Military Advisory Committee of the League of Nations. The same
press report also emphasized that that Commission is expected to play
important role in disarmament meetings, as all technical problems will be
handed over to it for an opinion.
Department has noted that invitation extended by League of Nations on
December 12, 1925,55 referred to fact that Disarmament Commission would
have at its disposal the advice of the League’s technical organizations. I
should, however, consider it highly unfortunate if the League were to gain
the impression that this Government, having agreed to be represented on the
Preparatory Commission, would consent to turn over questions in which it
had direct interest to an organization of the League on which it was not
represented, and which, acting as an organ of the League and not being
composed of governmental representatives, could not in this Government’s
opinion appropriately be consulted in matters of importance to it.
We feel that the Preparatory Commission should refer technical questions to
subcommittees formed from Commission itself and should not refer them to
other organizations. Should other countries desire the opinion of their
experts on League advisory commissions they could easily arrange to have
these experts attached to Preparatory Commission. If two sets and types of
organizations with different functions and capacities attempted to handle
problems presented to Preparatory Commission the result would only be
confusion.

That there may be no possibility of misunderstanding, Department desires
you to bring above considerations to attention of League Secretariat with
view to prevent premature formulation of plans in which the Government of
the United States is not disposed to concur and which it might be obliged to
oppose before the Preparatory Commission.
KELLOGG
55 Ante, p. 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 35].

500.A15/131: Telegram
[Document 47]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, February 9, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]
38. Department’s 22, February 6, 6 p.m.
1. No foundation for press report that all technical questions will
be turned over to Permanent Advisory Commission or Joint
Commission or that these Commissions will “play big role.” As
indicated in the invitation of December 12th56 and as amplified
on page 37 of document C.P.D.[1],57 the Preparatory Commission
is authorized but not bound to refer to these bodies any questions
on which their advice is desired.
2. Associated Press correspondent informs Tuck his despatch was
not written with full knowledge of the facts.
3. Reference of question[s] in which we are interested to League
organizations on which we are not represented need not arise. As
pointed out in Tuck’s telegram of December 28,58 provisions for
cooperation of these committees were so drafted as to afford the
opportunity for our delegation to be adequately represented when
questions of interest to us were under discussion. Moreover I feel
confident that it would always be possible to secure the reference
of any specific question in which we are interested to a
subcommittee of the Conference rather than to League
committees if we should so desire at the time.
4. It is clearly specified and understood that opinions of these
bodies are of purely advisory character and have no binding force.
As at previous conference it is planned to refer occasional
questions to them merely so that they can dispose of necessary

drudgery and leave Conference committees free for more
essential work.
5. During Arms Traffic Conference, questions were frequently
referred to legal section of Secretariat for advisory opinions. That
section is permanent League body forming integral part of
Secretariat and we were not represented on it. However, neither
Department nor delegation object[ed] to the course.
6. After having countenanced practice of referring questions to
League body on which we are not represented I am not quite clear
on what grounds I am desired to base our objection to similar
procedure as regards the advisory bodies on which we are offered
representation.
7. In view of the foregoing I have felt justified in withholding
action last paragraph of Department’s telegram until further
instructed since it is clear that it is not intended to attribute to
these Commissions the role that is objected to by the Department
and since press reports on the subject are inaccurate. Furthermore,
I question the wisdom of making any communication at this time
as [neither] Drummond nor Madariaga59 could take any decisive
action but could only circulate information concerning our
attitude which might create inadmissible impression as to our
intentions. If Department feels that additional steps are desirable
to make our position clear on this point I believe they could be
taken most effectively when Conference meets.
GIBSON
56 Ante, p. 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 35].
57 League of Nations, Documents of the Preparatory Commission, Series I.
58 Not printed.
59 Salvador de Madariaga, Director of the Disarmament Section, League of
Nations.

500.A15/138a
[Document 48]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
WASHINGTON, February 11, 1926.
MY DEAR MR. AMBASSADOR: At present it is the intention of the President to appoint
Mr. Hugh Gibson to attend the preliminary arms Conference at Geneva and
to give him as technical assistants and advisers Mr. Allen W. Dulles, of my
Department, two representatives of the War Department and two of the
Navy Department. Their names have been selected but as the Conference is
going to be adjourned, the President has made no announcement. There
may be a change in the technical advisers and assistants. I desire in this
letter to set forth a little more in detail than I did in my telegram to you60
the attitude of this Government in relation to such conference. Whether
these questions will any of them be disposed of by the preliminary
Conference I cannot say but I thought it best to outline to you my views on
the general subject.
First, the scope of this Conference or of any limitation of
armament conference. The suggestions in the invitation are very
broad and cover a great many questions which, it seems to me,
are entirely impractical. I believe the only practical bases for the
limitation of armament are visible armaments and peace strength.
This could include the trained personnel, the equipment,
munitions and supplies, which can be mobilized immediately on
the outbreak of war. No limitation on the basis of budgetary
expenses is at all practical. That depends upon the rate of pay,
etc., in each country. Any limitation based on the ratio of wealth,
population or resources is also impractical. It is impossible to
limit the war strength of any country. If the Conference is going
into all these collateral issues, it is doomed to failure.

Second, land disarmament is a regional question. I do not believe
that any agreement can possibly be procured which will involve
all the countries of the world in a scale limiting land armaments.
The conditions are so different as to the relation of countries with
each other, necessary forces for protection and many other
conditions which would make it impossible to arrive at a general
formula,—to illustrate, no land armament anywhere in the
Western Hemisphere bears the slightest relation to land
armaments of Europe. They are neither a menace to Europe nor
an aid to Europe except in extraordinary circumstances such as
brought the United States into the last War. Land armaments in
South America bear no relation to land armaments in North
America; neither do the armaments in the Far East (exclusive of
Russia) bear any relation to those in Europe except as nations
may require a certain number of troops to protect their colonial
possessions. The question of reduction of land armament is
primarily confined to the reduction of European armaments. The
United States has no more than an academic interest or, I might
say, a moral interest in this question. We cannot be expected
further to limit our already reduced land armaments or agree to
any system of limitation which would necessarily restrict us to a
smaller army than any of the larger powers. I realize, of course,
that the attitude of Russia may be a very important factor but this
is a matter of more immediate concern to the European and
Asiatic Powers. Our object in being represented at this
Conference is to show in every reasonable way our sympathy and
to give any aid consistent within our policy.
Third, naval conference. Of course, the United States is interested
in any naval conference. My general view on this subject is that a
naval conference, if called, should be separate entirely from the
land armament conference. If they are called together, it is evident
that France and some of the other countries will immediately
undertake to trade naval forces for land forces or land forces for
naval forces, to make one dependent more or less on the other. It
may be said that in limiting land forces, the naval forces must be
taken into consideration. This can easily be done in a separate

conference. Furthermore, there are five nations particularly
interested in a naval conference, Great Britain, France, Italy,
Japan and the United States. It would be impossible in my
opinion to get all the world into a naval conference and make an
agreement as to the standard of armament and the amount of
armament each country shall have. To illustrate, undoubtedly
South America, principally the A. B. C. Powers, are interested in
the question of naval armament but the question there is limited
entirely by their relation to each other and not by their relation to
Europe or to the United States. It is undoubtedly true that Greece,
Turkey, Russia and some other countries may be interested in the
question of naval armament but this is largely regional and cannot
now affect the armament of the larger powers. Furthermore, there
is no prospect of any of these countries in the immediate future
obtaining a naval armament which would in any way approach
that of any of the Five Powers. There is undoubtedly a practical
field in the further limitation of the size and number of cruisers,
submarines and possibly air forces although the latter is a difficult
subject and should be considered more or less by itself. The
question of the prohibition of submarines will, of course, come up
and I assume that France and the smaller powers will never agree
to their abolition. I doubt if we would entirely but we would be
willing, of course, to make an agreement as to the number.
Fourth, airplanes. This is a most difficult question which would
have to be discussed very largely by our technical advisers. So far
as the United States is concerned, of course, its airplane forces
could never be a menace or used against any foreign country nor
against the air forces of a foreign country except as they may be
transported by airplane carriers and the limitation of airplane
carriers is a practical limitation of air forces. The situation is
undoubtedly different in Europe. There, as I have said in relation
to land armament, it is more or less of a regional question by
reason of the short distances and the ease with which such air
forces may reach neighboring nations.

Fifth, it, of course, must be understood that the United States will
not be a party to any sanctions of any kind for the enforcement of
a treaty for the limitation of armament nor will it agree that such
treaties to which it may be a party shall come under the
supervision of any international body,—whether the League of
Nations or otherwise. The agreement, so far as we are concerned,
must depend upon the good faith of nations.
Sixth, in any agreement for the limitation of naval armament, the
United States would insist on the ratio provided for in the
Washington Treaty and, so far as land armament is concerned, it
would undoubtedly insist on the right to maintain forces equal to
any other large power.
General considerations. I have thus imperfectly outlined the position of the
United States. On the question of calling a naval conference, as you know,
the President always has been willing to call such a conference as a
continuation of the Washington Conference and I think he feels, as I have
said to you before, that it would be appropriate that such a conference be
called by him in the United States but I apprehend from what I learn from
you and from the press that it is not the intention of the European Powers to
attend any conference in the United States and that the League of Nations
jumped into this matter, inspired to some extent by a desire to get ahead of
the President. The President is not disposed to make the limitation of
armament dependent on whether he calls a conference or whether
somebody else does. He realizes that so far as land armament is concerned,
it should be called in Europe and he is not going to occupy the position that
he will not participate or do anything unless he can call the conference. The
manoeuvres which have been going on in Europe of late about adjournment
and the various conferences between Chamberlain and Briand lead me to
believe that this conference, or any that may be called, is largely a gesture
and that some of the countries have no intention whatever of making an
agreement for disarmament. The Locarno Conference was undoubtedly a
great step in advance even though it may not be the “cure all” that some
now appear to consider it. Nevertheless I am disposed to give it credit for
all it has done and it is a step forward. The nations gathering at Locarno,
especially France, had said so much about security, disarmament and

arbitration going hand in hand and that no disarmament could take place
until there was guaranteed security, having obtained that, they felt as though
they must, in order to satisfy their public opinion and that of the world, take
some step towards disarmament. It was evident to me that they undertook to
get an adjournment and hoped to cast the burden on the United States; in
fact, I was directly informed of this by absolutely reliable authority and I
counteracted it by cabling at once to Hugh Gibson to say to Sir Eric
Drummond that we would be represented and were ready, that the
President’s message represented his views on this subject, that we were
waiting to send our definite answer until the act passed Congress. The
moment it passed, I telegraphed acceptance. Finding that they could not
place the onus on the United States, they then undertook to get an
agreement between themselves and I take it that Great Britain refused to
agree. Thereupon, France undoubtedly engineered the scheme to get a
number of the countries to request an adjournment. The French Ambassador
called on me the other day and explained the reason for the adjournment
was that France was acting as an intermediary between Russia and
Switzerland in order to obtain the presence of Russia and that Germany had
not become a member of the League. However, I am rather inclined to
believe that some of these European nations are not now, in any event,
ready to make any bona fide disarmament of either naval or land forces and
that they are trying to get all the world into a general scramble in order to
have somebody to blame for the failure. So far as the United States is
concerned, we propose to keep our skirts clear. If we had refused the
invitation, it would have immediately gone out to the world that Europe
could do nothing without the United States being present. We propose, as
far as possible, to cooperate with them and, if there is a failure, for the
blame to rest where it should. I may be mistaken about this and over
suspicious. Nevertheless, the President was in no position to refuse to
cooperate. Public opinion in this country, both in the Congress and out,
would never have justified him in doing it.
I should be very glad if you could get the views of the British Government
on these various questions in a general way. I cannot, of course, make
known to the British Government my instructions to our delegation as the
delegation may not ultimately be required to act on them and many of the
instructions pertain more to a final conference than to the preliminary

conference, which I appreciate is largely for the consideration of technical
questions and the preparation of agenda. Nevertheless, knowing our
situation and my views in a general way I should be glad if you could give
me the British Government’s views, if Chamberlain is disposed to tell you. I
should also be glad to have your comment as to the attitude of the various
European countries and your suggestions as to whether it would be
advisable and worth while for you to come over to talk with the President
and me. I simply make this suggestion now because I do not wish to put
you to the trouble of the long trip unless you feel that something could be
accomplished which you could not do by letter.
Very sincerely yours,
FRANK B. KELLOGG
60 Not printed.

500.A15/145: Telegram
[Document 49]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, February 18, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received February 18—5:18 p.m.]
45. When in Geneva yesterday I took occasion to point out to Madariaga in
an oral and informal manner the considerations outlined in the
Department’s 22, February 6, 6 p.m. Madariaga confirmed the statements
made in paragraphs 3 and 4 of my 38, February 9, 5 p.m., and in addition
pointed out that for the purposes and duration of the Conference the
character of the Permanent Advisory Commission would be completely
altered. As the Department is aware, that Commission at present consists of
military, naval and air experts of the Governments represented on the
Council. During the forthcoming Conference however these experts will be
the same as the technical advisers of the delegations of such Government[s]
and in addition the military, naval and air advisers of each delegation to the
Preliminary Conference whose Governments are not members of the
League or Council are to be asked to form temporarily part of its
membership. Hence during the life of the Conference the Advisory
Commission would in fact be eliminated and substituted [replaced] by a
technical advisory subcommittee of the Preparatory Commission itself.
With regard to the Joint Commission, he stated that it is understood that at
least for the purpose and duration of the Conference one member each of
the American, German and Japanese delegations will be asked to sit with it.
In view of the foregoing it would not seem necessary to point out to
Drummond, who is temporarily absent, the considerations set forth in the
Department’s 22, February 6, 6 p.m., unless the Department so desires.
GIBSON

500.A15/157: Telegram
[Document 50]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
LONDON, February 27, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received 2:20 p.m.60a ]
39. I saw Chamberlain yesterday. Although his inclination is undoubtedly to
base disarmament on visible armaments and peace strength and likewise to
regard the limitation of naval forces as not having a direct relation to land
forces, the situation is so complex that he is unable to stand definitely on
either of those propositions. For instance he thinks that industrial strength
may be considered as a factor in land disarmament. He pointed out that the
French forces in Northern Africa, in Syria, even in Indochina are integral
parts of French land strength and are dependent upon ability of the French
to keep the Mediterranean open for transports and in that way involve naval
strength.
Chamberlain made it plain that an out-and-out declaration of position such
as you outlined is quite impossible for him; subject matter is too complex to
admit of declaration so simple and straightforward. His attitude may be
roughly summed up as follows: He is trying to carry on a common policy
with Briand; to do this in matters which are really serious he must be ready
to compromise on, if necessary even to sacrifice, matters of less immediate
importance. He has many factors and conditions with which to deal in
Europe, not to mention points of contact elsewhere which do not concern us
except remotely. He cannot approach the Preliminary Conference, therefore,
with a single mind in regard to disarmament. The Preliminary Conference
must take its proper place and assume its proper importance in an extensive
and correlated political policy.

He said to me frankly that he was unable to answer the questions I put to
him, except in this general way. He urged me not to think that he was
seeking to avoid giving an answer, and that I should not regard as final what
he did say; he suggested that I see Lord Robert Cecil61 who, he thought,
was in a position to speak more definitely. He then arranged an interview
with Cecil for me.
At the outset of my conversation with Cecil he stated that the committee of
experts which had been studying the agenda and entire subject for many
months was only just beginning to formulate its report; that until this report
had been submitted to Cabinet, and accepted, no final decision on any point
could be reached.
Cecil’s personal view on peace strength and visible armament was that they
furnished too narrow a basis. He preferred, as clearer and more satisfactory,
mobilizable strength or striking force. He thought, too, that other items,
such as industrial strength, must also be taken into consideration. He did not
see any logical connection between land strength and naval strength and he
hoped that consideration of these two separately would be possible, but he
recognized that in the end this might prove impracticable.
I pointed out to him that as the United States was not a member of the
League of Nations, our delegates could hardly be expected to discuss such
matters as sanctions or the aid to be given by the League to a nation
suffering attack. Cecil agreed. I then asked his personal view on whether he
thought it possible to [disassociate] the League from the agenda. He said,
frankly, that he did not think it possible. He could perceive no reason why
question such as disarmament could not be discussed formally without
direct reference to the League of Nations, but nevertheless, looked at from
European standpoint it must in fact be related to League activities. Greatest
difficulty Cecil saw was way of working out a sound ratio for ascertaining
armed strength of each nation, but he believed attempt must be made to do
this.
I asked him if he thought that the French had control of the Conference. He
replied that he did not. He had not studied the rules governing conduct of

the Conference but he felt that when a general agreement was not reached
no recommendations by Conference could be made.
My conversations with both Chamberlain and Cecil were carried on in a
most friendly spirit. Both gentlemen evidently desire to work with us in
most open and cordial manner and mean to keep the American delegation
fully advised of their attitude on every point as it develops.
The conclusion I draw is that we are about to take part in a Conference
whose decisions will be determined, necessarily, in part at least by
considerations of general policy which have no direct interest to the United
States, and that unless we follow the British in concessions they feel it wise
to make, the American delegates are likely to find themselves standing
alone and thus responsible for making an agreement impossible. We shall
not be able to count upon an inflexible British position or policy; they will
do their best, I think, to keep disarmament within the limit of easily
ascertainable facts and also to keep naval disarmament and land
disarmament as distinct as possible.
 
They may easily be forced to compromise. I need hardly point out that any
such compromise on our part might easily lead logically and directly to
relations with the League of Nations. My conclusion in this respect is
perhaps a prejudiced one, and it is quite possible that we may find spirit of
fairness and conciliation ruling the Conference when it actually convenes,
but I am doubtful. As matters stand I believe that the real importance of
Conference lies no longer entirely in working out of a standard by which a
measure of disarmament may at last be obtained, but in maneuvering us into
a position when our relations with the League of Nations will be
substantially modified. Only if the nations represented desire disarmament
is it possible. There is no one here who believes for a moment that either
France or Italy, to say nothing of the others, is ready to decrease its military
strength. All are willing to talk about disarmament and to express their
hopes that it may be obtained; but until financial need actually forces them
to reduce their armies and navies I fear that there is little reason to hope for
any substantial reduction of either.

HOUGHTON
60a Telegram in three sections.
61 Viscount Cecil of Chelwood, British delegate on the Preparatory
Commission.

500.A15/152: Telegram
[Document 51]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 2, 1926—6 p.m.
15. Your despatch No. 39, January 5. The Department’s monthly political
report for December contains the text of the League invitation to the
disarmament meeting and an analysis of subjects which the Commission is
to consider. The Department would be pleased if you could discreetly
ascertain the attitude of the Japanese Government. For your own
information the following outline gives the Department’s present views:
1. The question of limitation of land armaments is primarily of
interest to Europe, as an entirely different situation exists in the
American continents and in the Far East.
2. To be successful, a program of disarmament should be limited
to visible, tangible armaments and to peace strength.
3. It is not possible to limit ultimate war strength of any country.
4. It is preferable to disassociate naval conference from land
disarmament and former should be restricted to the five principal
naval powers. If these principal powers could agree, then
extension to other powers of the principles accepted by the chief
naval powers might be important.
KELLOGG

500.A15/173: Telegram
[Document 52]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, March 18, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received March 18—5:35 p.m.]
66. On the basis of a report by Beneš62 on the work of the Preparatory
Disarmament Commission, the Council of the League today decided:
1. To invite the military, naval and air experts of all the
delegations represented on the Preparatory Commission to sit
with the Permanent Advisory Commission during the Conference
on a basis of absolute equality;
2. To increase the membership of the Joint Commission63 by
adding four members competent to deal with questions relating to
industry and transport who should be chosen from the delegations
of the United States, Japan, Germany, and Russia;
3. To invite the Governments of Argentina and Chile to participate
in the work of the Preparatory Commission;
4. To invite the Permanent Advisory Commission to meet on May
18 simultaneously with the Preparatory Commission;
5. To leave to the Preparatory Commission the decision as to
when the Joint Commission should meet as it probably would not
be necessary to convoke the latter until several days after May 18.
WINSLOW
62 M. Edouard Beneš, Czechoslovak Minister for Foreign Affairs, and
member of the Council of the League of Nations.

63 Composed of members of the economic, financial, and transit
organizations of the League of Nations and of the employers’ and workers’
groups of the governing body of the International Labor Office.

840.00/33: Telegram
[Document 53]
The Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling) to the Secretary of State
LONDON, March 20, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 9:28 p.m.]
61. Yesterday’s Times contained a long despatch from Washington giving
what purports to be the substance of a report on conditions in Europe made
by Ambassador Houghton64 to the President and the Secretary of State. I
did not cable this on account of the origin of the despatch but in view of
your circular telegram dated March 19, 6 p.m.,65 just received, hereunder
follows a part of the article:
“Baldly stated, the Ambassador has this to say: The continent of
Europe, so far as its statesmen are concerned, has learned nothing
from the war; the League of Nations, far from becoming a truly
international instrument for the organization of peace, is moving
toward a revival of the alliance of 1815 with the tremendous
difference that it cannot hope to guarantee 40 years’ tranquillity in
Europe; in this movement France is the leader with certain
satellite powers aiding and abetting and with the British
Government reluctantly carried along—reluctantly because the
tide of British feeling sets strongly in the opposite direction and
yet in the opinion of Sir Austen Chamberlain, inevitable because
cooperation with France is desirable in the Near East and
elsewhere; the powers of the European continent do not genuinely
wish to disarm and do not relish or want American participation
in their councils; the Preliminary Arms Conference at Geneva will
meet, if it does meet, to discuss proposals upon which agreement
is neither desired nor expected and which have been deliberately
and disingenuously advanced in order to make failure certain.”
Comment follows to the effect that pessimistic nature of the report may
definitely influence American policy [as regards] Europe towards greater

isolation. Various newspapers of this morning comment upon it in either
special articles or editorials.
Today’s Manchester Guardian in a despatch from New York speaks of the
administration as definitely retreating from its resolution to discuss
international disarmament with the League.
“For the first time in recent years an anonymous semiofficial
statement has been issued in Washington of the allies
[pessimistically] discussing the state of Europe. The statement
suggests that Europe has reverted to the theory of balance of
power adding that this policy is an immemorial war breeder.”
The Daily Express and Daily Chronicle refer to the report as in opposition
to the League and to Chamberlain. Westminster Gazette states:
“We sympathize with the resentment so widely spread in the
United States that we should still be so brought as at Geneva to
the cynical lead of France. It was quite wise and right for the
United States to stand aloof until we establish a better order in
Europe.”
Diplomatic correspondent of the Daily Telegraph writes that British and
European diplomatic circles yesterday were completely taken aback by the
action of the American administration in communicating to the public press
the substance of the report which Mr. Houghton had submitted to the
President and the State Department. As possible reasons for this procedure
the writer considers that it may be desirable to prepare American public
opinion for a change of foreign policy towards isolationism and that the
effect of this exposure may help to clear the air and deal a blow to the
revival of secret diplomacy and intrigue. He further says that Mr. Houghton
exerted himself on behalf of the Locarno Pact.66
“In this connection he (Mr. Houghton) brought his powerful
influence to bear on Berlin. He was, however, disappointed at the
sequel, holding that Germany had been forced into unwarranted
concessions, e.g., in relation to her Eastern and Southern
neighbors, and still more by the Allied refusal to evacuate the

Rhineland as the logical repercussion of a pact said to be bilateral.
This omission he apparently regards as the negotiation [negation]
of the true spirit of peace and reconciliation which Locarno was
supposed to embody. It explains his utter lack of confidence in
Locarno at this date. His distrust of Europe has since been
considerably heightened: first, by the intrigues which led to the
postponement of the Preliminary Disarmament Conference; and,
secondly, by those which preceded the recent session of the
League at Geneva. The continental powers, he declares, are not
sincerely anxious for disarmament, least of all France, which is
determined not to disarm on the proportionate basis of the
Versailles Treaty” …67 “Italy and Japan, he thinks, are associated
with France in the endeavor to oppose the White House in any
real scheme for the reduction of arms as well as for a separate
naval conference at Washington desired by President Coolidge,
just as the new Latin syndicate within the League is designed, in
his opinion, to thwart Great Britain. Mr. Houghton considers
Great Britain to be the only honest and pacific state among the
powers of Europe but he thinks that official policy of conciliation
although genuine, is misguided and weak in its subservience to
continental, and in particular French, influences.”
[Paraphrase.] Discussion in private circles, as far as I have heard of it, is
expressive of surprise at the Ambassador’s frank utterances but is in no wise
unfavorable to him.
STERLING
64 Mr. Alanson B. Houghton, Ambassador in Great Britain, who was
temporarily in Washington.
65 To the Embassies in France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy and the
Legation in Switzerland, stating that “In view of unauthorized stories in the
press the Department is today making following announcement: ‘The
Department of State today announced that neither Ambassador Houghton
nor Minister Gibson [Minister in Switzerland] has divulged to any
unofficial person the nature of their reports to the President or Secretary

Kellogg.’” (File No. 840.00/31.) 66 The common term of reference for the
documents signed at Locarno between the representatives of the
Governments of Belgium, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Great Britain,
Italy, and Poland; see Great Britain, Cmd. 2525, Miscellaneous No. 11
(1925), Final Protocol of the Locarno Conference, 1925.
67 Omission indicated in the original telegram.

500.A15/184
[Document 54]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With
the French Ambassador (Bérenger)
[WASHINGTON,] March 25, 1926.
The French Ambassador said that he had seen a good deal in the press about
France’s intention to have the preliminary arms conference adjourned and
the British and American press were attacking Chamberlain and Briand for
secret agreements at Locarno; that it was not their intention to go on with
the conference. The Ambassador assured me that the French Government
was in favor of going on with the preliminary conference on May 18; that
the date had been fixed at the instance of Chamberlain and Briand and that
the reports in the press were entirely erroneous. I assured him that we were
going to be prepared. I told him who our delegates would be as near as I
could and informed him that neither the President nor I was responsible for
any of the articles in the press. He stated he quite understood that. I told him
furthermore that neither the President nor I was aware that Mr. Houghton
was going to be interviewed by the press nor do we know what he said. I
stated that that was a subject I did not care to discuss at all. The
Ambassador agreed with me as to the propriety of discussing the matter.

500.A15/196
[Document 55]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, March 25, 1926.
[Received April 5.]
No. 780
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my telegram No. 69, of March 24, 2 p.m.,68
and to report that I have just received, for transmission to the Department, a
formal communication from the Secretary General of the League of
Nations, addressed to the Secretary of State, dated March 19, 1926, stating
that the Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference will
meet at Geneva on May 18, 1926. The communication, which is transmitted
herewith, encloses the report of Monsieur Beneš (Document C.205.
(1)1926.IX) adopted by the Council of the League at its meeting of March
18th.69 This report was summarized in my telegram No. 66, of March 18, 7
p.m.
The communication from the Secretary General adds that the Permanent
Advisory Commission for Military, Naval and Air Questions will meet on
May 19th, and the Department’s attention is drawn to that part of M. Beneš’
report adopted by the Council in accordance with which the States
represented on the Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament
Conference are invited to appoint military, naval and air experts to sit on the
Permanent Advisory Commission on a footing of equality with members of
that Commission to assist in the work of the Conference. Sir Eric requests
that the Department be good enough to communicate to him, as soon as
possible, the names of the experts who may be appointed in compliance
with this section of the resolution.
In this connection I am aware that this scheme for the alteration of the
character of the Permanent Advisory Commission was proposed by Admiral
Aubrey Smith, British member of the Commission, and is an obvious and

apparently successful effort to avoid any necessity of allowing questions in
which the United States is interested to be referred to League organs on
which there was no American representation. While the solution arrived at
technically keeps intact the Permanent Advisory Commission as at present
constituted, i. e. a commission on which there are only represented military,
naval and air experts of the States members of the Council, and while
during the forthcoming Preparatory Disarmament Conference that body will
retain its same designation, it may be pointed out that, for the duration and
purposes of the Conference, this body becomes in reality a technical sub-
committee of the Preparatory Commission.
The enclosed communication from Sir Eric also points out that the Council
has decided to increase the number of members of the Joint Commission,
which is associated with the Preparatory Commission, by the addition of
four members specially competent to deal with questions connected with
industry and transport and to include a national of each of the following
States: United States of America, Japan, Germany, and the Union of
Socialist Soviet Republics. No request, however, is made of the Department
at this time to inform the Secretariat of the name of the member of the
American delegation, competent to deal with questions connected with
industry and transport, who may be designated to sit with the Joint
Commission. I shall endeavor to ascertain if and when such a request is to
be made and shall inform the Department promptly.
In this connection, it may be pointed out that this decision to permit
American representation on the Joint Commission for the purposes and
duration of the Preparatory Disarmament Conference was likewise
influenced by the desire to avoid the necessity of submitting to League
organs on which the United States was not represented questions in which it
was interested.
During the week-end following the adjournment of the Council and the
Assembly of the League of Nations I took occasion to go to Geneva and at
that time had an opportunity to discuss various matters informally with Mr.
Madariaga, of the Secretariat of the League, and with Sir Eric Drummond.
As pointed out in my telegram No. 69,70 both these officials told me that the
view is generally held in Geneva that the heads of the various delegations,

with their assistants, during the meeting which commences on May 18th,
would sit for only about ten days and then adjourn leaving the various
technical questions to be discussed by the Permanent Advisory Commission
and the Joint Commission. It is to be noted that while the Permanent
Advisory Commission is to convene on May 19th, the presence of the
military, naval and air experts of the American delegation with the
remaining members of the delegation at the meeting on May 18th would not
seem to be precluded. It is apparent, however, that these experts, as well as
the experts of the other States non-members of the Council, are to be
detached from the main Commission on the 19th in order to sit separately in
a conference with the original members of the Permanent Advisory
Commission and on an equal footing with them. It is estimated that this
latter commission, as pointed out above, would continue to sit after the
adjournment of the heads of delegations for a period of approximately ten
days or two weeks longer.
It is also to be noted that, while the date for the convocation of the Joint
Commission has not been fixed, it is stated in the report of Monsieur Beneš,
adopted by the Council, that the Preparatory Commission would invite the
Joint Commission by telegram to convene presumably a few days
subsequent to May 18th; again, there would appear to be nothing which
would preclude the participation of the assistant delegate on the American
delegation who may eventually be designated to sit with the Joint
Commission, from attending the plenary conference pending the
convocation of the Joint Commission.
Sir Eric and Monsieur [Señor] Madariaga told me that it is generally
believed, and they share this view, that it will be possible for the heads of
delegations, as well as for the two reorganized technical commissions, to
conclude their preliminary study of the entire matter within the period of
time indicated above. They also felt that following the conclusion of this
preliminary study, it would be necessary, before further study is resumed, to
allow in most cases the heads of the various delegations, as well as their
advisers, to return to the seat of their governments for consultation. It was
believed that there would be sufficient time for such consultation if the
Preparatory Commission as well as the reorganized technical committees,
should not convene again until the latter part of July and that at that time

these second sessions would again be terminated within a period of from
ten days to two weeks.
While it is obvious that the procedure outlined above is not to be taken as a
definite indication of the actual procedure which may be followed, it
appears to be sufficiently definite to warrant careful consideration by the
Department. Moreover, it does not seem likely that more definite
indications can be obtained until the actual meeting of the Conference on
May 18th.
Regardless of the status of the work of the Preparatory Commission and the
technical committees at the time of adjournment following the July
meeting, i. e. whether their work was complete or not, Mr. Madariaga was
of the opinion that nothing further would be done until the Assembly had
met in September. Fearing that this statement implied that the Assembly, on
which, of course, the United States would not be represented, would take
action, either through recommendations or amendments, on the work of the
Preparatory Disarmament Conference, I asked Mr. Madariaga what was
meant by his statement. In explanation, he said that as a matter of course the
Council must report to the Assembly at each September session on all the
work carried on by the various agencies of the Council during the year
dating from the preceding September; that this is a routine matter and that
the Council would merely report to the Assembly the findings of the
Preparatory Commission, and that the Assembly, in turn, as a routine matter,
would adopt the report of the Council. He said that the report of the Council
would, of course, be in reality the report of the Preparatory Commission
and whatever its findings or recommendations were, it was a foregone
conclusion that those would be the findings and recommendations of the
Council and the Assembly.
I have [etc.]
ALAN F. WINSLOW
[Enclosure]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to the Secretary of State

GENEVA, 19 March, 1926.
8/48346/39868
SIR: With reference to the letter, dated December 12th, 1925, which was sent
to you by the President of the Council of the League of Nations, I have the
honour to enclose herewith the Report of M. Beneš, (Document
C.205(1).1926.IX) adopted by the Council on the 18th March, 1926.
As you will see from this Report, the Council has decided that the
Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference will meet at
Geneva on the 18th May, 1926, and the Permanent Advisory Commission
for Military, Naval and Air Questions, on the 19th May.
I particularly desire to draw your attention to the Resolution adopted by the
Council, in accordance with which the States represented on the Preparatory
Commission for the Disarmament Conference are invited to appoint
military, naval and air experts who would sit on the Permanent Advisory
Commission on a footing of equality with members of that Commission
whenever it was convened to assist the work of the Preparatory
Commission. I shall be obliged if you will be good enough to communicate
to me as soon as possible the names of the experts whom you see fit to
appoint in compliance with this Resolution.
I further desire to point out that the Council has decided to increase the
number of members of the Joint Commission, which is associated with the
Preparatory Commission, by the addition of four members specially
competent to deal with questions connected with industry and transport, and
to include a national of each, of the following States: Germany, the United
States of America, Japan and the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics.
I have [etc.]
ERIC DRUMMOND
68 Not printed.

69 Not printed; see League of Nations, Documents of the Preparatory
Commission, Series II, p. 5.
70 Not printed.

500.A15/187: Telegram
[Document 56]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, March 29, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received 5:35 p.m.]
75 [73]. Reference to paragraph numbered 2, my telegram number 66,
March 18, 7 p.m. Drummond has explained to me that the American citizen
to be appointed by the President of the Council to sit with the Joint
Commission for the purpose and duration of the Preparatory Disarmament
Conference cannot be a member of the American delegation since no
member of the Joint Commission may be a government representative.
While no invitations have been extended as yet to any American citizen to
sit with the Joint Commission, consideration is being given to the choice of
(1) Owen Young, in spite of his recent refusal to attend forthcoming
Economic Conference on April 26th,71 (2) Adams, who will represent
United States Chamber of Commerce at Double Taxation Conference on
May 17th,72 and (3) David F. Houston, ex-Cabinet member.
WINSLOW
71 The Preparatory Committee for the International Economic Conference;
the members were not representatives of governments, but persons chosen
as experts.
72 The Government of the United States was not represented officially.

500.A15/187: Telegram
[Document 57]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
WASHINGTON, March 30, 1926—6 p.m.
48. Your 75 [73], March 29, 5 p.m. Department notes your statement that
Drummond has explained that as he cannot appoint a member of the
American Delegation, he proposes to appoint an unofficial American citizen
to sit with the Joint Commission for the purpose and for the duration of the
Preparatory Disarmament Conference. The Department made clear in my
No. 22, February 6, 6 P.M., its views that the Preparatory Commission
should not refer technical questions of direct interest to the United States to
subcommittees of the League but to sub-committees of its own
organization. This was communicated to Madariaga on February 18 [17] by
Mr. Gibson. The Department cannot understand why there should be any
necessity for a Joint Commission of the League to sit with the committees
of the Preparatory Disarmament Conference. So far as questions affecting
the United States are concerned, all questions should be considered by the
Preparatory Commission or sub-committees of that Commission. If other
countries desire to refer any questions affecting them to a League
Commission, that is something with which we are not concerned. The
United States can participate in the work of the Preparatory Commission
only to the extent of the participation of the representatives sent by the
President. The Preparatory Commission is competent to determine its own
procedure, to appoint sub-committees and to seek information where it
deems best. It would be unfortunate to limit its freedom of action in this
respect by any decisions reached at this time. You should present the
foregoing views to Drummond.
KELLOGG

500.A15/194: Telegram
[Document 58]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, April 2, 1926—10 p.m.
[Received April 3—3:04 p.m.]
75. Department’s 48, March 30, 6 p.m. I saw Drummond yesterday and
presented to him the considerations set forth in the Department’s telegram
under reference. I also pointed out in detail that until his explanation made
on March 27 (see my 73, March 29, 5 p.m.) the Legation had distinctly
understood that American to be added to the Joint Commission for the
purpose and duration of the Conference was to be an official member of the
American delegation; that this understanding was due (1) to the absence of
any statement to the contrary either in document C. P. D. 173 or in Beneš’s
report adopted by the Council on March 18,74 and (2) to conversations with
various competent members of the Secretariat previous and subsequent to
the Council’s decision of March 18. I said that therefore his explanation on
March 27th had come as a surprise.
Drummond stated that the Legation’s understanding was justified and
expressed his regret that the Secretariat had failed to make the situation
clear. While emphasizing again that the Joint Commission was purely an
advisory body and that its opinions could in no wise bind the Preparatory
Disarmament Commission, he expressed a desire to do everything possible
to meet the Department’s wishes.
He said however that it would be extremely difficult if not impossible to
revoke the Council’s decision to convene the Joint Commission, in order to
allow the Preparatory Disarmament Commission to appoint its own
technical subcommittee.
He also regretted that in view of technical difficulties it would scarcely be
possible for him acting on behalf of the President of the Council to invite
and subsequently designate a member of the American delegation to sit with

the Joint Commission in his capacity as an official representative of the
United States Government.
However, in consideration of the Department’s views in this matter he was
confident that in spite of original plan he could arrange for the designation
of any member of the American delegation whose preference should be
indicated by the Department to sit with that Commission in the capacity of
an expert; in order to avoid incongruity, since all other members of the Joint
Commission were unofficial, and to circumvent technical difficulties, he
pointed out that such a designation of a member of the American delegation
would have to be as an “expert” but that from the American point of view
he would still remain responsible to his Government and retain his official
character not only while sitting with the Joint Commission but throughout
his participation of the Conference. He pointed out that in spite of the
stipulations in the Council’s decision of March 18th that American member
to be added to the Joint Commission should be competent to deal with
questions connected with “industry or transport” he could arrange for the
addition of a member of the American delegation in any expert capacity
which the Department might wish to attribute to him (in view of the
character of the Joint Commission consistent choice would seem to be
either Dulles as a legal expert or Richardson as a shipping expert).
In suggesting this arrangement Drummond was obviously actuated by a
desire to find a solution acceptable to United States and to the other
Governments concerned as well as to circumvent existing technical
difficulties.
If this arrangement, which under the circumstances would seem the most
satisfactory possible, is acceptable to the Department Drummond would be
obliged to take up the matter with the President of the Council. He would
then, on behalf of the President and in conformity with prescribed
procedure, address an invitation to the member of the American delegation
preferred by the Department to sit with the Joint Commission. As
Drummond is leaving for Athens on April 8th it is important that the
Department inform me as soon as possible: (1) whether the proposed
arrangement is considered acceptable; (2), which member of the delegation

it desires to have sit with the Joint Commission; and, (3), the expert
capacity to be attributed to him.
WINSLOW
73 League of Nations, Documents of the Preparatory Commission, Series I.
74 Ibid., Series II, p. 5.

500.A15/196: Telegram
[Document 59]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
WASHINGTON, April 7, 1926—4 p.m.
54. Please address following communication to Drummond:
“My dear Sir Eric: Under instructions from my Government I
have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of March
19th75 to the Secretary of State. In this note you communicate the
resolution adopted by the Council of the League of Nations in
accordance with which the States represented on the Preparatory
Commission are asked to appoint military, naval and air experts to
sit on the Permanent Advisory Committee on a footing of equality
with members of that Committee whenever it is convened to
assist the work of the Preparatory Commission. You request
communication of the names of the experts to be appointed on
behalf of the American Government in compliance with this
resolution. You further make known the decision of the Council to
increase the number of members of the Joint Commission by the
addition of four members competent to deal with questions
connected with industry and transport, to include an American
citizen.
In the invitation transmitted to this Government under date of
December 12, 1925 by the Acting President of the Council, the
Government of the United States was invited to send
representatives to sit on the Preparatory Commission which was
to have ‘at its disposal the advice of the Technical (military and
civilian) organizations of the League of Nations, as well as that of
any other qualified authorities which in the opinion of the
Commission it may be advisable to consult on any of the subjects
which may come under its consideration.’ It was this invitation to

be represented on the Preparatory Commission which my
Government accepted under date of January 30th.
My Government does not desire to hinder the Preparatory
Commission in seeking the benefits of assistance which it might
derive from any source but it has not consented to be represented
on any other organization than the Preparatory Commission.
While it is not disposed to raise technical objection on questions
of procedure at this time, it is felt that it would be unfortunate to
have the procedure of the Preparatory Commission determined in
any respect prior to the meeting of this Commission and the
question as to the organizations, if any, which the Preparatory
Commission may desire to consult appears to my Government to
be one which should be left to the decision of that Commission.
It was on the assumption that the Preparatory Commission was
entirely competent to determine its own procedure and to decide
as to the reference to other bodies of questions which might arise
that my Government felt justified in accepting the invitation to
attend the meeting of the Preparatory Commission without any
reservations on this point.
It is inferred from the last paragraph of your note that the Council
of the League of Nations is considering the appointment of an
unofficial American citizen to sit with the Joint Commission.
While my Government would not of course presume to raise any
question as to any appointment which the Council might see fit to
make to a League Committee you will, of course, realize that the
appointment of an unofficial American citizen could not be
regarded 
by 
my 
Government 
as 
constituting American
representation on that body. Neither could it be construed as
imposing upon my Government any obligation to consent to the
reference to the Joint Commission of questions in which my
Government is interested. In this connection also it would seem
that in view of the competence of the Preparatory Commission to
determine its own procedure it would be preferable to await the
actual meeting of that Commission before determining the

functions of other bodies to which it might eventually decide to
turn for expert advice. In the interest of the success of the
Preparatory Commission’s work I am desired to state frankly my
Government’s view that attempts at this time to anticipate
decisions of the Preparatory Commission and to prejudice its free
decisions are calculated to impede rather than facilitate its work.
Further, in connection with my recent conversations with you,
and to supplement the representations which I had the honor to
make,75a I have been further instructed to state that it has been the
understanding 
of 
my 
Government 
that 
the 
Preparatory
Commission was constituted for the purpose of doing itself the
preparatory work on the limitation of armaments and not merely
to delegate this function to other bodies. It was on this
understanding that the American representatives were chosen.
Thus my Government assumed that the Preparatory Commission
was to continue in session until its report was submitted and that
the task of preparing a report was to rest with the Preparatory
Commission itself or subcommittees to be formed therefrom and
not with other organizations. The American representation on the
Preparatory Commission will be prepared to participate in the
work of this Commission in a spirit of cooperation and
helpfulness in the hope that its deliberations may result in
constructive achievement.”
KELLOGG
75 Ante, p. 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 55].
75a This much of the paragraph was deleted from the letter which the
Chargé sent to the Secretary General (file No. 500.A15/212).

500.A15/196: Telegram
[Document 60]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow)
WASHINGTON, April 8, 1926—noon.
55. Department’s 54, April 7, 4 p.m. Department is concerned by apparent
tendency to give increased importance to the role of League Committees.
As originally presented the role of these committees was clearly limited to
holding their advice at the disposal of the Preparatory Commission and no
objection was therefore raised by this Government inasmuch as this did not
put the League committees on different ground from any other authority
from which the Commission might seek advice. There has, however, been
an increasing tendency to inject these committees into the work of the
Commission and Drummond’s letter to me speaks of the fact that they are to
be “convened to assist the work of the Preparatory Commission.” Your
despatch 780 March 25 indicates that it is proposed to adjourn the
Preparatory Commission within a short time and leave the discussion of its
agenda in the hands of these League bodies. It will be obvious to you that
any such course would afford to those who are opposed to our cooperating
with the League good ground for claiming that we have been maneuvered
into turning over to League organizations responsible primarily to the
League Council matters which should be discussed only by the authorized
representatives of this and other Governments. As you know the
Department has sought to cooperate as generously as possible with the
League in its humanitarian activities but these efforts might be seriously
compromised if any ground were given for the belief that the League
Committees are given a more active and important role than was indicated
to us at the time the invitation was accepted.
In view of the difficulty of securing technical experts abroad it has been
necessary for this Government to send a large delegation and it will be
unfortunate if through the long adjournments which are foreseen in your
despatch 780, March 25 our representatives are kept in Europe longer than
is necessary for continuous discussion. It is therefore hoped that no effort

will be made to fix the duration of sessions until the Commission itself has
acted upon the matter.
KELLOGG

500.A15/204a: Telegram
[Document 61]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
WASHINGTON, April 8, 1926—4 p.m.
52. (1) You will remember that in the documentation accompanying the
invitation to the Preparatory Commission it was stated that body was to
have “at its disposal the advice of the technical (military and civilian)
organizations of the League of Nations, as well as that of any other
qualified authorities which in the opinion of the Commission it may be
advisable to consult on any of the suggestions which may come under its
consideration.” This Government accepted the invitation to sit on the
Preparatory Commission but has not consented to be represented on any
other organization than the Preparatory Commission. I have now received
the full text of a note from Drummond76 asking me to designate experts
from our delegation to sit on Permanent Advisory Commission “on a
footing of equality with members of that Commission whenever it is
convened to assist the work of the Preparatory Commission.” If wording is
accurate it would imply more active participation by the Permanent
Advisory Commission than was originally contemplated.
(2) With respect to Joint Commission which we discussed when you were
in Washington and the proposed appointment of an unofficial American
citizen on this Commission, Legation Berne has informed League that
appointment by the League of an unofficial American citizen to this
Commission could not be looked upon as affording us representation or
justifying the reference to Joint Commission of questions of interest to us.
Drummond has orally replied to these representations that since he was
obliged by Council’s decision to invite an American to sit with the Joint
Commission there appeared to be no course for him to follow other than to
explain to the President of the Council by letter and request that he be

relieved if possible of this obligation at least until the Preparatory
Commission shall have convened.
(3) Our Chargé at Berne reports that Drummond states view is generally
held in Geneva that there will be a session of the Preparatory Commission
lasting about 10 days after which there will be an adjournment until
sometime in July and that during the interval the Permanent Advisory
Commission and Joint Commission will continue to function.
(4) The Department has just received a telegram from our Minister at
Prague77 reporting that Beneš anticipates that the Preparatory Commission
will meet for a three-day formal session and will meet again before the
Assembly in September.
(5) The idea of a brief and purely formal session would seem to imply a
further advance toward turning the work of the Preparatory Commission
entirely over to the League Committees. This is entirely different from the
plan indicated in the original invitation which we accepted and as we have
not consented to be represented on either of the League Committees it is not
seen wherein American participation would be effective under such a
scheme. It was assumed that Preparatory Commission was to devote itself
continuously to discussion of disarmament problems and on that
assumption the President has appointed a sufficiently large delegation to
consider the various questions which might be presented and has assigned
men who can be spared from their present work only for serious and
continuous discussion of disarmament problems.
(6) I should like to have you discuss this matter promptly with Chamberlain
and ascertain his views as to how the Preparatory Commission is to
function. You may say that we feel that the only effective way in which this
Government can participate is to have the Preparatory Commission itself
continue the discussions, appoint its own committees, and remain in
practically continuous session until its work has been concluded.
(7) I have instructed Legation at Berne to address to Secretary General of
the League a written communication setting forth our views as outlined
above.

(8) Repeat to Paris, Berne and Prague for their confidential information.
Ask Paris to make confidential distribution.
KELLOGG
76 Ante, p. 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 55].
77 Not printed.

500.A15/208a: Telegram
[Document 62]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Whitehouse)
WASHINGTON, April 12, 1926—4 p.m.
93. As indicated in Department’s 52, April 8, 4 p.m. to the Embassy in
London, repeated to you for your confidential information, Department has
taken up with the Secretary General of the League certain questions with
regard to the work of the Preparatory Commission and has expressed the
hope that questions of procedure, particularly with reference to time of
adjournment or delegation of Preparatory Commission’s work to League
committees would not be determined prior to the meeting of the Preparatory
Commission.
Legation at Berne is being instructed to mail you immediately a copy of our
note of April 8 to the League Secretariat78 covering the foregoing points.
This note concluded with the following statement:
“The American representation on the Preparatory Commission
will be prepared to participate in the work of this Commission in
a spirit of cooperation and helpfulness in the hope that its
deliberations may result in constructive achievement.”
The foregoing sentence expresses the policy of this Government. Our
delegation has been selected and is planning to sail for Europe on April
30th. It is fully prepared to participate in a helpful and constructive way in
the work of the Preparatory Commission.
The Department has noted with some surprise press reports from Paris to
the effect that “a strong campaign for another postponement” has been
started there. This Government believes that any discussion of the
disarmament question would serve a useful purpose and that it is very
desirable to make a beginning on the preparatory work even though final
conclusions may not be possible at this time. For its part it would regret to

see a postponement of the meeting of the Preparatory Commission and
knows of no recent developments which would justify postponement.
 
The foregoing is for your information and guidance in the event either (1)
that any attempt should be made in any quarter to misrepresent this
Government’s attitude in the matter; or (2) that Foreign Office should seek
from you an indication of this Government’s views.
Report any developments by telegraph. Mail copies to London, Rome,
Brussels, Berne and Prague.
KELLOGG
78 See telegram No. 54, Apr. 7, to the Chargé in Switzerland, p. 70 [Pg. 70 is
part of Doc. 59].

500.A15/209: Telegram
[Document 63]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, April 13, 1926—noon.
[Received April 13—11:35 a.m.]
146. Your 93, April 12, 4 p.m. I do not think a press campaign under these
circumstances started for postponement of the Conference. French press has
from the beginning been extremely skeptical of any practical results being
accomplished and the Soviets’ refusal to take part increased this. Several
papers then expressed the opinion that it would be wiser to postpone, but
that no one would dare to make such a proposal for fear of displeasing the
United States.
There has been little comment recently.
Mailed to London, Rome, Brussels, Berne and Prague. Copy to European
Information Center.
WHITEHOUSE

500.A15/210: Telegram
[Document 64]
The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
TOKYO, April 13, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received April 13—9:25 a.m.]
36. On Sunday two Japanese papers printed a statement purporting to be the
Government’s attitude on the Disarmament Conference and press
correspondents here may have telegraphed it to the United States.
Yesterday on inquiring at the Foreign Office I was informed by the Vice
Minister that the statement was unauthorized and in many respects was
incorrect. For that reason I have not telegraphed it. Today I was in
conference with the Foreign Minister who outlined his Government’s
attitude substantially as follows:
1. The Government is willing that naval, military and air policies
should be considered together but the conclusions which are
reached should be different for different countries, and
consideration must be given to the nations taking part in the
Conference; for example, if Russia participated, Japan’s attitude
might be different in regard to separate liberty from what it would
be if Russia did not participate.
2. It is impossible to make a binding agreement for armament
limitation in time of war.
3. The Cabinet had reached no conclusion upon various matters
contained in League’s questionnaire79 but expected to decide
upon these questions as and when they might arise in course of
Conference.

I gained the impression from my interview with the Foreign Minister that
the Japanese Government intended to avoid committing itself to definite
policy, but would [leave] large discretion to the Japanese representatives at
the Conference and would pass separately on each important question as it
might arise.
MACVEAGH
79 See p. 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73].

500.A15/211: Telegram
[Document 65]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
LONDON, April 14, 1926—noon.
[Received April 14—10:10 a.m.]
74. Your telegram No. 52, April 8, 4 p.m. I talked with Chamberlain on his
return late yesterday afternoon. He assumes that, after some general
discussion, the Preparatory Commission will divide into subcommittees
which will proceed simultaneously to take up the several parts of the
agenda; and that until the subcommittees are ready to report there will be no
full meeting.
As far as Permanent Military Commission is concerned, Chamberlain
seems to agree that while representatives of other nations may wish to
consult that body, there is no reason why the American delegates should
consult it. Further, he thinks that if we are not willing that individual
American citizens serve on Advisory Committee, that can also be easily
arranged. He wishes, however, to consult with Lord Cecil and he asked me
for an aide-mémoire which was given him.
The diplomatic correspondents of the Morning Post and the Daily
Telegraph state that it is expected that Baltic states and Poland, with
approval of France, will request postponement of Conference.
HOUGHTON

500.A15/209: Telegram
[Document 66]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in France (Whitehouse)
WASHINGTON, April 15, 1926—5 p.m.
96. Department’s 93, April 12, 1926, and your 146, April 13, 1926. The
press here carries repeated rumors, under Paris and London date lines, that
French Government intends to bring about postponement of preparatory
meeting through medium of requests by Baltic States and Poland. In view
of these rumors, the Department desires you to see Briand or Berthelot80
personally and set forth the views of this Government as outlined in
Department’s 93.
Repeat to Embassy London as Depts 55 by telegraph and also Department’s
93 in case text of latter telegram not already available there.
KELLOGG
80 Philippe Joseph Louis Berthelot, Secretary General of the French
Ministry for Foreign Affairs.

500.A15/217: Telegram
[Document 67]
The Chargé in France (Whitehouse) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PARIS, April 16, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received 10:45 p.m.]
148. Your No. 96, April 15, 5 p.m. When I told Berthelot about the press
reports in the United States he was surprised and somewhat hurt and gave
them a most categorical denial. He stated that he had not had the slightest
intimation from either Poland or the Baltic states of any desire on their part
to postpone Conference and that he fully appreciated its importance.
Berthelot added that he had done everything he could to induce the Soviets
to attend the Conference, although in his opinion it was quite clear that they
did not desire to attend. …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
WHITEHOUSE

500.A15/219: Telegram
[Document 68]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
BRUSSELS, April 17, 1926—noon.
[Received April 17—11:04 a.m.]
33. Your 93, April 12, via Paris. Belgian Foreign Office indicates a
disposition not to adopt any procedure which would cause American
Government difficulties at forthcoming meeting of the Preparatory
Commission in Geneva. Belgian Government does not desire postponement
of meeting.
PHILLIPS

500.A15/221a: Circular telegram
[Document 69]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France
(Herrick)
WASHINGTON, April 20, 1926—6 p.m.
The address which the Secretary is delivering today in New York at the
Associated Press Luncheon refers among other subjects to American
representation on the Preparatory Commission for the Limitation of
Armaments. After briefly discussing the situation in China and the logical
development of American policy toward China pursuant to the treaties
concluded at the Washington Conference of 1922, the Secretary states:
“The other agreements reached at this same Conference in
Washington may be viewed as milestones in the orderly
development of the established policies of this Government. Thus,
in matters relating to the limitation of armament, we have agreed
to be represented on a Commission which is shortly to meet at
Geneva to consider the general problem of arms limitation. This
Commission, as its name discloses, is a Preparatory Commission.
It is not a conference to conclude definite treaties or agreements
but to discover the proposals which can be laid before a future
conference or conferences with the greatest hope of success. Its
purpose is to prepare the ground work for the future by an orderly
and exhaustive consideration of the problem.
The desire for further limitation of armaments is universal but
with that desire there is a most natural demand for security. We
would not be candid with ourselves or just to others if we did not
recognize the peculiarly fortunate situation of our own country in
this respect. With our detached position and our geographic
isolation from those areas of the world where conflicting
territorial or political issues have led to the maintenance of large
standing armies, we have been able to reduce our land forces

from the more than 4,000,000 men under arms in 1918 to a
present regular army of about 118,000 for the more than
118,000,000 of our own population and that of our over-seas
possessions. Thus, as regards land armament we have voluntarily
reduced to the minimum. We have every reason to rejoice that our
situation has permitted this but no justification for overlooking
the different problems with which other countries are faced. We
would naturally welcome any steps which other powers might
take toward the limitation of land armament; we shall be glad if
we can at any time exert a helpful influence in this direction.
As regards naval armament this Government would welcome any
practical steps which might tend toward the further limitation of
competitive naval construction. In this connection it should be
borne in mind that while a substantial part of the program
presented to the Washington Conference by the American
delegation was realized, no agreement was reached as to the
limitation of competitive building of naval craft other than capital
ships and aircraft carriers. This Government would welcome an
agreement which would complete the work begun at Washington,
particularly as there is danger that the competitive construction
which formerly existed, particularly with respect to capital ships,
may still be continued, in a less aggravated form it is true, with
respect to cruisers and other types of naval craft not dealt with by
the Washington Treaties. Our representatives at the Geneva
meeting will help to the uttermost of their ability in preparing the
way for agreements for the further limitation of naval armament
at no distant date. Our people are practical idealists. They believe
in dealing with what is visible and tangible. The dramatic success
of the proposal by Mr. Hughes at the Washington Conference,
based on tonnage allotments for capital ships, was due in no small
measure to the fact that it dealt with real and measurable objects.
Thus our representatives at Geneva will endeavor, as far as
possible, to use their influence in favor of projects which may be
practical in their application and realizable in their development.

Each definite move toward disarmament, small though it be, is of
greater value for the promotion of world peace than ambitious
and all inclusive projects which may be excellent in theory but
which fail to take account of existing world problems. The
questions which have been submitted for the consideration of the
Preparatory Commission are very general and sweeping in
character and until there has been some discussion it is impossible
to determine what definite proposals can most profitably be
advanced, but when the most practicable line of action is
determined this Government can be counted upon to cooperate
within the limits of its traditional policy in any serious effort
toward the further limitation of the burden of armaments”.
In the event that you consider desirable or that garbled reports of this
speech should appear you may give out foregoing quotation to the press.
The other sections of the Secretary’s speech in so far as they relate to
foreign policy deal with China,81 our Treaty with Turkey,82 and Tacna and
Arica.83
Repeat by telegraph to London, Brussels, Rome, Berne and Prague.
GREW
81 For correspondence concerning China, see pp. 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 423]
ff.
82 For correspondence concerning the treaty with Turkey, see vol. II, pp. 974
ff.
83 For correspondence concerning Tacna-Arica, see pp. 260 [Pg. 260 is part of
Doc. 138] ff.

500.A15/223: Telegram
[Document 70]
The Minister in Czechoslovakia (Einstein) to the Secretary of
State
PRAGUE, April 22, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received April 22—2:15 p.m.]
13. Dr. Beneš believes that our insistence on having the Preparatory
Commission for Disarmament determine its own procedure may prove most
embarrassing to the League which has altogether separated the
considerations of principles from the subsequent study of technical
questions from [by?] its own advisory commissions. Yet he thought it not
impossible in order to comply with our wishes that some new committee
may be appointed.
I urged on him the desirability of avoiding future misunderstandings and
clarifying as much as possible at the start instead of leaving controversial
matters for subsequent consideration. He agreed fully and declared he
would do his utmost to carry this out. In spite of his interest in the League
he said he was opposed to those who were seeking to entice us into it by
indirect means.
Telegram mailed to London, Paris and Berne.
EINSTEIN

500.A15/224: Telegram
[Document 71]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, April 22, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received 6:25 p.m.]
92. Department’s 64, April 20, 8 p.m.84
1. I indicated informally to Drummond on April 21 the contents
of Department’s 55.85 Although the question was not raised I do
not believe that he intends to convey to the interested
Governments the substance of my remarks.
2. He asked that I impress upon the Department that the
Permanent Advisory Commission and the Joint Commission for
the purpose and duration of the Conference would be solely
responsible and subservient to the Preparatory Commission and
not to the Council.
3. He indicated moreover that in his opinion there would be no
disposition at the Conference to oppose the Department’s views
with regard to the organization of the work of the Conference.
WINSLOW
84 Not printed.
85 Ante, p. 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60].

500.A15/242a
[Document 72]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
WASHINGTON, April 23, 1926.
SIR: The President has instructed me to inform you of his desire that you
should be in charge of the American representation on the Preparatory
Commission which is to meet in Geneva on May 18, 1926 to consider
questions relating to the limitation of armaments. You will be assisted by:
From the Department of State:
Mr. Allen W. Dulles,
Mr. Dorsey Richardson;
From the War Department:
Major General Dennis E. Nolan,
Brigadier General H. A. Smith,
Major George V. Strong;
From the Navy Department:
Rear Admiral Hilary P. Jones,
Rear Admiral Andrew T. Long,
Captain Adolphus Andrews.
Mr. Alan F. Winslow, Secretary of the American Legation at Berne, will act
as Secretary to the American Representation.

In case additional military or naval personnel should be required to deal
with the questions before the Commission, the Department will arrange for
such personnel either from Washington or from the offices of military or
naval attaches in Europe.
I desire to leave it to your discretion to make such arrangements for the
organization of the American representation as circumstances may require.
Purpose of American Representation.
The purpose of American representation was indicated by the President in
his message to Congress of January 4th of which the full text is annexed.86
In dealing with the question of the further limitation of armaments this
country should be helpful within the limits of its traditional policy, and
where questions arise which do not fall within the scope of this policy you
should not of course object to efforts by others to reach agreements which
they may consider desirable in dealing with the special conditions existing
elsewhere.
Character and Extent of American Participation in the Deliberations of the
Preparatory Commission.
A consideration of the various questions which will be submitted to the
Commission indicates that the discussions will bear upon a broad range of
problems.
In the consideration of these problems it is obvious that the United States
would be directly interested in questions relating to the further limitation of
naval armament; it would likewise be directly interested in questions which
might affect our land armament. The United States is concerned only in a
general way in the question of the limitation of European land armament as
that question is deemed largely regional in character. On the other hand, we
must decline to become involved in such questions as those relating to the
application of European security pacts whether resulting from Articles of
the League Covenant or European treaties or agreements.

This Government appreciates, however, that a general informal discussion
of the problems involved in the limitation of armaments may be considered
important before an attempt is made to formulate concrete agenda for future
conferences, but it desires you, while furthering in any way the purposes for
which the Commission was convoked, to avoid taking a leading part in the
debate on questions with which we are not properly concerned. You should,
of course, refrain from any action which might create an impression that the
United States was disposed to hamper full and free discussion of such
problems among the interested powers.
It is noted that the third paragraph of the League Invitation of December
1287 states:
“The Commission will have at its disposition the advice of the
technical (military and civilian) organizations of the League as
well as that of any other qualified authorities which in the opinion
of the Commission it may be advisable to consult on any of the
subjects which may come under its consideration.”
It is considered that questions of direct concern to the United States should
be referred to committees to be formed from the personnel attached to the
main Preparatory Commission or to committees on which we may be
appropriately represented. There would appear to be no obstacle to such a
course inasmuch as it is understood that the Preparatory Commission is
competent to determine its own procedure.
In the documentation submitted with the League invitation it is stated that
“the Preparatory Commission will decide on the proposals for the
Conference on the reduction and limitation of armaments to be submitted to
the Council.” In so far as the United States is concerned you will appreciate
that this Government would not participate in the submission of a report to
the Council of the League of Nations, although it could not properly offer
objection if States members of the League should desire individually or
collectively to do so. In this connection you will recall the statement in the
President’s message of January 4, that representation on the Preparatory
Commission involves no commitment with respect to attendance upon any

future conference, or conferences, on the reduction or limitation of
armaments.
 
Outline of the American Viewpoint and Policy.
The American position with respect to the limitation of “armaments was set
forth in the President’s Messages of December 8, 192588 and January 4,
1926 to the Congress and in my address of April 20. In these statements it
was pointed out that in the opinion of this Government the need for great
armaments has been diminished by agreements such as the Locarno treaties
and that “the natural corollary to these treaties should be further
international contracts for the limitation of armaments.” It was further
pointed out that the general policy of this Government in favor of the
limitation of armaments could not be emphasized too frequently or too
strongly and that in accordance with that policy any measure having a
reasonable tendency to bring about these results should receive our
sympathy and support. The President added, “the conviction that
competitive armaments constitute a powerful factor in the promotion of war
is more widely and justifiably held than ever before and the necessity for
lifting the burden of taxation from the peoples of the world by limiting
armaments is becoming daily more imperative.”
It was this conviction which led to the calling of the Washington
Conference of 1921–1922 and which prompts this Government to give its
cordial support to any efforts which may lead to further limitation of
armaments wherever and whenever it is felt that the circumstances are such
as to hold out a reasonable prospect of success.
General Considerations.
It is the opinion of this Government that the practical approach to the
question of the limitation of armaments is through dealing with visible
armaments at peace strength.*
In order to arrive at a working basis for determining the strength of the
armaments of any nation it is felt that such a determination should include,

in the case of the army, only the military strength, including both personnel
and materiel (equipment, munitions and supplies) which can be mobilized
at the outbreak of war and, in the case of the navy, existing naval tonnage.
The Problem of the Limitation of hand Armament.**
In considering this question the President, in his message of December 8th,
stated:
“The question of disarming upon land is so peculiarly European
in its practical aspects that our country would look with particular
gratitude upon any action which those countries might take to
reduce their own military forces. This is in accordance with our
policy of not intervening unless the European powers are unable
to agree and make request for our assistance. Whenever they are
able to agree of their own accord it is especially gratifying to us,
and such agreement may be sure of our sympathetic support.”
The United States has not only already reduced its land forces from a war
strength of over 4,000,000 by successive steps to an authorized peace
strength of the Regular Army of about 280,000, but has also further limited
that strength to an actual strength of about 118,000 men. When this latter
figure is compared with that of the forces of other great powers, it will be
clear that this country has already taken the lead in the reduction of land
forces and it could hardly be expected to make any further reduction. Nor
would it be reasonable to expect this Government to forego the right to
maintain forces fully commensurate with those of other great powers. It
seems unlikely that any formula would be considered which might have the
effect of limiting the army of the United States to a figure lower than its
authorized strength or that any other great power would be likely to accept a
limitation approaching in any way the present reduced strength of our own
army.
In view of the present reduced state of our land forces and since the
question of the limitation of land armament is primarily a European
problem, it is not felt that you should take the initiative in the discussion of
this matter unless your assistance is sought. In this event, however, you will
of course endeavor to exert a helpful influence in assisting informally to aid

in reaching an agreement in case an impasse should be reached. The
following paragraphs may offer a basis for profitable discussion.
The conditions prevailing in different regions of the world are so varied and
the factors entering into the situation are so divergent that constructive
achievement in the matter of the limitation of land armament appears to lie
in regional agreements rather than in an effort to work out a general plan for
the limitation of land armament applicable to the whole world.
In considering the limitation of land armament it is recognized that it is
impossible to deprive a nation of the strength which it may derive from the
past military training of its inhabitants. It is, however, possible for nations
to agree upon the number of men who will receive military training each
year, the amount (length, degree, nature) of training they shall undergo, and
the reserve equipment which shall be maintained.
 
In this connection it should be noted that the placing of all peacetime
military forces on a common ground as to procurement, would facilitate an
accurate estimate of the relative size of the armies of the various countries
as a basis for the limitation of armaments.
In connection with the discussion of mobilization stocks or reserve
equipment, it must be borne in mind that on the outbreak of war, the
military power of any nation, from the point of view of the army, is
determined largely by two factors, the active army, including trained
reservists; and war reserves of materiel.
It is desirable that a limitation be placed upon the size of active armies, and
it is equally desirable that a limitation be placed upon the peace-time
reserves of materiel. It should be borne in mind that consideration of the
size and composition of these reserves of materiel might lead to an effort to
bring in the consideration of the industrial power and resources of a country
unless the discussion were limited, as it should be, to actual and tangible
reserves of materiel maintained as such under national control.
Limitation of Naval Armament.

The 5–5–3 ratio (Washington Treaty 192289 ) should be firmly maintained
as applicable to all types of combatant naval units so far as the United
States, Great Britain and Japan are concerned. The United States is
interested in a general way in the limitation of the naval armament of other
countries. Such limitation may properly be a matter of negotiation in so far
as not already determined by the Washington Conference and provided the
Washington agreements are not disturbed.
This Government would welcome any practical steps which might tend
toward the limitation of competitive naval construction. In this connection it
should be borne in mind that while a substantial part of the program
presented to the Washington Conference by the American Delegation was
realized, no agreement was reached as to the limitation of competitive
building of naval craft other than capital ships and aircraft carriers. This
Government would welcome an agreement which would complete the work
begun at Washington.
Separation of the Problems Involved in the Limitation of Land Armament
from those Involved in the Limitation of Naval Armament.
It is appreciated that the scope of the work of the Preparatory Commission
will include the consideration of problems relating to the limitation of both
land and naval armaments. It is believed, however, that you should
endeavor to arrange for the consideration of these problems by separate
committees of the main Commission with a view to the eventual
preparation of separate agenda for conferences which may be called later.
The ultimate success of any effort toward the limitation of armaments
seems to lie along the line of isolating from the general problem as many
concrete questions as possible and it is therefore felt that the consideration
of the limitation of both land and naval armaments jointly at the same
conference would tend to render more difficult definite achievement along
either line.
Five nations are particularly interested in the question of the limitation of
naval armament: the United States, Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan,
and the success of any program would depend primarily upon an agreement
between those five powers. There are, however, other nations which may be

concerned to a certain extent in the limitation of naval armament. Regional
agreements between certain South American countries, between the powers
of the Eastern Mediterranean, and between certain northern European
powers, might facilitate a general reduction in naval armament and such
regional agreements should be encouraged. The success of the further
limitation of naval armament along the lines of the Washington Treaty
might be imperiled if powers not parties to that treaty should undertake a
considerable program of naval armament and it might therefore be very
desirable, while working toward the regional agreements mentioned, to
correlate such agreements with the standards fixed at Washington by the
five principal Naval Powers.
In this connection it should be noted that certain powers have undertaken
“not to dispose by gift, sale or any mode of transfer of any vessel of war in
such a manner that such vessel may become a vessel of war in the navy of
any foreign power.” It is felt that it would be a useful addition to any further
program for the limitation of naval armament to secure from other naval
powers not bound by the Washington Conference Treaty an undertaking of a
similar character.
Readiness to Call a Naval Conference.
In his message of December 8, the President referred to the fact that the
United States has constantly, through its Executive and through repeated
acts of Congress, indicated its willingness to call a conference for the
consideration of the further limitation of naval armament. The President, in
his message of December 8, said:
“The general policy of our country is for disarmament and it
ought not to hesitate to adopt any practical plan which might
reasonably be expected to succeed but it would not care to attend
a conference which from its location or constituency would in all
probability prove futile.”
 
This Government believes that the greatest assurance of success in limiting
naval armament could be obtained by a conference of the five naval Powers

which attended the Washington Conference and which would be practically
a continuation of that Conference involving the limitation in construction of
other naval craft such as cruisers and submarines. It is the opinion of this
Government that a naval conference confined to practical lines could make
substantial progress in further limiting naval armament.
Consideration of Certain Criteria which do not afford an acceptable Basis
for the Reduction of Armaments.
Any attempt to limit the ultimate war strength of a nation would be futile.
The factors which enter into the potential war strength of a nation are in
many respects the same as those which form an essential part of the normal
activities of a State in time of peace. No country would agree to curtail or
limit its natural resources or its capacity to prepare for a national
emergency. It follows from the foregoing that the United States
representation should not agree to the application to this country of any
formula for the limitation of armaments which is based upon an estimate of
the potential war strength of a nation.
You should likewise under no circumstances concur in the adoption of any
formula for the limitation of armaments which is based upon expenditure.
Any comparison on this basis is apt to be extremely misleading. For
example, the item of base pay varies largely with the character of service,
whether voluntary, militia, or conscriptive. The base pay of the lowest
rating in the United States Army is fifty-eight times the minimum base pay
of the lowest rating in the forces of one of the great powers whose service is
based on conscription. The effect of this on comparative expenditures is
obvious. In addition, it costs more to feed, clothe, and shelter an American
soldier or sailor than one of any other nationality. Monetary expenditure for
the creation and maintenance of military establishments does not afford
either a true measure of armaments or a fair basis of comparison for
limitation of armaments.
Further, an attempt to limit armaments on the basis of an inverse ratio to
national wealth or population, or an attempt to equalize the military power
of nations by allotting to smaller and weaker nations forces equal to or
greater than those possessed by larger and more powerful nations, is an

artificial effort to equalize that which is not and cannot be made equal, and,
in consequence, would be totally impracticable.
No International Supervision of the Limitation of Armaments.
In case the question should arise you should make it clear that the United
States would not agree to place the supervision of its armaments or the
carrying out of any program for the limitation of armaments in the hands of
the League of Nations or any other international body. The execution of any
international agreement for the limitation of armaments must depend in so
far as the United States is concerned upon international good faith and
respect for treaties. The United States will not tolerate the supervision of
any outside body in this matter nor be subject to inspection or supervision
by foreign agencies or individuals.
In case the other powers desire to make such a regime of inspection or of
control applicable to themselves, this is not, of course, a matter which
concerns the United States and you should not oppose it, on the clear
understanding of course that we would not even consider the extension of
such a régime to this country.
You will, of course, bear in mind that it is contrary to the traditional policy
of this Government to enter into commitments as to the application of a
régime of sanctions for the enforcement of Treaty obligations. The
application of sanctions of either an economic or military character must,
under our constitutional organization, depend upon the approval of the
Executive and Legislative action in the Congress. In consequence of this
policy of this Government you should not make any commitments in the
matter of sanctions.
In view of what you have learned of this Government’s policies through full
and frank discussion during your stay in Washington, I am confident that
you will understand that the reservations contained in the foregoing
instructions are in no sense to be construed as evidence of an obstructive
attitude on the part of this Government. Quite the contrary is the case and
this Government hopes that you will be able to play a helpful and a
constructive part in the deliberations of the Commission. However, the
questions which have been submitted to the preliminary commission are so

general and so sweeping in character that until there has been some
discussion it is impossible to determine what definite proposals can most
profitably be advanced. Consequently this Government has indicated
certain limitations beyond which you should not go. These limitations have
been laid down as a matter of prudence and merely for your guidance in
estimating the practical value of suggestions which may be presented from
time to time. Quite apart, however, from the instructions which it has been
possible at this time to reduce to written form the President desires to
impress upon you his deep interest in any sincere effort to deal with the
problem of armaments. He is confident that with mutual good-will progress
can be made and it will be a matter of gratification to him if the American
representation can in some measure contribute to this progress. As the
discussion develops and brings out the nature of the questions which can
effectively be considered the President trusts that it will be possible to send
you further instructions to present proposals in regard to specific problems
and for your further guidance in exercising a helpful influence in bringing
about agreement among the interested powers. In connection with each
proposal as it arises you should bear in mind the sincere desire of this
Government to cooperate, within the limits of its traditional policy, in any
serious effort toward the further reduction of the burden of armaments.
I am [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
86 Ante, p. 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36].
87 Ante, p. 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 35].
88 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. VII, XII.
* By the phrase “peace strength” is meant that armament which is
maintained in time of peace, that is, in the absence of a declared state of war
between two or more powers or the actual carrying on of hostilities against
a recognized belligerent. [Footnote in the original.]
** The terms “land armament” and “naval armament” as used in this
instruction include the aviation units which form a part of the land and
naval forces of the United States. [Footnote in the original.]
89 For text of treaty, see Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 247.

500.A15/242b

[Document 73]

Memorandum by the Department of State?

undated
CONSIDERATION OF THE SEVEN QUESTIONS SUBMITTED WITH THE INVITATION OF THE COUNCIL OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS OF DECEMBER 12,
1925
QUESTION I
“What is to be understood by the expression ‘armaments’?”
“(a) Definition of the various factors—military,
economic, geographical, etc.—upon which the power of
a country in the time of war depends.
“(b) Definition and special characteristics of the various
factors which constitute the armaments of a country in
time of peace; the different categories of armaments
(military, naval and air), the methods of recruiting,
training, organizations capable of immediate military
employment, etc.”
“What is to be understood by the expression ‘Armaments’?”
For the purpose of the Preparatory Commission on the Limitation of
Armaments, the expression “armaments” should be defined as the organized
military (Army, Navy and Air) forces of a country, with their materiel and
installations actually in being.
In the foregoing definition the term “organized military forces” should be
construed to mean persons equipped and formed into groups under the
direction and control of a central authority to maintain and protect national
rights through force of arms.
The term “materiel” should be construed to embrace generally the arms of
various calibers, ammunition, means of transportation and communication,
supplies, accessories, et cetera, necessary to the operation of the forces.
The term “installations” should be construed to include fortifications,
arsenals, dry docks, plants and accessories, et cetera, designed or employed

for specific use in connection with the accomplishment of a military
purpose.
“(a) Definition of the various factors—military, economic,
geographical, etc.—upon which the power of a country, in time of
war, depends.”
The various factors upon which the power of a country in time of war
depends include the following:
(1) Geography, topography and climate.
(2) Population and social conditions.
(3) Political situation.
(4) Economic situation—
a. Material resources, food and raw materials.
b. Manufacture and munitioning capacity.
c. Transportation and communications.
d. Foreign commerce.
e. Finance.
(5) Military and naval establishments; reserves of materiel, etc.
Of the above factors, point (5) is the only one capable of a satisfactory
evaluation; an attempt to evaluate the other factors would lead into such a
maze of speculative elements, diversity of opinions and differing formulae
as to serve no useful end from the point of view of a consideration of the
question of the Limitation of Armaments.
“(b) Definition and special characteristics of the various factors
which constitute the armaments of a country in time of peace; the
different categories of armaments (military, naval and air), the

methods of recruiting, training, organizations capable of
immediate military employment, etc.”
The armaments of this country are separated into the Army and Navy; each
branch including, in the United States, its air service.
The Army is divided into combatant and non-combatant branches.
The organization of the Army varies in different countries in accordance
with national conditions, which are determined by varying factors such as
distances, terrain, weather, resources and population, physical and social
conditions, morale, communications, sources of supplies, etc.
The details or manner of training and organization cannot be profitably
discussed because such matters are primarily of domestic concern.
However, in regard to the definition and special characteristics of the
various factors which constitute the armament of a country in time of peace,
particularly with reference to organizations capable of immediate military
employment, the general subject of character of service might be discussed
with the idea of placing all peace time military forces on the voluntary
basis. In this connection, it should be noted that the abolition of
conscription would be the most effective step which could be taken toward
the material reduction of peace time armed forces. In addition, a general
abolition of conscription and the consequent reduction of the number of
reserves would tend to render more nearly equal the length of time
necessary for various nations to put their armies into the field at full war
strength. It should be noted, however, that this government, because of
difficulty in recruitment, would oppose any general requirement which
provided for voluntary service for periods greater than a three year
enlistment.
The discussion of the various factors which constitute the Naval armaments
of a country in time of peace should be restricted to a consideration of the
tangible and material units of naval strength capable of physical
measurement.
At the Conference on the Limitation of Armament, held in Washington,
November 12, 1921, to February 6, 1922, one of the general principles laid

down by Mr. Hughes and accepted by the delegates of all the powers
represented was:
“The use of capital ship tonnage as the measurement of strength
for navies and the proportional allowance of auxiliary combatant
craft prescribed.”
It will be seen from this that the term “armament” as applied to navies was
construed as applying to tonnage primarily as a basis for comparison of
naval strength. In the general discussion and final agreement certain other
factors, such as maximum caliber of guns, maximum tonnage of individual
units, and other characteristics pertaining essentially to ships and equipment
actually carried on ships were included. But all of the factors that were
accepted as contributory to the desired end, related solely to tangible and
material characteristics of combatant units capable of actual physical
measurement. It must be remembered that when the ship of whatever class
it may be is disabled or sunk, the whole unit including all of her personnel
is out of the battle and can be replaced only by another unit which can not
be immediately constructed or organized. Thus, the personnel of Naval
Armaments is regulated in numbers largely by the tonnage of such
armaments, and the consideration of methods of recruiting and of training
and of organization does not properly enter into a discussion of limitation of
naval peace strength.
QUESTION II
“(a) Is it practicable to limit the ultimate war strength of
a country, or must any measures of disarmament be
confined to the peace strength?
“(b) What is to be understood by the expression
‘reduction and limitation of armaments’?
“The various forms which reduction or limitation may take in the
case of land, sea and air forces; the relative advantages or
disadvantages of each of the different forms or methods; for
example, the reduction of the larger peace-time units or of their
establishment and their equipment, or of any immediately

mobilisable forces; the reduction of the length of active service,
the reduction of the quantity of military equipment, the reduction
of expenditure on national defence, etc.”
(a) “Is it practicable to limit the ultimate war strength of a
country, or must any measures of disarmament be confined to the
peace strength?”
It is not practicable to limit the ultimate war strength of any country
because that strength is, in the last analysis, determined by its wealth, its
population, its resources, its industries of every kind that enter into its
economic life, the character of its people, and many other elements to
which it is impossible to apply a standard of definitive measurement.
Under no circumstances is it conceivable that any country would accept for
a moment any suggestion of a limitation on or reduction of its resources, its
industries, or any other factor which is entirely bound up with the economic
life of its people. Therefore, it is evident that only the peace strength in
combatant units is susceptible of reduction and limitation by mutual
agreement.
(b) “What is to be understood by the expression ‘reduction and
limitation of armaments’?
“The various forms which reduction or limitation may take in the
case of land, sea and air forces; the relative advantages or
disadvantages of each of the different forms or methods; for
example, the reduction of the larger peace-time units or of their
establishment and their equipment, or of any immediately
mobilisable forces; the reduction of the length of active service,
the reduction of the quantity of military equipment, the reduction
of expenditure on national defence, etc.”
The expression, “reduction and limitation of armaments” is understood to
mean the reduction of, or the placing of a limitation on, (1) the forces
organized in time of peace, for the carrying on of war, and/or (2) the
materiel of such forces.

In regard to the army, such reduction or limitation may be applied to either
personnel or materiel. Its application to personnel must be primarily in the
form of a limitation upon numbers in service, whether that reduction be
applied to forces on a voluntary or a conscriptive basis. But in prescribing
such a limitation the class of troops, whether regular, national guard, or
militia, must be taken into consideration. In regard to materiel, such
limitations may involve the elimination of designated weapons, or
prescriptions upon the size, character and amount of armament in service or
in reserve, or prescriptions upon the number and character of military and
naval aircraft, as well as upon the number or location of air bases.
Any limitation based primarily upon a comparison of budgets for national
defense purposes would be totally unacceptable to this government.
In the case of the Navy the various forms which reduction or limitation may
take are:—
1. Maintaining the present size of individual units and reducing
the numbers of units.
2. Reducing the size of individual units in replacements and
maintaining the numbers of units.
3. Reducing both size and numbers in units in replacements.
4. Extending the lives of the different types, thereby deferring
replacements.
5. Reducing the caliber of major battery guns.
The method set forth in No. 1 offers a basis for discussion as it admits of
definite physical measurement by which to make comparison of relative
naval strength. It should be borne in mind, however, that there is a
minimum tonnage for each power below which it is unsafe to go in
reduction.
The method set forth in No. 2 likewise admits of definite physical
measurement and to that extent may constitute a basis of comparison of

naval strength. While reducing the size of units in replacements and
retaining the numbers will reduce the cost of such replacements and
incidentally the maintenance to some extent, there are objections to such a
method. Reduction in size tends to reduction in the efficiency of defense
against air and under-water attack. It also reduces the sea endurance and
therefore the ability to operate in areas distant from home bases where
operations may be necessary to insure integrity of lines of communication.
The method set forth in No. 3 combines the advantages and disadvantages
of Nos. 1 and 2.
The method set forth in No. 4 merely puts off expenditures and in the long
run does not reduce. This method has a disadvantage from an internal
economical standpoint in that it tends to disrupt shipbuilding industries and
break up organizations devoted to this art.
The method set forth in No. 5 merely reduces the expenditure for offensive
ordnance material but has no other effect on general reduction.
While the reduction of expenditures for national defense purposes is highly
desirable, it should be constantly borne in mind that a comparison of
expenditures for such purposes does not form a true basis for comparison of
national armaments.
 
QUESTION III
“By what standards is it possible to measure the armaments of
one country against the armaments of another, e. g., numbers,
period of service, equipment, expenditure, etc.?”
In the case of the land forces, there is no entirely satisfactory unit which is
applicable to all elements, but in regard to personnel a manday unit appears
to be the most satisfactory unit of measure in comparing the total force, that
is, both active and reserve components; in regard to materiel, fire power
may be satisfactorily measured by foot-tons energy; for tanks or motor

transportation, a mile-ton-hour may be employed and for aircraft a lift
tonnage standard might be employed.
The limitation of land armament as it now exists involves different and
more complicated factors than the limitation of naval armament, because no
two armies are organized in the same way nor have they fixed elements
which can be compared in the manner that the war ships of one nation can
be compared with those of another. Infantry divisions in different countries
vary in strength from 7,000 to 20,000 and the types of military service
include conscription, militia and voluntary. There is no unit in an army
which can be satisfactorily used as a yardstick. Any plan for the limitation
of armament, to be successful, must contain within itself the elements of
simplicity and facility of determination. Limitations can be placed upon the
strength of the Regular Army, upon the number of reserves, upon the
militia, which is partly trained, and upon those reserves which are trained
still less.
It is considered that the only equitable standard by which it is possible to
measure the naval armaments of one country against the naval armaments
of another is either (1) the amount of tonnage possessed or allowed to be
possessed in each type of combatant vessel, or (2) the total tonnage of all
types combined.
Under method (1), each type should be considered separately and unrelated
to the tonnages of other types, although it may be pleaded that geographical
location, outlying bases, overseas possessions, interests, etc., and
extraneous political or economic considerations might tend to stress the
need for one type over another type and therefore demand greater
allowances of tonnage in one type and lesser tonnage in another, for
comparison in total strength. The fixing of such relationship would be
almost impossible, therefore it would seem imperative that the comparison
rest in tonnages of types—considered each by itself—rather than in any
attempt to deal with tactical and strategic employment of the various types.
In arriving at the value of the tonnage already possessed, consideration
should be given to the ages of the individual units in each type in order to
arrive at an equitable agreement as to immediate scrapping and
replacements.

The life of the unit of each type, that is, period when replacements may
begin, should be uniform and fixed by agreement between the powers
concerned.
The actual numbers of units in any type should be left to the discretion of
the powers, only prescribing the maximum limit of tonnage of an individual
unit and the total tonnage allowed.
Under method (2), the total allowable tonnage should be fixed and each
nation might build, within that tonnage, the numbers of units of each type
considered advisable according to her peculiar conditions. But the
maximum tonnage of a unit of each type should be prescribed and also the
maximum caliber of guns to be allowed each type.
It should be recognized that possession of fortified bases, properly located
on lines of communication, constitutes a decided element of strength.
The question of equipment is one which should concern only the maximum
caliber of gun carried. The standard by which the tonnage of the individual
unit is measured should be prescribed; that is, what should be considered
standard tonnage of the ship. In this connection, in the Washington
Limitation of Armament Conference it was accepted that fuel and extra feed
water were not included in the tonnage weight of the ship.
The complement in personnel of each unit, the speed, cruising radius,
amount of ammunition carried and other essentially unit characteristics
should be left to the discretion of each power except as noted above in
regard to limitation on the maximum caliber of gun.
The question of protection in the shape of armor, both as to thickness and
arrangement, and underwater subdivision should be left to the individual
powers, only with the proviso that the maximum tonnage of each unit
should not be exceeded.
Expenditure on the military establishments does not afford any true measure
of armaments.

It is idle to attempt to formulate a plan for the limitation of armament which
attempts to change economic or natural laws, by taking into account
deficiencies of weaker nations, in men, money, or munitions, on the theory
of making the war potential of all nations adequate to meet all possible
cases of aggression. Such an artificial effort to equalize what is not and can
not be made equal is foredoomed to failure.
QUESTION IV
“Can there be said to be ‘offensive’ and ‘defensive’ armaments?
“Is there any method of ascertaining whether a certain force is
organized for purely defensive purposes (no matter what use may
be made of it in time of war), or whether, on the contrary, it is
established for the purposes of aggression?”
 
It would be very difficult if not practically impossible to say whether a
particular armament is per se offensive or defensive. From a technical point
of view, the terms “offensive” and “defensive” are employed as applying to
the use of [or?] disposition of armaments rather than to armaments
themselves. It is generally accepted by American military and naval
authorities that a vigorous offense is the best defense. An inferior force may
be used offensively and thereby obtain an initial advantage with a view to
accomplishing a more efficient defense. It is quite conceivable that a nation
considering her rights or her honor violated, although her armament may be
no greater than would be generally considered necessary for the defense of
her territory, would launch an offensive that would in reality be entirely in
defense of her sovereign rights.
Defensive peace armaments in the non-technical sense may be considered
as those which are created and maintained solely for the internal and
external security of the homeland and outlying possessions or dominions,
and for the protection of the national rights throughout the world. Such
armaments must not be confused with a police force, which is created and
maintained to deal with domestic crime and disorder, and has no relation to
national defense. As to the specific types of armament which may be

considered defensive rather than offensive, it may be stated that under
general conditions the following partake rather of a defensive than of an
offensive character: (1) Coastal fortifications; (2) land fortifications at a
reasonable distance from the frontier.
But it should be remembered that land fortifications may be offensive or
defensive, depending upon their location or probable use.
Although it may be called a peace armament by the nation possessing it, an
armament may partake of aggressive character if apparently created and
maintained by a State to secure or maintain political, military or economic
dominance or preponderance over territory not under its sovereignty,
jurisdiction, or protection, whether by invasion or threat of invasion.
QUESTION V
(a) On what principle will it be possible to draw up a scale of armaments
permissible to the various countries, taking into account particularly:
Population;
Resources;
Geographical situation;
Length and nature of maritime communications;
Density and character of the railways;
Vulnerability of the frontiers and of the important vital centers
near the frontiers;
The 
time 
required, 
varying 
with 
different 
States, 
to
transformpeace armaments into war armaments;
The degree of security which, in the event of aggression, a State
could receive under the provisions of the Covenant or of separate
engagements contracted towards that State?

(b) Can the reduction of armaments be promoted by examining possible
means for ensuring that the mutual assistance, economic and military,
contemplated in Article 16 of the Covenant, shall be brought quickly into
operation as soon as an act of aggression has been committed?
(a) This Government believes that no useful end can be attained by the
consideration of the subject of war potential which would be involved in the
attempted application of most of the points enumerated above. From the
standpoint of the limitation of land armament it appears that the only factor
which might form a basis for a formula for the limitation of land armament
is a limitation on the basis of population or area, providing such a limitation
is taken as a direct ratio preferably applied only to metropolitan* area or
population. However, it is possible to place an arbitrary limitation on the
size of the peace-time military establishment, including equipment and
trained reserves without reference to war potential. Factors in the
establishment of this arbitrary limitation might include the standardization
of the character and term of service, preferably through the abolition of
conscription for peace-time procurement.
In regard to naval armament, the factors listed in this question likewise
cannot usefully be considered in arriving at a scale of naval armaments
permissible to the various countries, whether one takes into account the
separate factors mentioned under this head or all of them combined. Any
attempt to apply any or all of these factors to a scale of naval armament
permissible to the various countries would lead to endless confusion and
serve no useful purpose.
Substantial progress has already been made toward the limitation of naval
armament by fixing a definite tonnage ratio on certain classes of vessels for
various countries. This ratio was not reached by the consideration of
unrelated and for the most part indeterminate factors such as those listed in
Question V. Any departure from the principle already established at the
Washington Conference would only tend to jeopardize the progress toward
further limitation of naval armament.
Among the factors which appear to give no promise of usefulness in
arriving at a limitation of either land or naval armament are:

1. The ultimate war strength or potential war armament of a
nation;
2. Monetary expenditure for the support of peace-time
armaments.
 
In so far as the United States is concerned the degree of security which a
state might receive under the provisions of the Covenant of the League or
separate supplementary agreements is a matter into which this country
would not enter as it is not a party to any such agreements.
From a practical standpoint it will be seen that most of the factors listed in
Question V are too indeterminate to give any promise of usefulness as a
basis for the establishment of any acceptable formula for the limitation of
land or naval armament. The same would be true of any attempted
combination of these factors.
(b)
“Can the reduction of armaments be promoted by examining
possible means for ensuring that the mutual assistance, economic
and military, contemplated in Article 16 of the Covenant, shall be
brought quickly into operation as soon as an act of aggression has
been committed?”
The United States is not a member of the League of Nations and hence this
question does not apply to this country.
QUESTION VI
“(a) Is there any device by which civil and military
aircraft 
can 
be 
distinguished 
for 
purposes 
of
disarmament? If this is not practicable, how can the
value of civil aircraft be computed in estimating the air
strength of any country?

“(b) Is it possible or desirable to apply the conclusions
arrived at in (a) above to parts of aircraft and aircraft
engines?
“(c) Is it possible to attach military value to commercial
fleets in estimating the naval armaments of a country?”
(a) Commercial aeronautics, with the attendant development of an
aeronautical industry and a personnel skilled in the manufacture, operation
and maintenance of aircraft, does furnish a basis for the determination of air
power. The development of commercial aeronautics and the development of
a nation’s military air power are to a certain extent inseparable and inter-
dependent.
All aircraft may be of military value no matter what restrictions may be
placed upon their character. Some can probably be converted with but few
changes into military aircraft; others can be designed so that with major or
minor alterations or even with none at all they can be employed for military
purposes.
The war value of an airplane may be said to lie in a combination of two or
more of the following characteristics:
(1) Suitability for offensive and defensive equipment;
(2) Radius of action;
(3) Speed;
(4) Lift tonnage;
(5) Height it can attain. (Ceiling)
 
While it may be possible to evolve formulae defining the inter-relationship
of the above factors in such a way as to limit to some extent the war value
of a commercially-built machine, it is practically impossible to insure that
war equipment may not be mounted in a commercial plane. Thus it will be

seen that definite rules can not be laid down strictly prescribing whether
machines are purely war machines or commercial machines that may be
quickly converted to war machines.
The most practicable and accurate method for computation of the value of
commercial aircraft in estimating the air strength of a country is lift-
tonnage. However, in attempting to arrive at a formula for the purpose of
limitation of armament, only aircraft designed and constructed for military
purposes should be included in any figure establishing a maximum for
military aircraft, because no limitation should be placed on the development
or construction of commercial aircraft.
“(b) Is it possible or desirable to apply the conclusions arrived at
in (a) above to parts of aircraft and aircraft engines?”
The same conclusions arrived at in (a) above should apply to parts of
aircraft and aircraft engines.
“(c)Is it possible to attach military value to commercial fleets in
estimating the naval armaments of a country?”
It is possible to attach military value to commercial fleets in estimating the
naval armament of a country. However, it does not seem advisable to permit
the military value of commercial fleets to enter into calculation for the
limitation of naval armaments because it is recognized that there should be
no limitation upon either the development of commerce or the construction
of commercial fleets.
QUESTION VII
“Admitting that disarmament depends on security, to what extent
is regional disarmament possible in return for regional security?
Or is any scheme of disarmament impracticable unless it is
general? If regional disarmament is practicable would it promote
or lead up to general disarmament?”
It appears that the crux of the question lies in the interpretation to be placed
upon the word security. If the term security means a reasonable degree of

protection against the danger of probable aggression, then it would appear
that substantial progress might be made toward the desired end. If, however,
the term security be interpreted to mean absolute protection against any or
all possible aggression from any country, then it appears that in this day and
generation there is no answer to the question and discussion of the same
might well be closed.
 
Assuming, however, that the first interpretation above given be accepted,
then it would appear that security may have a very determining effect upon
the extent to which any country will agree to limit its armament and further
that such limitation will probably be in direct ratio to the degree of security
which that country considers to be assured. Regional security should lead to
regional limitation of armament but complete regional security probably
will not result in the regional limitation of armament to the extent required
solely for the maintenance of internal law and order, as long as a possible
threat exists of aggression from one or more states outside of the region in
which mutual regional security has been provided for. It appears, however,
that the most practicable approach to the limitation or reduction of
armaments is through the development of regional security pacts where
such are necessary. Such pacts, to be absolutely effective, should include all
powers within a given region. It is further believed that regional
disarmament is a logical and practicable forerunner of general disarmament.
Mutual confidence in the good faith of countries of a given region may
render the conclusion of specific security pacts an unnecessary preliminary
to the limitation or reduction of armaments. A striking case in point is that
of the relations between the United States and Canada, which resulted from
the Convention of 181791 by which the naval forces permitted the
signatories on the Great Lakes, were specifically limited without any
provision for security. The convention for the limitation of armaments
concluded by the Central American republics on November 20, 1924,92 is a
further illustration of the possibility of the existence and successful
operation of a disarmament pact without prior specific agreements for
security.

90 Transmitted to the Chargé in Switzerland, Apr. 29, 1926, for the use of
the American representative on the Preparatory Commission.
* The term “metropolitan” is used to distinguish homeland or mother
country from the colonies of [or ?] overseas possessions. [Footnote in the
original.]
91 For text of the convention, see Hunter Miller (ed.), Treaties and Other
International Acts of the United States of America, vol. 2, p. 645.
92 Presumably the convention signed Feb. 7, 1923, at Washington; see
Conference on Central American Affairs, Washington, December 4, 1922–
February 7, 1923 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1923), p. 339.

500.A15/229: Telegram
[Document 74]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, April 24, 1926—noon.
[Received April 24—9:47 a.m.]
95. Buero as head of Uruguayan delegation to the Preparatory Disarmament
Commission having received directly from the Secretariat of the League a
copy of my letter of April 8th to Drummond93 told me at a private interview
in his opinion the attitude of the Department was entirely correct and that he
could be counted on to do all in his power to support our views with regard
to the organization of the work of the Conference when it meets.
WINSLOW
93 See telegram No. 54, Apr. 7, 1926, to the Chargé in Switzerland, p. 70
[Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 59].

500.A15/256: Telegram
[Document 75]
The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
GENEVA, May 15, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received May 16—10:30 a.m.]
3. (1) The British and the French delegates are endeavoring, in harmony
with our views, to arrange that the Conference committees be substituted
for League organizations.
(2) Mr. Boncour, of the French delegation wishes to be chairman of the
Conference and on Monday morning is coming to broach question to me.
As far as I am aware support for Boncour is general and he would
unquestionably make a good chairman. As yet there has been no rival
candidate proposed. Boncour’s election would have this advantage, that it
would encourage him to press for a successful achievement. It may prove
desirable to give him our vote, in view of fact that French delegation is
using its influence in support of our views regarding committees.
(3) My name has been proposed by French delegation as vice chairman of
Conference. It would be unwise, I think, for me to accept, as my usefulness
to the work of our delegation would be restricted, and there are as well
other obvious disadvantages. Unless you instruct me otherwise, it would be
advantageous to decline the vice chairmanship and to propose instead the
name of Uruguayan delegate who has a good deal of influence and who has
been consistently friendly to us at other conferences.
GIBSON

500.A15/257: Telegram
[Document 76]
The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, May 15, 1926—11 p.m.
[Received May 16—3:22 p.m.]
4. Propose to make following statement Tuesday or Wednesday when
general statements are to be made by various delegations. Will send flash
for release to press on delivery.
1. The Government of the United States has gladly accepted the
invitation to be represented on the Preparatory Commission. The
reasons for this acceptance were stated by the President in his
message to the Congress on January 4th in the following terms:
“The general policy of this Government in favor of
disarmament and limitation of armament cannot be
emphasized too frequently or too strongly. In
accordance with that policy any measure having a
reasonable tendency to bring about these results should
receive our sympathy and support. The conviction that
competitive armaments constitute a powerful factor in
the promotion of war more widely and justifiably held
than ever before and the necessity for lifting the burden
of taxation from the peoples of the world by limiting
armaments is becoming daily more imperative.”
2. It was this conviction which led to the calling of the
Washington Conference in 192194 and which prompt[s] the
American Government to give its cordial support to any efforts
which may lead to further limitation of armaments, wherever and
whenever it is felt that the circumstances are such as to hold out a
reasonable prospect of success.

3. In the hope that the American Government may contribute to
finding a solution for the problems of the reduction and limitation
of armaments the President has sent a full representation with
instructions to join in the work of the Preparatory Commission.
He has impressed upon his representatives his deep interest in any
sincere effort to deal with the problems of armament and his
confident belief that with mutual good will substantial progress
can be made. It will be a matter of gratification to him if the
American representation can in some measure contribute to this
progress.
4. The questions which will come before the Preliminary
Commission require patient study in order to establish the
principles which offer the most effective method of approach to
the reduction and limitation of armaments. It is hoped, therefore,
that there may be a general disposition to devote to the problems
before us the earnest and continuous attention of the Preparatory
Commission and its committees constituted for the study of
special subjects.
5. This is not the time to indicate in detail the views of the
American Government on the specific questions which may come
before the Preparatory Commission. It may, however, be of
interest to state in a general way the attitude of the American
Government on certain outstanding questions.
6. The conditions prevailing in different regions of the world are
so varied, and so many divergent factors are involved, that
constructive achievement in the matter of the limitation of land
armament appears to lie in the conclusion of regional agreements
rather than in an effort to work out a general plan for limitation
applicable to the whole world. As regards land armament the
United States occupies a fortunate situation. We have, since 1918,
been able to reduce our land forces from more than four million
men under arms at the end of the World War to a present actual
strength of 118,000—or one soldier per thousand inhabitants. It
will thus be seen that so far as land armament is concerned we

have voluntarily reduced to a minimum. It is fortunate that our
situation has permitted this reduction but we are not disposed to
overlook the fact that other countries are differently placed and
that their problems are not susceptible of such simple solution.
7. With respect to naval armament it may be noted that, while a
substantial part of the program presented to the Washington
Conference by the American Government was realized, no
agreement was reached as to the limitation of competitive
building of naval craft other than capital ships and aircraft
carriers. The American Government would welcome any steps
which might tend to the further limitation of competitive naval
construction.
8. The scope of the work of the Preparatory Commission includes
a consideration of all types of armament and of many related
problems. For the ultimate success of our effort toward the
limitation of armaments, it seems important not only to consider
general abstract principles, but also to endeavor so far as possible
to isolate from the general problem as many concrete questions as
possible and then deal with these definite questions in a direct and
practical way.
9. One of the most practicable approaches to the subject lies in an
effort to put an end to international competition in armaments.
Agreements of this character should constitute helpful guarantees
of that national security which in turn would facilitate future
efforts for the further reduction of armaments.
10. The task before us is beset with obstacles and difficulties. One
attempt after another has been made to overcome them in the past
—and in spite of intelligence and industry and good will the end
sought has not yet been attained. It is imperative as never before
to destroy the spectres of suspicion and of distrust which rise
from competition in armaments and thus lay a foundation for
lasting peace. No one of us can accomplish this alone but together
we can go far along the road if we approach our task with a single
purpose—with a readiness to understand each other’s problems

and patience to seek solutions. We have no right to disappoint our
peoples. They have suffered too much and their lives are clouded
with fear of future wars. If we refuse to be turned aside from our
purpose we can surely do something to relieve their anxieties.
There could be no greater incentive for us to meet in a spirit that
is worthy of our task.
GIBSON
94 See Foreign Relations, 1921, vol. I, pp. 18 ff.

500.A15/264: Telegram
[Document 77]
The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, May 18, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]
8. Opening session this morning. Boncour withdrew his candidacy at last
moment and nominated Loudon, Dutch delegate, which is a happy solution.
I nominated Uruguayan delegate, Buero, as vice president, and Cobian,
Spanish delegate, was made another vice president. All three elected
unanimously.
Permanent Advisory Commission eliminated and a military, naval and air
committee made up of representatives of each delegation adopted in its
place. This was achieved through good offices of Cecil who took the
initiative and relieved me of any necessity of intervention. Problem of Joint
Commission to be taken up at this afternoon’s session.
GIBSON

500.A15/271: Telegram
[Document 78]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 21, 1926—7 p.m.
43. The representative in Geneva of the Associated Press reports that the
Japanese delegation has a complete program for the limitation of both land
and naval armaments; that it prefers treating these questions separately; and
that it would be willing to participate in a naval conference at Washington,
even if only Great Britain, the United States, and Japan were to attend.
In regard to this report, our delegate, Minister Gibson, commented to
Department yesterday as follows:
“I made inquiries of the chief Japanese delegate, Matsuda,
concerning this report. He agreed with the statement that the
Japanese Government was disposed to discuss either in
Washington or elsewhere the question of naval reduction and he
empowered me to report this confidentially as emanating from
him. He said that he felt it was impracticable to attempt to find a
formula for naval reduction which should be applicable to the
entire world and that if anything could be accomplished, it could
only be between the powers most vitally interested. He said that
he believed that we all should take part fully and sincerely in the
discussions of naval affairs by the Preparatory Commission but
that some ground might be found in the meantime for direct
agreement between the naval powers most interested. He likewise
said that while his Government was ready to come to Washington,
if a naval conference were necessary, nevertheless, he thought an
agreement might be reached at Geneva without a prolonged
international conference. Moreover, the favorable effect on
popular opinion might be considerably increased if such an

arrangement could be concluded quietly and without arousing
previous expectations through the complicated methodology of an
international conference.
Lord Cecil in his opening speech on Tuesday alluded to the fact
that the Washington Conference had not provided for the
limitation of submarine and cruiser strength and stated that he felt
that supplementary agreements might be concluded with regard to
these types. I deemed it wise to speak to Cecil informally of this
matter rather than to allow him to hear of it through the press. He
said that he would consider unfortunate any undue publicity to the
notion of a separate naval conference at Washington just at the
time the Preparatory Commission was getting under way, as such
action might be interpreted as an attempt to undercut the work of
the Commission, but he added that he was under no illusions as to
the possibility of reaching universal naval reduction and that he
felt the sole hope lay in direct agreement either at Washington or
at Geneva between the interested naval powers. He furthermore
said that while it might be in the general interest to minimize
public talk of a separate conference for the present, this should be
without prejudice to our right to consider holding such a
conference or concluding an agreement at Geneva when the
Commission had had its chance to show what it could accomplish
and if it should fail to make a beginning for a general naval
agreement.”
If the Embassy has any information which might throw light on the
Japanese attitude set forth above, the Department would like to obtain it.
KELLOGG

500.A15/271: Telegram
[Document 79]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan
(MacVeagh)95
WASHINGTON, May 22, 1926—11 a.m.
44. In view of misinterpretations carried in press this morning of statements
made by “White House Spokesman” yesterday afternoon there is sent for
use at your discretion but not for verbatim publicity minutes taken of that
statement.
“The Spokesman said that he had noted reports in the press of
suggestions made in Japanese quarters in Geneva that there be
held in Washington another naval limitation conference,
participated in by Japan, Great Britain and the United States.
These suggestions, the President presumes, were made entirely on
the authority of the Japanese people who made them and the
suggestions were made without consulting this Government.
There is very little that he could say about that suggestion at the
present time. At some other time or under some other
circumstances the President might view a suggestion of this kind
with considerable sympathy, but at the present time this
Government has committed itself to the conference that is now in
session. If now we should begin to talk about some other
conference to consider questions that are already being
considered by this conference, the President is inclined to think it
would very seriously impair the prospects of any successful and
practical conclusion being reached by this conference. The
President, it was explained, did not say this in criticism of what
the Japanese have said, but if we were to join in and participate
and endorse another conference he should think the other
Governments assembled would say “what is the use of going on
with this conference?” The attitude of this Government is to do

everything it possibly can do to make the present conference a
success. The interested governments are all assembled there. It
has taken a considerable time to secure that result. Everything that
can possibly be done to work out a practicable solution of some
limitation of naval armament and land armament should be done
at this present conference. The President has such strong hope and
so much confidence that there can be practical solutions that he
thinks it would not be helpful for him to make any comment or to
make any suggestion or join in any suggestion that we have in
contemplation the calling of a conference in Washington.”
KELLOGG
95 Sent also to the American delegation at Geneva as Department’s No. 5.

500.A15/280: Telegram
[Document 80]
The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
TOKYO, May 25, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received May 25—3:33 p.m.]
51. I duly conveyed the substance of your telegram No. 44, May 22, 11
a.m., to the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs. He was gratified to
receive this authoritative statement and he stated that he agreed entirely
with the statements therein contained.
With regard to the Associated Press report contained in your telegram No.
43, May 21, 7 p.m., to me, the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs stated
that he had communicated with Matsuda and that Matsuda had given him
every assurance that the Associated Press report in question was absolutely
without foundation and that he (the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs)
had already issued a communiqué to the Japanese press to this effect—the
substance of this communiqué I am despatching to the Department in a
separate telegram.96 …
The Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs said further that he had been
advised that Matsuda had not put forward any such program and that
certainly nothing of this sort had been authorized; he added that whereas the
Government of Japan desired to see the Conference of Geneva meet with
success, it had no prejudice or definite plan; that, while the Japanese were
willing to go along with the other interested powers with a plan calling for
naval and military disarmament, either separately or jointly, nevertheless,
should the Geneva Conference fail to agree upon a definite plan, the
Japanese were willing to participate with other interested powers in a
separate conference to deal with this particular matter. However, he said
that his personal opinion was that such a conference on disarmament would
be both useless and inadvisable if both the Governments of Italy and France

were not invited to attend and that attempts between the United States,
Great Britain, and Japan to reach an agreement, without consulting Italy and
France, would lead to difficulties of a serious nature. Furthermore, he said
that he personally did not see very much hope for a successful issue of the
Geneva Conference. As regards naval disarmament, he felt that France
would insist upon having the same proportion of inferior vessels as Great
Britain had and that Italy in turn would demand the same as France. He
added that it was impossible to conceive of Great Britain agreeing that
France should have a proportion of lesser vessels equal to her own
proportion.
The views of the Minister for Foreign Affairs coincide with those which Mr.
Gibson reported were expressed to him by Matsuda. The Foreign Minister
remarked that informally an attempt might well be made—in case of the
failure of the Geneva Conference—by the interested powers to come to an
agreement on further naval disarmament without convoking another
conference, but that in view of the considerations already stated he
entertained little hope for the successful issue of such an attempt.
As regards the attitude generally of the Government of Japan with regard to
the questions before the Conference at the present time, he said that it was
exactly as he had told me in a previous interview, i. e., that while the
Japanese were very anxious to do everything in their power to ensure the
success of the Geneva Conference, nevertheless, they were not definitely
committed upon any points, and that the Japanese Government would
render a decision upon each point as it arose.
MACVEAGH
96 Infra.

500.A15/279: Telegram
[Document 81]
The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
TOKYO, May 25, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received 12:05 p.m.]
52. The following is a statement issued by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
in regard to Associated Press report sent from Geneva:
“Japan is determined to cooperate with the powers to the best of
her ability for the realization of the disarmament question.
Consequently she earnestly hopes for the success of the work of
the Preliminary Disarmament Conference at Geneva and
entertains no proposal with respect to any similar undertaking
other than the present Conference.
In these circumstances we need scarcely say that the rumor
emanating from Geneva at this time, to the effect that Japan has
some new proposal, does not in any way reflect the true intention
of the Japanese Government.”
MACVEAGH

500.A15/318: Telegram
[Document 82]
The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
GENEVA, June 11, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received June 12 (?)—12:38 a.m.]
40. I have conversed twice with Chamberlain, at his request, on the work of
the Preparatory Commission. He expressed the view that course pursued by
our delegation had been sound and practical. Although he was not wholly
familiar with details of the proceedings, Chamberlain feels that there has
been regrettable departure from practical considerations by the Preparatory
Commission as a whole and that outlook for progress is dismal. He said that
the British delegation had lost patience and had requested him to instruct
them to take a strong stand for constructive work. He had felt that he was
unable to give instructions without first consulting the Cabinet and possibly
Council for Imperial Defense. It was also his feeling that he could not take
action without conferring with Lord Cecil, who has the entire charge of
matters which bear on the Preparatory Commission.
It was my impression that Chamberlain was reluctant to press this issue at
present in view of other differences of views with the French, who have
asserted vigorously their position that any disarmament must hinge upon
security resulting from previous knowledge about help to be expected
against an aggressor state under article XVI of the League Covenant.97 A
series of proposals calculated to expedite action under article XVI had been
introduced in the drafting committee by the French delegation. On the
ground that these proposals were not within the competence of the
Preparatory Commission, they were referred to the League Council.
In recent meeting of the Council Chamberlain insisted that consideration of
those proposals go over until Council’s September session. He told me,

however, that he had not been able to state his real reasons which were that
the opposition in Germany to entering the League was based principally on
article XVI; that any action tending to give new interpretation to that article
at present time might arouse renewed opposition in Germany and he felt it
imperative, therefore, to put off any discussion on amending the Covenant
until Germany was in the League.
Chamberlain said he had told Briand that he thought the French proposals
futile, that no government [garbled group], that the degree of help to be
given under article XVI would be determined for each state by
circumstances of each case, by the identity of aggressor and of the state
attacked, and by the interest of the contributing state; that, deplorable
though it might be, nothing would change the fact that no government
would write a blank check for the League to use in dealing with any
hypothetical case of aggression which might arise. He had tried to persuade
the French that they were pursuing a course from which they could not
obtain any benefits and that it would be much better to get down to realities
and deal with visible armaments, and to leave such questions as security,
national resources, etc., to be handled later as influencing factors in any
general scheme of disarmament. He did not seem to be of the opinion that
his arguments had made any impression.
I spoke of our attitude toward premature adjournment of the military
subcommittee. Chamberlain agreed that our position was sound but
appeared to be uncertain what British attitude would be. Later I was told by
one of the British delegation that Chamberlain had expressed himself as
impressed by bad effects of adjournment as I had stated them, and that it
was hoped that on his return to London he would arrange to have the British
delegation take firm stand against any general adjournment.
Edouard Beneš in talking with Dulles expressed the view that no progress
was to be expected in matter of disarmament until Germany had entered
League of Nations and until the Locarno pacts had been tried out and found
to be effective. He seemed to feel that when that had been done some
measure of disarmament might be achieved.
GIBSON

27 See Senate Document No. 46, 66th Cong., 1st sess., p. 21.

500.A15/367: Telegram
[Document 83]
The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
GENEVA, September 16, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received 8:40 p.m.]
102. For several weeks our delegation has felt concern at development of
French thesis in subcommittees and has given serious thought to keeping
the record clear on our position. The following is submitted for the
Department’s consideration: Thus far the Preparatory Commission and its
committees have not produced much more than an outline of a French plan
put through by bloc vote in disregard of technical considerations which
should be basis of work. Plan is calculated to defeat any constructive efforts
to solve disarmament problem by making action depend on complicated
and impossible conditions such as injection of control and suppression,
adoption of single and inadequate criteria, rejection of standards hitherto
accepted, and ignoring or minimizing important elements; such as, for
example, trained reserves. If the work continues to be carried on as it has
been thus far, it seems evident that the final report will be an essentially
unsound document, bristling with reservations and with minority
declarations, which cannot serve as useful basis for constructive work and
will bring work of Preparatory Commission into disrepute.
I am venturing suggestion that the Department may wish to consider
whether it would not be expedient to take advantage of opportunity
presented by forthcoming meeting of Preparatory Commission to put our
position clearly on record. Notwithstanding fact that we have endeavored to
keep work on practical basis and have made clear record of our views, the
mere fact that we have taken part in the discussions may leave us in
position of being criticized for having failed to prevent adoption of report
calculated to defeat any possibility of disarmament. It must be kept in mind

that subcommittees’ meetings are not public and that only way we have to
register our views publicly is in plenary meetings of Preparatory
Commission.
The sort of statement I have in mind would be one temperate and timely
which would express satisfaction that Preparatory Commission had met to
take account of work so far accomplished and to consider any
improvements that might be made on basis of experience gained; that we
have carefully followed the work of the subcommittees and feel that they
have not kept in view the instructions which Preparatory Commission laid
down for their guidance, as well as of essential character of our work; that
in view of very complicated character of general disarmament problem a
meeting preliminary in nature had been called to apply the laboratory
method to discussion of general principles so that sound peace basis might
be established on which action might be based by future conference or
conferences; that one of special advantages of proceeding in this manner
was that necessity of upholding special national interests was obviated; that
the basic reason for the calling of such a conference as this was to make
possible an unbiased and objective examination of each country’s
undoubted right to present and defend its own special interests at any
conference held in the future; that we had come to Geneva in belief that
there was to be such an objective discussion as outlined; that it was in that
spirit that we had taken part in the sessions, but that it must be obvious to
whoever reads the proceedings of the committees that they have arrived at
their decisions upon political rather than upon technical grounds; that
decisions were not only reached on these grounds but that they were often
taken by a minority in a private conference with a majority of the
Preparatory Commission abstaining, and that this abstention was not
because of a lack of technical reasons.
We could point out that this Preparatory Commission was manifestly
expected to confine its activities to an objective study of the disarmament
problem, as it would be unfair to countries not represented on it for us to
make this the occasion to build up a scheme of disarmament based on
national interests of only 19 countries, disregarding the interests of other
countries whose attendance at future conferences will be essential; that our
only hope to accomplish anything lies in producing plan that they will

recognize to be practicable and fair; that otherwise, we may close door to
future participation by those countries.
It could be made clear that we do not seek to place blame on anyone but
that we are merely concerned with fact that procedure of sort described
cannot conceivably lead to formulation of a report which could be received
seriously as embodying the considered technical opinion of experts; that we
should have laid a sound foundation for the next step toward disarmament
only if we had a report representing conclusions based on technical grounds
alone. But on the other hand, if the report which our political
representatives were asked to accept as basis of their action were not true
reflection of opinion of our technical experts, our political representatives
would be standing on unsafe ground when they came to take next step.
Statement might end with recommendation that in starting the second
reading the committees be directed to furnish carefully thought-out
technical opinions unbiased by political considerations or instructions. A
suggestion of that sort, whether it were acted upon or not, would put us
clearly on record as doing our utmost to achieve practical results. I hope the
Department will consider whether we can afford to miss opportunity to do
this.
I think that the statement should avoid the least imputation of blame to any
delegation or group of delegations, so that support of our views may be
rendered easier for the French, if they are sincere in their protestations.
I shall follow up conversations I have recently had with Boncour as soon as
he is able to spare the time from the present League situation, and it is
possible that we may arrive at a satisfactory agreement. It would be helpful,
however, if I had an intimation whether the Department would authorize
such a statement as I have outlined, should it be desirable to make one.
GIBSON

500.A15/367: Telegram
[Document 84]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegate on the
Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, September 18, 1926—2 p.m.
56. Your 102, September 16, 4 p.m. I agree that you should take the present
opportunity to place our views on record regarding way in which limitations
may be brought about as a practical matter and at same time to restate
positions taken by our representatives in subcommittees. It is my opinion
that you should emphasize efforts we have made in military subcommittee
to keep discussions to practical questions instead of to theories of all-
inclusive formulae. I should avoid appearance of questioning motives of
any group of delegations in military subcommittee.
Following outline is merely suggestion. You are on ground; you have
received general instructions; you are fully acquainted with positions we
have taken and I expect you to be free to amend or add to this statement as
you and your advisers deem suitable. I am merely suggesting some of
things to be said. You will also keep in mind that you are not addressing
only a body of men who are familiar with entire question, but that you are
making a statement which should place position of our delegation clearly
before the American people.
Should you think that other illustrations of our helpfulness in guiding
Preparatory Commission towards practical results should be mentioned,
please add them. The following has been put in the form of a quoted
statement solely for sake of convenience, not with any desire to limit you to
its wording:98
“The American Delegation welcomes the opportunity given the
Preparatory Commission by this plenary session to take stock of

the progress thus far made. The Preparatory Commission is aware
of the interest with which its work is being followed in the United
States, whose Government is most hopeful that from the
deliberations in Geneva will come concrete bases for
accomplishment in reducing and limiting armaments. The
sincerity and optimism of the American Government in this
connection were emphasized by the Secretary of State in his
speech at Plattsburg on August 18.99
In view of the American Government’s earnest hope for specific
achievement, and its desire to do all in its power to make this
possible, I wish to place before the Preparatory Commission
certain observations upon the work accomplished since we
convened in May, and certain suggestions which, in the
considered opinion of the American Delegation, may, if accepted,
contribute to the greater success of our undertaking.
You will recall that during the first plenary sessions I outlined the
general viewpoint of the American Government in regard to the
problems before the Preparatory Commission. The discussions of
the Preparatory Commission and of its sub-committees since that
time have served to confirm my Government in the views I then
expressed on its behalf, viz.: 1) That land armament is most
susceptible of limitation by regional agreements, 2) that, since the
Washington Naval Treaty did not cover all classes of vessels
further steps might well be taken to limit the competitive building
of types of vessels not so covered, 3) that success in the limitation
of armaments is to be achieved by the isolation of as many
concrete problems as possible, and the treatment of these in a
direct and practical way without awaiting the determination of a
set of abstract principles applicable to all armament problems.
The American Delegation has constantly kept in mind the
practical objective for which we are all working, viz.: actual
agreements for the limitation of armaments. It has endeavored to
face realities and to find formulas which gave promise of results
in the near future. It has deplored any tendency to discuss

exclusively an ideal scheme for universal disarmament which
existing conditions throughout the world would appear to make
most remote in any practical sense.
Thus the American Delegation has taken the position that
limitation, to be practicable, should be directed towards
armaments which are in existence and are, therefore, tangible and
limitable. The American Delegation has consistently discouraged
any effort to calculate the potential economic, financial and
industrial resources of one country as against those of another,
since it has felt that such elements are not susceptible of
limitation and fall outside any practical definition of armaments.
In regard to the limitation of naval armaments, the American
Delegation has attempted to point out that the standard of tonnage
by classes—a practical method of comparison and limitation of
naval forces which has clearly demonstrated, since its acceptance
in the Washington Treaty, its utility and convenience as a common
unit—should be considered in any effort actually to bring about
the limitation of navies.
Furthermore the American Delegation has opposed proposals to
establish supervision and control of national armaments by an
international agency, since it has felt that any limitation
agreements must rest primarily upon international good faith and
respect for treaties and moreover since it has been shown by the
successful operation of the Washington Naval Treaty that such
supervision is not necessary.
The American Delegation, therefore, believes it fitting to ask
here: just how far along the road to practical results have we
progressed and, more particularly, does the work of our Military
Sub-Committee, as far as it has gone, promise to be of great
assistance to us in arriving at a solution of our problems?
I believe that many of us will agree that the debates of our
Military Sub-Committee have, in some instances, confused rather
than clarified the issues before us, and that the answers to the
questions thus far made will be of very little assistance to us when

we come to study them. This has come about, I believe, because
this Preparatory Commission perhaps did not give sufficiently
clear directions to its Sub-committees, and did not emphasize that
it wished merely technical military opinions from Sub-Committee
A, and that the political implications of any question should be
taken up only by the plenary Preparatory Commission. The result
has been that the Military Sub-Committee appears to have
approached questions from both the political and the military
points of view. It is this confusion of functions which has
detracted from the value of the Military Sub-Committee’s work.
The American Delegation believes that this condition can be
remedied by specific directions addressed to the sub-committee
by this Commission. To be precise, we should say that we desire
to receive technical expert answers from that subcommittee, that
if the views of the Military Sub-Committee’s members are
divergent, we wish to receive such divergent expert views, the
minority as well as the majority, that the question of the
acceptability of this or that expert view, its usefulness and
applicability in connection with agreements for the limitation of
armaments will be determined by this Commission and by an
international conference, that our military experts can lay all these
considerations to one side. If we give such a direction, I believe
we shall derive important assistance from the eminently qualified
group of experts on our Military Sub-Committee, whose
maximum usefulness is lost to us now because of their tendency
to confuse political with technical considerations.”
KELLOGG
98 Quoted passage not paraphrased.
99 Address delivered at the dedication of the Thomas Macdonough
Memorial, Plattsburg, N. Y., Aug. 18, 1926.

500.A15/369: Telegram
[Document 85]
The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, September 20, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received 2:05 a.m. (p.m.?)]
105. My 103, September 17, 10 a.m.1 Preparatory Commission summoned
to meet September 22, 10 a.m.
GIBSON
1 Not printed.

500.A15/374: Telegram
[Document 86]
The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
GENEVA, September 21, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received 6:30 p.m.]
108. Department’s 56, September 18, 2 p.m. I am telegraphing separately
the text of a statement I propose to make tomorrow morning at opening of
the Preparatory Commission.2 I feel that I owe you an explanation for the
liberal way in which I have interpreted your instructions. There is an
atmosphere of tenseness here with the French striving to regain position of
leadership … Boncour has launched scheme for early convening of a world
disarmament conference and has vigorously played it up as a step taken
against opposition of other nations, filling the press with statements that a
section of the work of the Preparatory Commission has been deliberately
obstructed by other countries with a view to delaying any final conference.
Question before Commission is purely one of procedure. I fear lest any
general statement of our attitude might be seized upon as pretext for leading
discussion away from question of procedure. To avoid affording any pretext
of this sort I have in my statement studiously avoided placing blame on
anyone for the unsatisfactory condition of our work. We feel that
opportunity is thus presented by which the French will be enabled to fall in
with our views without loss of prestige and that a controversy will thereby
be avoided.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I believe that our general attitude can be stated more effectively apart from
the question of procedure and without running the risk of controversy. I

have embodied your views in a separate statement, and later in the
discussion I hope to be able to find appropriate occasion for its delivery.3
GIBSON
2 Infra.
3 See Mr. Gibson’s statement made Sept. 27, at the second meeting of the
Second Session, Documents of the Preparatory Commission, Series III, pp.
23–25.

500.A15/376: Telegram
[Document 87]
The American Delegate on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)
to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, September 21, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received September 22—12:20 a.m.]
109. My 108, September 21, 2 p.m. The American delegation welcomes the
opportunity that is afforded by this plenary meeting of the Preparatory
Commission to review the work thus far accomplished and to consider what
can be done to contribute to an early and successful conclusion of our task.
Our immediate task is to consider how far we have progressed and what, in
the light of experience, should be our future course. I venture to submit
certain suggestions which in the considered opinion of the American
delegation will if accepted contribute to the successful conclusion of our
labors and to the achievement of definite results.
 
Recognizing the complexity of the problems involved, the Preparatory
Commission was set up to apply what might be called the laboratory
method to a study of general principles upon which further steps could be
taken toward disarmament. We are seeking merely to lay the foundation for
actual agreements for the limitation and reduction of armaments. I think we
are all agreed that one of the essential merits of this form of conference is
that it is calculated to permit an unbiased objective examination of all
phases of the disarmament problem uninfluenced by the necessity for
safeguarding or reconciling special national interests. The American
delegation has always assumed that our essential task was to draw up a
clear statement of the problem and the methods of approaching it, leaving to
a final conference or conferences to take into account the requirements of
special national interests. This was clearly indicated in the resolution of the
Assembly of the League of Nations adopted on September 25 last year in
which it was stated that the Assembly requested the council:

“To make a preparatory study with a view to a conference for the
reduction and limitation of armaments in order that as soon as
satisfactory conditions have been assured from the point of view
general security …4 the said conference may be convened and a
general reduction and limitation of armaments may be realized.”
Thus it would seem that from the very beginning an effort was made to
confine the work of the Preparatory Commission to exploring the problem
of disarmament and to leave questions of national interests to be dealt with
at a later conference when countries not here represented will have an equal
opportunity to present their views.
In our last session we referred a number of questions to our technical
committee and it was laid down in the most definite manner that they were
to report to us upon the purely technical aspects of those questions. The
direction to the subcommittees was in the following language:
“The Commission refers to its technical subcommittees the points
stated below in order that it may be informed on the technical
aspects of the question submitted to it by the Council. The
Commission is alone competent to deal with the political aspects
of these questions in the same way that it has sole responsibility
for the final answers to be given to these questions.”
I think it was generally believed at the time that this was sufficiently clear
but our Military Commission appears consistently to have approached
questions from both the political and military points of view and the
American delegation cannot but feel that this has led to confusion and has
detracted from the value of the subcommittee’s work. This meeting affords
a convenient opportunity for us to remedy the situation and I venture to
submit for the consideration of the Commission two points calling for our
attention.
1. Subcommittee A has considered the effects of political and
economic factors on the questions referred to it for technical,
military, naval or air advice although both economic and political
are reserved for other bodies.

2. In the proceedings of Subcommittee A there has been an effort
to limit the views embodied in its reports to majority opinions and
in many instances the views of a minority with the majority
abstaining. There has been a consequent failure to record in the
reports thus far drafted or to prepare for presentation to this
Commission the divergent views which have developed. There
can be no effective approach to disarmament until all possible
methods have been explored. If this Commission is to act in the
light of adequate information the advantages and disadvantages of
each method should be clearly stated and where no single method
is unanimously accepted the divergent views should be submitted
in a report to the Preparatory Commission. This would obviate the
present tendency to state merely those views which command the
greatest number of votes and leave this Commission without
knowledge of other views unless those holding them make
minority reports.
The American delegation believes that this situation can be remedied and
further 
progress 
facilitated 
by 
specific 
directions 
addressed 
to
Subcommittee A to the effect that this Commission desires to receive replies
to the questions assigned to that Commission based on expert technical
information without regard to political or economic considerations; that if
the views of the two delegations are divergent we wish to receive all such
views with adequate explanations. Unless some such directions are given I
feel apprehensive as to the value of the report which Subcommittee A will
eventually draw up as it will not be a purely technical report. And only if
we have at our disposal a sound technical report on the various questions
which have been referred to Subcommittee A shall we have a safe
foundation for taking the next step of considering the various factors of the
problem.
In consequence the American delegation proposes that the Preparatory
Commission direct Subcommittee A to revise the work thus far done on
each question and to present in their replies to all questions the divergent
technical views, which should be uninfluenced by political, economic or
financial considerations, and should be accompanied by a clear statement of
the advantages and disadvantages of each view which is set forth.5

We are all of us anxious to achieve positive results. The American
delegation has consistently kept in mind the practical object for which we
are all working, namely, actual agreements for the limitation of armaments.
We are all of us in agreement that it is desirable to reach such actual
agreements.
The American delegation believes that the acceptance of its proposals will
not only tend greatly to expedite the satisfactory conclusion of our labors
but will also give us an adequate foundation for the next phase of our work
and finally that it will render possible the calling of a further conference or
conferences on the limitation and reduction of armaments at a much earlier
date than would otherwise be possible but I believe we all realize that we
cannot hope to reach such agreements until we have satisfactorily disposed
of the task which has been entrusted to us.
GIBSON
4 Omission in the original telegram.
5 In the statement Mr. Gibson made on Sept. 22, this paragraph was
replaced by the following: “In consequence, the American delegation
submits the following proposal: “‘With regard to the questions or parts of
questions which have not so far been answered by Subcommission A, the
Preparatory Commission directs that the former [Sub]commission shall
answer those questions on purely technical grounds, uninfluenced by
political or economic considerations, and that all divergent views on each
question, accompanied by a clear statement of the relative advantages and
disadvantages of each, shall be furnished to the Preparatory Commission in
its report.
“‘With regard to the questions already dealt with by Subcommission A at
first reading, the Preparatory Commission directs that the former
[Sub]commission at second reading shall revise the answers to those
questions in such a manner that these answers shall be prepared on purely
technical grounds, uninfluenced by political or economic considerations,
and that all divergent views on each question, accompanied by a clear
statement of the relative advantages and disadvantages of each, shall be

furnished the Preparatory Commission in its report’”. (File No.
500.A15/375.)
500.A15/386: Telegram
[Document 88]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 2, 1926—1 p.m.
23. You are probably aware of the fact that Uruguay, not having been
reelected to a seat in the Council of the League, has notified the President of
the Preparatory Commission that Uruguay has withdrawn from
participation in the work of the Commission.
The Uruguayan Minister in Switzerland, Señor Buero, has been the
Uruguayan representative on the Preparatory Commission and has served as
one of its vice presidents, having been nominated for that position by
Gibson. Señor Buero has contributed to the Commission’s work and has
shown a friendly and appreciative attitude toward the United States.
If you see no objection, I wish that you would orally and informally express
to Uruguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs this Government’s regret that
Preparatory Commission will no longer have benefit of cooperation of
Uruguay’s delegation. You may add that this Government’s representation
on Preparatory Commission deems loss of Buero as chairman of military
subcommittee a most severe one, as, by his ability and personality he has
shown himself to be a powerful influence for good in work of committee
already accomplished.
I do not wish to make any suggestion which would embarrass the
Government of Uruguay, if any strong feeling locally has been aroused by
recent happenings at Geneva, but I should like to have you, at your
discretion, express as purely personal the hope that cooperation of

Government of Uruguay in work toward limitation of armament may again
be counted on in future.
You are no doubt informed that membership in the Council or in the League
of Nations itself is not necessary for participation in work of the
Preparatory Commission. Germany was represented on the Commission
before she had become a member of the League, and Spain is continuing
her representation on the Commission since her resignation from the
League. Our participation, of course, does not in any way involve political
relations with the League of Nations.
KELLOGG

500.A15/391: Telegram
[Document 89]
The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
MONTEVIDEO, October 7, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received 8:30 p.m.]
53. Your telegram number 23, October 2, 1 p.m. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs informed me today that Uruguay will be represented at the next
meeting of the Preliminary [sic] Disarmament Commission, possibly by
Guani.6
GRANT-SMITH
6 Alberto Guani. On Oct. 9 Mr. Grant-Smith reported Uruguay’s
Withdrawal from the Preparatory Commission.

500.A15/421: Telegram
[Document 90]
The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State
GENEVA, December 9, 1926—noon.
[Received December 9—10 a.m.]
Council on December 7th adopted resolution contained in report by Beneš
on Preparatory Commission for Disarmament Conference whereby
Preparatory Commission is requested to submit proposals with regard to the
moment on which it would be possible to convene Disarmament
Conference, due allowance being made for probable progress of its work,
and to draw up the agenda of the Conference.7
TUCK
7 The resolution was adopted on Dec. 8. See Documents of the Preparatory
Commission, Series III, pp. 30–32.

Discontinuance 
of 
the 
office 
of
American 
Unofficial 
Observer,
Reparation Commission
[91] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, April 10, 1926—2 p.m.
462.00 R 29/4046a: Telegram
[92] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
Paris, April 22, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 7:25 p.m.]
462.00 R 29/4047: Telegram
[93] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
Paris, April 23, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 5:15 p.m.]
462.00 R 29/4048: Telegram
[94] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, June 7, 1926—7 p.m.
462.00 R 29/4048: Telegram
[95] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, December 18, 1926—7 p.m.

462.00 R 29/4124a: Telegram
[96] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
Paris, February 1, 1927—2 p.m. [Received February 1—9:13 a.m.]
462.00 R 29/4138: Telegram

462.00 R 29/4046a: Telegram
[Document 91]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 10, 1926—2 p.m.
90. H–41 for Hill.8 The Department intends to discontinue the maintenance
of an independent office for the American Unofficial Observer, Reparation
Commission, on May 31, 1926. This action is for reasons of economy as
well as because of the progress made in disposing of questions touching
American interest in the reparation problem, and also in view of the
reorganization of the Reparation Commission. The Department intends to
designate a member of the Embassy staff to attend the meetings of the
Commission after May 31, 1926, and in general to take over duties which
the Unofficial Observer has performed.
The change described above would involve return of Mr. Hill to the
Department as soon as practicable after May 31. Mr. Edwin C. Wilson, First
Secretary of Embassy, has been assigned to the Embassy in France. Mr.
Wilson has been familiarizing himself in the Department with pending
reparation questions. Department intends to charge Mr. Wilson with special
duty, under direction of the Ambassador, of attending to matters regarding
reparation. He expects to reach Paris about first of May, thus having about a
month in which to familiarize himself, on the ground, with condition of
matters now pending, in consultation with Mr. Hill. If arrangement be
carried out, the Department would expect Mr. Wilson to give preferential
attention to reparation matters.
The Department wishes Mr. Hill to make every effort to have pending
questions disposed of before May 31, as far as possible. The Department
will endeavor to aid in this action by forwarding promptly any additional
instructions Mr. Hill may require.

 
The Secretary will welcome any suggestion and comment that either the
Ambassador or Mr. Hill may care to submit in regard to the matter. Also
please telegraph recommendations as to physical arrangements and
personnel, and whether it would be feasible to incorporate in Embassy
offices a section with necessary personnel and space for attending to
reparation matters.
KELLOGG
8 Ralph Waldo Snowden Hill, American unofficial observer on the
Reparation Commission.

462.00 R 29/4047: Telegram
[Document 92]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PARIS, April 22, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 7:25 p.m.9 ]
155. H–92 from Hill. Department’s telegram No. 90 (H–41), April 10, 2
p.m. In view of Department’s request for comments, I venture to make the
following: (1) If change proposed be made May 31 it would arouse
considerable comment and would create unfavorable impression regarding
intent and purpose of the United States with the repercussion here that
would follow. Such a change could not fail to focus attention upon itself as
at the time selected there will be no other overt change in Reparation
Commission to distract much attention, but merely the automatic
dissolution of the Permanent Managing Committee, whose duties will be
reabsorbed by the Reparation Commission, where they rested originally.
Up to September 1, 1926, all assistant delegates who formed the Permanent
Managing Committee will remain here in Paris and will continue to sit at
meetings which will be meetings of the Commission, instead of the
Committee, not, in the eyes of the public, a great distinction. If the
delegates are present, the assistants will sit as assistants; if the delegates are
absent the assistants will sit in their places. While the reorganization
provides that the Reparation Commission meet at least once monthly, it is
contemplated that at outset at least it will meet very frequently, possibly as
often as the Permanent Managing Committee has met. Expectation is that
principal delegates will often be absent and that assistant delegates will take
their places. It was in accordance with this expectation that Barthou,10 who
lives in Paris, stated that until September 1 he would not sit if all the
principal delegates were absent at any meeting, but that instead he would
leave his assistant delegate, Mauclère, to preside.

 
No overt change will take place until September 1, when certain of the
assistant delegates will retire. In case of Mauclère, retirement will be
permanent. Mr. Gutt, the Belgian assistant delegate, will cease to reside in
Paris but will attend meetings. The secretary of the Belgian delegation will
handle current matters but will not sit on the Commission. The British and
Italian assistant delegates will remain in Paris, because of distance and
inconvenience of traveling to and from their countries; each of these
delegations will give up its general secretary instead.
If Department wishes to make the change it contemplates, it would create
much less comment, in my opinion, if it were made next September, as
attention would then be diverted by Mauclère’s retirement and the other
changes; the spotlight would not be directed upon this delegation as it
would be if the change were made May 31.
(2) Apart from unfavorable effect such change would have here if made at
this time, I have other grounds for thinking it would be premature. Many
matters of interest to the United States, it is true, have been adjusted. There
remain, however, quite a number of important matters, some of which I
doubt could be settled by the end of May. Furthermore, new questions
constantly arise which, in greater or less degree, must and will affect the
interests of the United States, such as the recent Finnish decisions which
attribute certain payments to the Dawes annuities which heretofore had
been considered as outside those annuities.
The following list, which is not all inclusive, comprises outstanding matters
which need adjustment and regarding which, in my opinion, someone
should be here on the ground who has not only a legal appreciation of
points involved but who has also fullest possible knowledge of the
background:
(1) Arrangement of army costs10a and costs of Commission for
the third annuity;
(2) General adjustments incidental to the third annuity;

(3) Adjustment with Reparation Commission of any arrangement
made with Germany for obtaining share of the United States in
the Dawes annuities;11
(4) Arrangements for obtaining payments on account of claims of
the United States against Austria and Hungary;12
(5) Adjustments which have to be made because of arbitral
decisions attributing charges, such as Polish social insurance,
against annuities;
(6) The D. A. P. G. tankers case.13
 
No date for meeting of tanker tribunal has been fixed and it has not been
possible for the other two arbitrators to get the umpire, who is busy on other
matters, to fix time when he can come. It is, I think, very important that
someone who is familiar with the law and the facts in this case should be on
hand to lend assistance when the arbitrators sit.
(3) The Department furnishes no personnel to the Unofficial Observer
except two stenographers. They have never been a staff adequate to run the
office, and ever since our association with the Reparation Commission it
has been the practice for that body to furnish us additional assistants. I
doubt that Department would wish to accept assistants from the
Commission if the proposed change be made. It would be necessary,
therefore, to take over at least one of this personnel, an American who has
acted as secretary for both my predecessor (Colonel Logan) and me, and
who has been here for many years. He is most competent and thoroughly
informed and I do not believe the work of this office could be carried on
satisfactorily without him. He more than earns the $300 a month which the
Reparation Commission pays out of an allotment running to September 1,
1926. It does not seem probable that the economy would be so great as the
Department thinks; at the most the saving would not be more than $400 a
month. I doubt that this amount would make up for the disadvantages of a
change at this time.

I personally believe it to be advisable to continue the office in its present
form but there is no insurmountable difficulty to its being embodied
ultimately in the Embassy, providing that the change is delayed as I have
already indicated. If the work is entrusted to someone in the Embassy,
however, I think it very important that the identity of the American
Observer should be maintained at least vis-a-vis the Reparation
Commission. Hill.
HERRICK
9 Telegram in five sections.
10 Louis Barthou, French delegate and chairman of the Reparation
Commission.
10a See vol. II, pp. 156 ff.
11 See Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. II, pp. 133 ff.
12 See ibid., 1924, vol. I, pp. 142 ff.
13 See vol. II, pp. 166 ff.

462.00 R 29/4048: Telegram
[Document 93]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PARIS, April 23, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received 5:15 p.m.]
156. Department’s No. 90, April 10, 2 p.m., and my No. 155 (H–92), April
22, 3 p.m. Mr. Hill gave you his comments on the technical side of the
question; I can only add that at present time there is no space available in
the chancery for a reparations section.
Division (1) of Mr. Hill’s telegram presents an important political aspect. In
present state of European opinion it would be most unfortunate were the
United States to make any move just now which could be taken as a
lessening of our interest in European affairs. The question of the “safety
clause” in debt settlement with France14 is being given much attention in
the press and I greatly fear that any change in our relations with the
Reparation Commission might be linked up with it and hostile criticism
aroused. For foregoing reasons I strongly support suggestion that any
change should be held back, at any rate until September.
HERRICK
14 See vol. II, pp. 91 ff.

462.00 R 29/4048: Telegram
[Document 94]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 7, 1926—7 p.m.
165. H–56 for Hill. Department’s No. 90, April 10, 2 p.m., Hill’s H–92,
April 22, 3 p.m., and the Embassy’s No. 156, April 23, 4 p.m. Mr. Wilson
will sail for France on June 9. The Department wishes him to work closely
with Hill in order to familiarize himself thoroughly with reparation matters;
it is desired that for the present he give them his preferential attention.
Department also desires that Hill, if he sees no objection, make
arrangements he may deem proper to have Wilson attend reparation
meetings.
Department does not intend to instruct Hill to return to the Department
before September 1, 1926. Definite instructions in that matter will be sent
later.
KELLOGG

462.00 R 29/4124a: Telegram
[Document 95]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, December 18, 1926—7 p.m.
332. H–108 for Hill. Department’s telegram No. 90 (H–41), April 10, 2 p.m.
Department wishes Hill to be prepared to turn over to Embassy the handling
of reparation matters and his files as of January 31, 1927, and that he report
to Department subsequent to that date. Allotment will be made for the
salary of the secretary referred to in his H–92 (your 155, April 22, 3 p.m.),
division (3), and if necessary for one stenographer. He will receive other
instructions later.
KELLOGG

462.00 R 29/4138: Telegram
[Document 96]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, February 1, 1927—2 p.m.
[Received February 1—9:13 a.m.]
42. Reparation 1. Wilson has taken over reparation work from Hill as of
today.15
HERRICK
15 The transfer of the office to the Embassy was effected February 28.

Proposed disposition of property held
by the Alien Property Custodian16
16 For that portion of Executive Order No. 2729–A of Oct. 12, 1917,
relating to the appointment and functions of the Alien Property Custodian,
see Foreign Relations , 1918, supp. 2, p. 263.
[97] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (Mellon)
Washington, December 12, 1925.
763.72113 Mills Bill/75
[98] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Olds)
[Washington,] February 3, 1926.
462.11 W 892/663
[99] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Olds)
[Washington,] February 4, 1926.
462.11 W 892/672
[100] The Under Secretary of the Treasury (Winston) to the Assistant
Secretary of State (Olds)
Washington, March 17, 1926.
763.72113 Mills Bill/4

[101] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
Washington, March 19, 1926.
763.72113 Mills Bill/13
[102] The Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Castle) to
the Under Secretary of State (Grew)
[Washington,] March 22, 1926.
763.72113 Mills Bill/15
[103] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, April 2, 1926.
763.72113 Mills Bill/11
[104] The Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Castle) to
the Assistant Secretary of State (Olds)
[Washington,] April 3, 1926.
763.72113 Mills Bill/19
[105] The German Embassy to the Department of State
Washington , April 3, 1926.
763.72113 Mills Bill/17
[106] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, June 8, 1926.

763.72113 Mills Bill/69
[107] The Secretary of State to the Austrian Minister (Prochnik)
Washington, June 11, 1926.
763.72113 Mills Bill/69
[108] The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
Washington, November 10, 1926.
763.72113 Au 7/2
[109] The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Committee on
Ways and Means of the House of Representatives (Green)
Washington, December 15, 1926.
462.11 W892/819a
[110] Informal Memorandum Left by the Hungarian Minister (Pelényi)
With the Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Castle)
Washington, December 16, 1926.
763.72113 Au 7/4
[111] The Under Secretary of the Treasury (Winston) to the Assistant
Secretary of State (Olds)
Washington, December 23, 1926.
763.72113 Au 7/7

763.72113 Mills Bill/75
[Document 97]
The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (Mellon)
WASHINGTON, December 12, 1925.
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: Since the Treasury plan for the return of German
property now held by the Alien Property Custodian was published17 the
Austrian Minister called to the attention of Mr. Castle that in some parts of
the plan as published German and Austrian property were spoken of and in
other parts merely German property. He was afraid there might be some
misunderstanding.
The Hungarian Minister also telephoned to Mr. Castle in some agitation and
asked whether this Department could not bring to the attention of the
Treasury that Hungarian property was in no way mentioned. I do not know,
of course, whether this was an oversight or intentional, but should suppose
that the property of the nationals of the three countries would be treated in
the same way.
I should be very glad if you would let me know what I may say to the
Austrian and Hungarian Ministers.
I am [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
17 On Dec. 10, 1925, a statement by the Treasury Department was released
for publication setting! forth a plan for disposing of the property held by the
Alien Property Custodian and the payments of the awards of the Mixed
Claims Commission, United States and Germany. This plan, with some
modifications, was introduced into Congress on Mar. 29, 1926, as H. R.
10820, 69th Cong., 1st sess., and is commonly referred to as the “Mills
Bill.”

462.11 W 892/663
[Document 98]
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Olds)
[WASHINGTON,] February 3, 1926.
The German Ambassador came in this afternoon at my invitation and I
discussed with him the possibility of reaching some general agreement for
the final disposition of all outstanding claims of a pecuniary nature against
Germany. I pointed out that in the first place there is a certain amount of
unfinished business pending before the Mixed Claims Commission.19 This
includes certain claims known as the sabotage claims. A second large class
of claims is those pending in the Department which have never been sent to
the Mixed Claims Commission because they were filed subsequent to the
date fixed by the Executive Agreement, and, therefore, do not fall within the
jurisdiction of the Commission as it is defined at present.
I suggested the desirability of making some arrangement for prompt
disposition of both classes of claims. With respect to the claims already
before the Commission, the only complication arises from the Black Tom
and other cases known as the sabotage claims. For obvious reasons it would
be embarrassing to have these cases go to trial, and I expressed the hope
that a way might be found to settle them without trial.
With respect to the claims which were filed too late for presentation to the
Commission under the Executive Agreement, I pointed out that these claims
were apparently not barred by the provisions of the treaty and that there is
considerable doubt as to whether they could be effectually barred by an
executive agreement not ratified by the Senate.
In conclusion I asked the Ambassador whether he had seen a draft of a
proposed agreement on this whole subject which had been prepared, and as
I understood it, approved by the American and German Agents.

The Ambassador seemed to be entirely familiar with the situation. He first
dealt with the sabotage claims, stating that whatever else Germany may
have been responsible for in the way of violations of neutrality prior to our
entrance into the war, she was not responsible for these particular claims.
He was prepared to admit that a trial of these sabotage cases would be
unfortunate. Nevertheless, he was advised by his Government that it was
ready to prove absolutely that Germany was not responsible, and he was
sure that his Government would not entertain any suggestion by which
Germany would be called upon, even by implication, to admit liability. I
inquired whether it might not be possible to include the sabotage claims
with the late claims and others in an omnibus award. The Ambassador
finally agreed that this would be worth considering.
Passing to the late claims, the Ambassador insisted that they were barred by
the Executive Agreement and that if Germany was to admit them now she
ought to have some compensation. This brought us to the real point of the
discussion. According to the Ambassador, Germany will make no
agreement covering the late claims or the sabotage claims or anything else
which is not contingent upon the return of the alien property fund to its
German owners. The Ambassador was emphatic on this subject. He said he
would be willing, of course, to put up any proposal that might be made, but
he was perfectly sure that an unconditional agreement covering the
American claims would have absolutely no chance of approval by his
Government.
R[OBERT] E. O[LDS]
19 Set up under the agreement of Aug. 10, 1922, between the United States
and Germany; see Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. II, pp. 240 ff.

462.11 W 892/672
[Document 99]
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Olds)
[WASHINGTON,] February 4, 1926.
The German Ambassador came in again this afternoon at my request and I
informed him that after consideration we had concluded not to enter into a
conditional agreement on the subject of claims. In other words, we were not
disposed to make an agreement contingent upon the action of Congress
authorizing the return of the German property in the hands of the Alien
Property Custodian. The Ambassador expressed disappointment and stated
that our position created a deadlock. He said he understood that the Mellon
plan20 could not be presented and acted upon so long as the claims against
Germany remained unadjusted. I endeavored to explain again to the
Ambassador that in our view all of the claims under consideration were
proper to be presented under the treaty, and that the so-called late claims
could not be regarded as barred by the exchange of notes made when the
Mixed Claims Commission was set up under the treaty. The only way
eventually to bar claims is by amendment to the treaty and that has not been
done. The German Government, according to the Ambassador, frankly
declines to accept this view.
R[OBERT] E. O[LDS]
20 i. e., the Mills Bill.

763.72113 Mills Bill/4
[Document 100]
The Under Secretary of the Treasury (Winston) to the Assistant
Secretary of State (Olds)
WASHINGTON, March 17, 1926.
DEAR MR. OLDS: I have your letter of March 16th21 with reference to the
conversation of Mr. Prochnik, the Austrian Minister, with your Department.
In preparing comprehensive legislation for settling the questions existing
between Germany, its nationals, the United States and the American mixed
claimants, I found it impracticable to cover in the same bill the return of the
Austrian and Hungarian property. It is the desire of the Treasury that one
bill settle all war questions between the two countries and their nationals.
We could do this in the case of Germany because the Mixed Claims
Commission for the determination of American claims has been set up, the
claims have been filed, the limitation for filing of claims has passed, most
of the claims have been adjudicated, and it is possible to obtain an accurate
estimate of the total amount of awards and thus fix the probable immediate
liabilities of the Treasury with respect to advancing the cash to pay the
awards. In the Austrian and Hungarian cases a Commission, I understand,
has been set up quite recently and claims are being filed, but the period of
limitation for the filing of claims has not run, and it is impossible to
estimate, therefore, the total amount of claims which will be presented. It
follows necessarily that no satisfactory estimate can be made of the
probable amount of awards. Germany has made an arrangement for
providing cash to be applied towards the payment of awards. No such
arrangement has been set up by, the Austrian or Hungarian Governments.
The Treasury felt that it could not very well ask Congress to commit the
Treasury to liabilities the amount of which could not now be estimated and
the means of meeting which were not provided.
It seems to me that the considerations I have mentioned above clearly
differentiate the German from the Austrian and Hungarian situations. If

Congress, however, should adopt the policy along the lines indicated by our
proposed bill in the case of Germany, it seems to me that this same policy
logically ought to be extended to the Austrian and Hungarian situations
when at some later period their liabilities for mixed claims and the means of
payment therefor have been definitely established. I feel sure that the
Treasury would be glad to make a statement along this line when the bill
affecting the German questions is presented.
Very truly yours,
GARRARD B. WINSTON
21 Not printed.

763.72113 Mills Bill/13
[Document 101]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria (Washburn)
WASHINGTON, March 19, 1926.
No. 438
SIR: The Austrian Minister called at the Department on March 15, 1926, to
discuss the question of the return of Austrian property now held by the
Alien Property Custodian. He began by referring to the numerous Bills
which have, from time to time, been introduced in the Senate and in the
House of Representatives looking to the return of alien property. He pointed
out that although all previous Bills which had been introduced in Congress
for the return of alien property made no discrimination among German,
Austrian and Hungarian property, he had reason to believe that the so-called
“Treasury Bill”, which the press reports is to be introduced this week,
applies only to German property, on the theory that it is in a special
position, on account of the Dawes Plan,22 which provides a means of
reimbursement of the United States to the extent of Germany’s capacity to
pay. The Austrian Minister said that it was his understanding that Austria
had been omitted from the Treasury Bill because, first, the 20 year
moratorium 
and, 
second, 
because 
the 
Austro-American 
Claims
Commission23 had not yet concluded its labors, in fact, had hardly begun
them.
Mr. Prochnik went on to say that he did not question the wisdom of the
Treasury’s point of view, but wished to point out that he had been advised
several times recently by his Government that, if no mention were made of
Austrian property in the proposed legislation and if, so far as this legislation
went, it could be assumed in Vienna that the Austrian property would be
held indefinitely, a serious financial panic would occur. He said that
personally he saw no reason why there should be a panic, but his advices
from Vienna were insistent on this point. He did not ask that the Austrian
property be returned out of hand, nor did his Government actually expect

this; his Government and he merely hoped that it would be possible to
include in the Bill a statement to the effect that when the Austrian
Government had made arrangements suitable to this Government for the
discharge of its financial obligations arising out of the war, that the Austrian
property would be returned. He said that such a provision would avoid a
panic in Vienna.
Mr. Prochnik said that he had frequently proposed to his Government the
following plans:
(1) That the whole of the Austrian debt to the United States, the
relief credits as well as the awards of the Claims Commission, be
immediately funded under a sixty-two year agreement. This, he
said, would, of course, presumably require the consent of the
League of Nations and similar funding agreements with the other
nations which had participated in furnishing relief funds and had
granted a moratorium.
(2) If the above were found impracticable, that the awards of the
Claims Commission be funded as soon as they were given and
that a binding agreement be entered into immediately by the
Austrian Government, looking to such funding and providing a
funding scheme.
The Minister said that he had not received authorization from his
Government to make either proposition to this Government and that he was
in some embarrassment to know whether, if his Government agreed, the
United States would be willing to discuss either of the above plans. He was
afraid that the United States might say that it would not discuss the relief
credits until the moratorium had expired and that he, Prochnik, would be in
the embarrassing position of having proposed a plan to his Government
which proved entirely unacceptable to the United States.
Mr. Prochnik’s views were brought to the attention of the Treasury
Department, which has commented thereon in a letter dated March 17,
1926, a copy of which is transmitted herewith, for your information.24 You
will especially note the statement made in the final sentence of Mr.
Winston’s letter.

I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
ROBERT E. OLDS
22 See Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. II, pp. 1 ff.
23 Established under the terms of the agreement of Nov. 26, 1924, between
the United States, Austria, and Hungary; see ibid., vol. I, pp. 142 ff.
24 Supra.

763.72113 Mills Bill/15
[Document 102]
The Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Castle) to
the Under Secretary of State (Grew)
[WASHINGTON,] March 22, 1926.
Memorandum of conversation between the German Ambassador and Mr.
Castle on Saturday, March 20, 1926.
MR. GREW: The German Ambassador came in to say that he thought the
Mellon Bill, which was to be presented shortly to Congress for the
settlement of American claims and the return of alien property, had been
greatly improved since he talked about it in the Department with Mr. Olds
and with me some time ago.25 He said that he felt the new wording as to
payment of late claims rather covered the point which he had made before,
that the Germans would not agree to have these claims considered unless
the Bill went through. In other words, that their promise must be
conditional. He said that the way the Bill was worded now practically
covered his objections. He left with me an informal memorandum, attached
hereto,26 which memorandum was drawn up to point out the few objections
the Germans have left as to the settlement. Maltzan reiterated his belief in
the exceeding importance of getting this Bill through promptly because all
Germany had received with acclaim the belief that America was going to
settle matters promptly and he felt that if now the Bill should not go
through, the present friendly feeling toward America would rapidly change
to a strong dislike. For another reason he said it was exceedingly important
and this was that Germany, intending to keep up the Dawes annuities, was
in the middle of a bad financial crisis and could not sufficiently export
because of lack of capital in the hands of manufacturers. He said that if this
money now held by the Alien Property Custodian were turned over it would
immediately be expended in the United States for copper and cotton, which
would be in Germany manufactured for export to Russia and that from

these Russian exports Germany would receive money to pay the Dawes
annuities. I made very little comment on what he had to say.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
W[ILLIAM] R. C[ASTLE,] Jr.
25 See memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State, Feb. 4, p. 127 [Pg.
127 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100].
26 Not printed.

763.72113 Mills Bill/11
[Document 103]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, April 2, 1926.
No. 838/70
YOUR EXCELLENCY: According to a formal statement made public by the U. S.
Treasury Department on March 30th, the enactment of legislation providing
for prompt settlement of the awards under the German-American Mixed
Claims Commission, and the restoration of the sequestered property of
German nationals now in the hands of the Alien Property Custodian has
been recommended by the said Department to Congress and a bill
embodying this plan has been introduced in the House of Representatives
by Representative Mills of New York.
Although the work of the said Commission has as yet not been concluded,
the amount of the awards is estimated by the Treasury at between
$180,000,000 and $190,000,000 (plus about $60,000,000 in interest) and
the bill provides that interest earned on seized enemy (not merely German)
property prior to March 4th, 1923, and deposited by the Alien Property
Custodian in the U. S. Treasury (i. e. 30,000,000 Dollars) shall be retained
and applied towards payment of the awards of the Mixed Claims
Commission. Besides, the Treasury is to be authorized to borrow enough
additional money to make all the payments under the proposed bill.
The bill further provides that all receipts by the United States from
Germany on account of the Dawes annuities and in repayment of Army
Costs27 shall be applied for the retirement of the debt thus created by the
United States for the payments required by the bill.
Now, it appears to me that in stipulating to apply the 30 Million Dollars
mentioned above (the earnings made by the Treasury out of money of the
Alien Property Custodian on deposit with it prior to the Winslow act28 )

towards the payment of awards against Germany, the proposed bill inflicts
grave injustice to Austrian nationals as there is hardly any doubt that this
sum of 30 Million Dollars also includes interest derived from private
property seized from Austrian nationals.
Of course, I am well aware that property rights in regard to interest accrued
on seized enemy property prior to March 4th, 1923, i. e. the aforenamed 30
Million Dollars, have been transferred to the United States by the Winslow
act and the original owners have been deprived of the means of legally
claiming this money.
Moral considerations, however, which according to the United States
Treasury’s own statement have led [it] to prepare the bill introduced by
Representative Mills, also seem to have played their part in the stipulation
to apply the money earned on seized property prior to the coming into force
of the Winslow Act as part payment of the awards of the German-American
Mixed Claims Commission and thus returning, if indirectly, seized German
property in easing the burden placed on the German nation by the awards.
Yet, no provision seems to have been made to equally protect Austrian
interest and to concede, as in the case of Germany, moral claims which
Austrian nationals may have to the share in the 30 Million Dollars interest,
derived from their rightful property.
May I, in addition, point out to Your Excellency certain features in the
development of the subject in question, which cannot fail but deepen the
depression effected on the Austrian public sentiment by the introduction of
the Mills bill.
Before the enactment of the Winslow bill, there was some inclination in
Congress to differentiate between Austrian and German property on the
ground that, contrary to Germany, Austria had refrained from applying
extraordinary war measures against American nationals, leaving them in
free control of their property and business interest. This exceptional attitude
maintained during the war by the Austrian Government, the comparatively
small amount of seized Austrian property and the most desperate financial
and economic situation of the said country had the effect that a special

resolution authorizing immediate return of Austrian property was taken into
consideration.
The Department of State at that time did not approve, however, a
discrimination and accordingly advised Congress that legislative measures
of a discriminating character may embarrass the Government of the United
States and unfavorably act on German public opinion.29
The subsequent passage of the Winslow bill shattered the hopes of the
Austrians that some preference might be shown them in recognition of the
treatment accorded to American nationals during the war and they slowly
had to be reconciled to the idea that there could be no return of their
property prior to the release of assets held by the Alien Property Custodian
in the name of German owners, as the problem concerning the enemy
property must be dealt with simultaneously. But a continuous retention of
Austrian after the release of German property was never seen within the
scope of possibility and therefore the introduction of the Mills bill in its
present shape dealt a heavy blow on the expectations of the Austrian people,
who in their hard struggle for economic recovery are welcoming every
encouraging offer by the outer world.
There are two reasons given in the statement of the Treasury Department
for the failure of including Austrian property in the present bill, viz:
1. While a commission has been constituted in the case of Austria
and claims are being received, the period of limitation for filing
claims has not run, and no estimate can be made of the total
amount of claims which will be presented or the probable amount
of awards thereunder.
2. In addition, the Dawes plan provides for payments by Germany
to the United States on account of the awards, but there is no like
arrangement for payment by Austria.
As strong as these two reasons may appear in a purely technical light, they
seem to lose their force of conviction under the following deliberations: It is
true that American claims against Austria have as yet not been awarded and
that their total amount could therefore not be determined at the present state

of affairs. It is equally true that in the case of Germany the term for filing
claims has expired while it has just begun for Austria. But on the other hand
the organization of the Tripartite Claims Commission experienced such an
unusual delay that most of the claims against Austria had been presented at
the Department of State before the beginning of its functions, which is born
out by the fact that only comparatively few additional claims have been
filed since the commission has been constituted. From the number, extent
and nature of the claims filed and from the precedence, established in the
German-American procedure, some conclusion could be arrived at. It may
be stated with reasonable safety that the final extent of Austrian liabilities
arising from the aforementioned sources will be so insignificant as
compared with the large sums involved in the seized property that it hardly
can have any influence or bearing on the financial plans and transactions to
be adopted by the Treasury after enactment of the Mills bill. In fact, the
Austrian liabilities will in all probability comprise a total which may be
safely termed a “negligible quantity” in the round sums submitted to
Congress by the Treasury Department, smaller even than the amount of the
still unawarded German claims, which has not been considered large
enough to warrant a postponement of the return of German property.
As to the second reason I beg to recall Your Excellency’s attention to the
first part of my note which deals with the 30 Million Dollars of earnings
from deposits made by the Alien property Custodian with the Treasury. I am
confident that a careful computation of the earnings derived from Austrian
property will reveal an amount which in the future will cover a large, if not
the larger portion of the total of claims to be awarded in due course to
American nationals by the Tripartite Claims Commission.
There is every reason to believe that this amount will more favorably
compare with the final total of Austrian liabilities than the remainder of the
30 Million Dollars together with the Dawes annuities do compare with the
total of German liabilities. As to the residue of the awards not covered by
these earnings derived from seized Austrian property, I can assure Your
Excellency the willingness of the Austrian Government to negotiate for a
fair and suitable adjustment.

Reverting to the Dawes annuities I may venture the remark that from the
statement issued by the Treasury Department, the impression might perhaps
be gained that Germany, contrary to Austria, had made special provisions
for the retirement of the money to be advanced by the United States for the
payment of the awards, while in fact this obligation was assumed with no
regard to the Commission’s future awards against Germany. Moreover, the
Dawes annuities do not represent a payment already effected but a promise
for future redemption. (The afore indicated readiness of the Austrian
Government to negotiate for a suitable adjustment may be recalled in this
connection.) This very liberal concession made by the United States in
favor of Germany emboldens me to appeal for an attitude of like generosity
towards Austria.
In summing up my arguments, I pray Your Excellency to kindly weigh the
following facts: There is Austrian private property in trust with the Alien
Property Custodian, which is of such a small amount that it can have no
bearing whatsoever on the financial interests of the American people. This
property, however, as small as it may be, means everything at present to the
Austrian owners, as it would materially help them in their efforts to revive
private business in Austria, now the most essential requisite for the
country’s rehabilitation, if not all the progress obtained during the last three
years in the successful reconstruction of the public household and
stabilization of the currency shall be lost again. Furthermore, this property
is held for technical reasons, to insure the payment of American claims,
which in all probability will be only a portion of the small amount retained
by the Alien Property Custodian and which to a large extent is already
covered, when (as proposed in the German case) the earnings from deposits
of Austrian property will equally be credited to the payment of Austrian
liabilities. Your Excellency, I am sure, will reach the conclusion that there is
a justified reason to waive in this particular instance technical
considerations and to seek a way which may include the return of Austrian
property in this present bill.
The Austrian Government would highly appreciate an indorsement by Your
Excellency of the Austrian standpoint in this matter, and I am hopeful that
with such an indorsement Congress will hardly deny to the Austrian

nationals the relief sought in the immediate release of Austrian property,
provided it favorably acts on the principle of the Mills bill.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK
27 See Finance Ministers’ Agreement of Jan. 14, 1925, Foreign Relation,
1925, vol. II, pp. 145 ff.
28 H. R. 14222, introduced by Samuel E. Winslow, a Representative from
Massachusetts; see 42 Stat. (pt. 1) 1511, “An Act To Amend the Trading
With the Enemy Act.”
29 Presumably the Minister is referring to the letter of the Secretary of State,
Oct. 26, 1922, to Mr. Winslow, printed in Congressional Record, vol. 64, p.
5311.

763.72113 Mills Bill/19
[Document 104]
The Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Castle) to
the Assistant Secretary of State (Olds)
[WASHINGTON,] April 3, 1926.
MR. OLDS: Doctor Dieckhoff30 came to see me at my request this morning in
the matter of the possible German taxation of property which might be
returned to German owners if the bill introduced by Representative Mills
goes through Congress.
I told Doctor Dieckhoff that this was, of course, a Treasury Bill and that the
Department of State was taking no active part in the matter. I said, however,
that certain questions might arise which the Department would be requested
to answer. I told him that the eventual return of this property, if made,
would be on the theory that private property should not be confiscated and
that the idea was to return it to the actual private owners. I said that the
question would very probably be asked in the committee as to whether the
German Government would levy such special taxes on this returned
property as would make it actually pass into the hands of the German
Government rather than that of the original owners. Doctor Dieckhoff said
at the time the Winslow Bill went through Doctor Wiedfeldt, then
Ambassador, had realized this question might arise and had made a
statement to the Department that the German Government would not levy
any special taxes. He said that Baron Maltzan, foreseeing the same
possibility, had some weeks ago asked his Government and received
permission to state categorically that if the property were returned no
special taxes would be assessed against it.
Doctor Dieckhoff asked me if we wanted this in the form of a note. I told
him that it would not be necessary, but that I should be grateful for a
memorandum which could be used if the question arose. This memorandum
he promised to send on Monday.

763.72113 Mills Bill/17
[Document 105]
The German Embassy to the Department of State
MEMORANDUM
Referring to today’s conversation between Mr. Castle and Mr. Dieckhoff,
the German Embassy has the honor to state, in the name of the German
Government, that the German private property held by the United States,
will, in case of its return to its owners, not be subjected to any kind of
special taxation, but will, moreover, enjoy the privileges provided for in
paragraph 18 of the German Federal Act of June 4th 1923, of which a
translation is annexed hereto.31
WASHINGTON , April 3, 1926.
31 Not printed.

763.72113 Mills Bill/69
[Document 106]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, June 8, 1926.
No. 1505/70
EXCELLENCY: In my note of April 2nd, 1926, regarding the bill introduced in the
House of Representatives by Mr. Mills providing for the payment of the
awards of the Mixed Claims Commission and the return of property held by
the Alien Property Custodian I had the honor to indicate to Your Excellency
the willingness of my Government to negotiate for a fair and suitable
settlement of whatever amount the Tripartite Claims Commission adjusting
claims of American citizens against the Austrian Government may in its
findings charge against the latter.
I have now received specific instructions which will enable me to enter into
negotiations with the appropriate branch of the Government of the United
States aiming at a solution acceptable to both sides, by which Austrian
property held by the Alien Property Custodian in security for payment of
future awards to be stipulated by the Tripartite Claims Commission may be
replaced by another security of equal or even better quality and rate, thus
removing the grounds for further retention of the former.
While the Austrian property in trust with the Alien Property Custodian loses
a great deal of its value as a security in face of the attitude stoutly
maintained by the United States in regard to inviolability of private
property, the agreement, I hope to reach, shall provide for more tangible
collaterals and actual payment of the final awards of the Tripartite Claims
Commission.
As I mentioned in my previous note all our efforts after successful
reconstruction of the public finances, are now bent on recovering private
economics. Business and production in Austria are at this very period

undergoing a severe crisis which could only be overcome with the aid of
foreign and domestic capital. In this connection the early release of Austrian
private property held in the United States has become a problem of great
importance. It is under this pressure of necessity that my Government in
spite of the many obstacles of a technical and material nature undertook the
rather difficult task of preparing the ground for the negotiations I have the
honor to propose to Your Excellency.
Trusting that the United States Government fully realizing Austria’s actual
situation and need will readily support steps leading towards an early return
of Austrian property by an Act of Congress, I have the honor to request
Your Excellency to kindly have me advised at Your earliest convenience as
to the person or persons, with whom I may take up the matter in question.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK

763.72113 Mills Bill/69
[Document 107]
The Secretary of State to the Austrian Minister (Prochnik)
WASHINGTON, June 11, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of June 8,
1926, stating that you have been instructed by your Government to
negotiate with the appropriate branch of the Government of the United
States with respect to the release of Austrian property held by the Alien
Property Custodian and the substitution therefor of other security for the
payment of the awards of the Tripartite Claims Commission.
I have transmitted a copy of your note under’ acknowledgment to the
Secretary of the Treasury, stating that I have suggested to you that you
communicate with him with a view to the initiation of direct discussion of
this question between yourself and such representatives of the Treasury
Department as he may care to designate.32 You, of course, realize that under
existing law no disposition can be made of the Austrian property held by the
Alien Property Custodian without specific legislation by the Congress, but
as that body would undoubtedly refer any plan of the nature suggested by
you to the Treasury Department for examination, it seems appropriate to
have the matter considered in the first instance by that Department.
Accept [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
ROBERT E. OLDS
32 On June 29, 1926, the Austrian Minister informed the Department that he
had conferred with the Under Secretary of the Treasury (file No. 763.72113
Mills Bill/73).

763.72113 Au 7/2
[Document 108]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, November 10, 1926.
No. 2556/70
EXCELLENCY: With reference to previous correspondence concerning settlement
of war claims and return of Austrian property I have the honor to forward to
Your Excellency herewith enclosed for your kind information copy of a
communication addressed to the Hon. Garrard B. Winston, Undersecretary,
Department of the Treasury, under even date.
Accept [etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK
[Enclosure]
The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Under Secretary of the Treasury (Winston)
[WASHINGTON,] November 10, 1926.
No. 2556/70
DEAR MR. UNDER SECRETARY: I take the liberty to revert to our conversation of last
July concerning settlement of American war claims by the Austrian
Government and return of Austrian property now held in trust with the
Alien Property Custodian. I explained to you at that time how my
Government is anxious to have these two problems separated from one
another and to have eliminated the interdependency of cause and effect now
existing between them, by offering Austrian Government bonds as a
security for the payment of American war claims and by reaching in way of
negotiations some agreement with the United States Government as to
interest and maturity of the bonds.

Shortly after said discussion I received a letter from you requesting me to
furnish you with a more specific description of the nature of the bonds my
Government intends to issue. In a letter ddo. August 2nd, addressed to you,
I expressed the hope that I shall be able to comply with your request in the
near future. However, some unforeseen delays and complications interfered
with a speedy dispatch of this matter and it is only now that I am in a
position to lay before you a complete proposal, carefully planned by my
Government in a special Cabinet Council.
I would greatly appreciate an appointment by you of a certain date and hour
agreeable to you, when I may lay before you this proposal and discuss it
with you in detail.
For your immediate information follows roughly outlined a sketch of the
offer made by my Government.
The Austrian Government is ready to turn over to the United States
Government, Austrian Government bonds to the extent of the Austrian
property held by the Alien Property Custodian. These bonds would serve as
a security for the American claims. In case these bonds should exceed the
amount of American claims awarded by the Tripartite Claims Commission,
the American Government will return to the Austrian Government the
portion in surplus of the claims and vice versa, the Austrian Government
will issue an adequate amount of additional bonds in case the American
claims reach a figure in excess of the Austrian property held by the Alien
Property Custodian.
These bonds will, as far as they are covered by American claims, be a
charge upon the assets and revenues of the Republic of Austria in the
meaning of article 197 of the Treaty of St. Germain,32a second only to the
charge of the League of Nations Loan upon the proceeds from the customs
and tobacco-monopoly and of the so-called reliefcredits. The interest will
run from the date whenever a portion of the American claims has been
ascertained and awarded. The bonds will pass from such date into the
public-debts of Austria and form a part thereof. They will be provided with
interest-coupons. They will be issued to bearer, in denominations of
$10,000.00 each. In the wording of the text it will be clearly expressed that

they are a portion of the amount due by the Government of the Republic of
Austria in satisfaction of the awards rendered by the Tripartite Claims
Commission.
The issue of such bonds would be in full agreement with the Austrian laws
and the international obligations assumed by the Austrian Government.
There is not doubt as to the fact, that the American claims awarded by the
Tripartite Claims Commission come under the general lien expressed in
articles 197 and 200 of the Treaty of St. Germain, ranging after the lien of
the League of Nations loan (which, however, is restricted to specific sources
of revenues) and after the general lien of the relief credits. The Austrian
Government would not be in a position to furnish special security in
addition to the afore-referred to general lien provided in articles 197 and
200 of the Peace Treaty, as such a special lien would require the consent of
the other allied and associated powers and the reparations commission and
open questions of a delicate and intricate nature, which could only be
solved under the greatest difficulties if at all.
The bonds will mature at a term to be specified by agreement and beginning
from the date when the full amount of American claims has been
ascertained. The Austrian Government wishes, however, to reserve its right
to redeem the bonds before expiration of the stipulated term of maturity.
Further details as to the text and form of the bonds, rate of interest, maturity
a. s. f. we hope to settle by mutual agreement.
Mr. Undersecretary, I am aware of the fact that the calculated extent of
Austrian obligations arising from the awards of the Tripartite Claims
Commission will have a bearing on the decision of your Government,
whether the offer of my Government should be accepted or not. This offer
is made regardless of whatever Congress will decide in connection with
Austrian property, although we hope that an agreement for the settlement of
the American war claims will have a favorable influence upon the
deliberations of Congress concerning return of property. Technically,
however, we want to divorce these two questions.
Although the work of the Tripartite Claims Commission is not yet near its
termination, it has, as I understand, progressed to a point, where the

American Agency could give you a safe estimate as to the maximum
amount the American claims may total, or at least of the amount which they
surely will not exceed. The more the work of the Tripartite Claims
Commission progresses the more it becomes evident that this maximum of
indebtedness, even by applying a very safe margin, comes closer and closer
to the figure I aways held out as the ultimate extent of our liabilities arising
from war claims. With other words the Austrian obligation from war claims
will be a very insignificant sum.
I shall not try to commit myself on the information you may gain from
consulting the American Agency, I do want to emphasize, however, again
and again the great importance which a favorable consideration by the
American Government of our proposal will have on Austrian economics
and I may entertain the hope that this fact will have some weight on your
decision.
Expecting to hear from you, at your earliest convenience, I beg to renew
[etc.]
EDGAR PROCHNIK
32a William M. Malloy (ed), Treaties, Conventions, etc., Between the United
States of America and Other Powers, 1910–1923 (Washington, Government
Printing Office, 1923), vol. III, pp. 3149, 3216.

462.11 W892/819a
[Document 109]
The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Committee on
Ways and Means of the House of Representatives (Green)
WASHINGTON, December 15, 1926.
MY DEAR MR. GREEN: I received late yesterday afternoon a copy of H. R. 15009
providing “for the settlement of certain claims of American nationals
against Germany and of German nationals against the United States, for the
ultimate return of all property of German nationals held by the Alien
Property Custodian and for the equitable apportionment among all
claimants of certain available funds”. While I have had no opportunity to
examine it in detail I find that its provisions are not such as to remove the
apprehensions which I outlined to you in our conference on November 30,
1926.
The bill appears to provide for the utilization in the first instance for the
payment of certain awards of the Mixed Claims Commission, United States
and Germany, of the following sums, among others:
(1) $25,000,000 from the unallocated interest fund consisting of
interest earned prior to March 4, 1923 on cash deposited in the
Treasury by the Alien Property Custodian.
(2) Not more than $50,000,000 representing 50 per cent of the
appropriations to be made by Congress to pay the claims of the
former owners of the German ships, radio stations and patents
seized by the United States.
(3) 20 per cent of the ex-enemy property or its proceeds still held
by the United States.
It appears that participation certificates repayable out of future receipts by
the United States under the Paris Agreement of January 14, 1925,32b would

be issued in exchange for the sums thus utilized and that interest at 5 per
cent, also payable out of such future receipts, would be allowed on awards
of the Mixed Claims Commission until paid and on all but $25,000,000 of
the participation certificates.
As you are aware the United States is under a present obligation imposed
not only by Treaty but also by the specific assurances contained in notes
dated December 10, 1924 and January 4, 1925 from the American
Ambassador at London to the British Government32c to give appropriate
credit upon its claims against Germany, for any ships or other property or
its proceeds which might be finally retained. I have no assurances from any
quarter that the utilization of the ex-enemy property contemplated by H. R.
15009 would not be construed by other interested Governments as a final
retention within the meaning of the treaty and the above-mentioned
assurances.
 
The present right of the United States to participate in the payments made
by Germany pursuant to the Dawes Plan is defined by the Paris Agreement
of January 14, 1925. Article 3 of that agreement provides for the payment to
the United States “for the purpose of satisfying the awards of the Mixed
Claims Commission established in pursuance of the Agreement between the
United States and Germany, of August 10th, 1922”,32d of “Two and one
quarter per cent (2¼%) of all receipts from Germany on account of the
Dawes Annuities available for distribution as reparations, provided that the
annuity resulting from this percentage shall not in any year exceed the sum
of forty-five million gold marks.” While it is true that the awards of the
Mixed Claims Commission by their terms carry interest at 5 per cent per
annum until paid, the question might be raised as to whether, regardless of
the provisions of Section 3 (h) of the draft bill, the application of this
property as proposed would constitute a payment and therefore that the
payment of interest on the participation certificates would not be justified.
Regardless of the merits of any contentions which might be advanced in
respect of these questions, it is clear that were any dispute or difference of
opinion to arise between the United States and the other interested

Governments, the provisions of Article 26 of the Paris Agreement would be
applicable. The second paragraph of that Article reads as follows:
“Any difference or dispute that may arise with the United States
of America regarding the interpretation of this Agreement
affecting American claims or the rights of the United States of
America under this Agreement shall be referred to an arbitrator to
be agreed upon between the United States of America and the
Reparation Commission acting unanimously.”
It is, of course, impossible to forecast the decision of an arbitrator on these
points. There can be no doubt, however, that the position of the United
States Government would be most embarrassing if after the enactment of
legislation such as that contemplated by H. R. 15009 and the carrying into
effect of its provisions a decision adverse to the United States should be
rendered in any arbitration proceedings under Article 26, particularly in
view of the so-called declaration of policy incorporated in Section 2 of the
draft bill.
While the above questions may never be raised, nevertheless their
importance is so great that I feel it incumbent upon me to place upon the
record the fact that they have been called to the attention of your Committee
so that no possible future misunderstanding could lead to the allegation that
the Department of State had failed in its duty to inform the Congress in the
premises.
I have [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
32b Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. II, p. 145.
32c See Department’s telegrams No. 457, Dec. 9, 1924, 10 p.m., and No. 9,
Jan. 3, 1925, 7 p.m., to the Ambassador in Great Britain, ibid., 1924, vol. II,
pp. 102 and 127 .
32d Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. II, p. 262.

763.72113 Au 7/4
[Document 110]
Informal Memorandum Left by the Hungarian Minister (Pelényi)
With the Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs
(Castle)
WASHINGTON, December 16, 1926.
It has come to my knowledge that the Austrians are planning to ask for the
release of the seized Austrian property, and are willing to place at the
disposal of the American Government bonds in an amount corresponding to
the approximate amount of American claims against Austria.
I have heard further that the Austrian Minister has made protest, in some
form or other, against the fact that the bill H. R. 15009, arranging for
release of German property, has not included the question of the release of
Austrian property.
The question of the return of Austrian and of Hungarian property has so far
been considered by the American Government separately from the question
of the return of German property, for the reason that while the claims
against Germany have practically all been established and the work of the
Mixed Claims Commission almost terminated, not even the one year term
—within which all claims shall be presented to the Tripartite Claims
Commission—has come to a close in the case of Austria and Hungary, and
therefore not even the approximate amount of said claims can be estimated.
This distinction made by the American Government appeared perfectly
natural and obvious to the Hungarian Government, which as a consequence
has never pressed the American Government to release prematurely the
seized alien property of Hungarian ownership.
Should the American Government see fit to change its attitude and accept
an Austrian proposal for the return of Austrian property before the Tripartite
Claims Commission brings its task to a close, it is my personal conviction

that the Hungarian Government would still maintain the original attitude of
the American Government, which is also its own, to wit: that the question of
the return of Hungarian property would have to remain in abeyance till such
time as the American claims against Hungary would be definitely
established. Only then, and not before, can the two interested Governments
deal with the second question as to the form in which claims of American
nationals found to be valid could be satisfied and in which Hungarian
property held as a pledge for the satisfaction of such American claims could
be released.
The Hungarian Government would have to continue in this attitude even in
case the American Government should offer to release Hungarian property
at an earlier date, under the same conditions under which it might prove
willing to release Austrian property. The agreement between the United
States and Austria and Hungary, ratified by Hungary on November 5,
1925,32e and establishing what is known as the Tripartite Claims
Commission, provides only for the “determining of the amounts to be paid”
to American nationals, and obviously leaves for a future date the question as
to how claims passed upon by the Commissioner should be satisfied.
This agreement was ratified by the Hungarian Legislative Assembly, by a
special act, and was embodied in the laws of Hungary. In connection
therewith, the above mentioned viewpoint of the Hungarian Government
went on record, to wit: that the question of the satisfaction of American
claims could be dealt with only after they will have been found valid and
their respective amounts known definitely.
As I have no official information regarding the Austrian proposals, nor do I
know the American Government’s attitude in regard to same, I can naturally
not speak by authority of my Government. However, I believe it is my duty
to inform you at this moment, in the course of our conversation, that I do
not see how my Government could change its attitude as set forth before.
It certainly does not intend to follow the Austrian lead to press for an early
return of seized alien property, and sees no reason to protest in any form
whatever against the non-inclusion of Hungarian property in connection
with the release of German property.

Hungary has not asked and is not asking for any preferential treatment by
the United States.—Thus Hungary did not ask for a moratorium but was
among the three first countries to fund its indebtedness to the United States.
—Similarly, Hungary is not asking for and does not believe in an earlier
release of the seized property of its nationals, but expects to deal with this
question when it will logically arise at the termination of the work of the
Tripartite Claims Commission.
32e Signed Nov. 26, 1924; Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, p. 152.

763.72113 Au 7/7
[Document 111]
The Under Secretary of the Treasury (Winston) to the Assistant
Secretary of State (Olds)
WASHINGTON, December 23, 1926.
DEAR MR. OLDS: Thank you for your letter of December 21st32f enclosing a
memorandum32g showing the position of Hungary on the return of alien
property. I have told the Austrian Minister that so far as the Treasury was
concerned, it would not recommend any legislation until we received a
definite estimate of the probable amount of the awards against Austria. If at
that time the estimate showed the awards were far less than the amount of
property held by the Alien Property Custodian, the Treasury might consider
recommending a bill returning at once a part of the alien property and hold
the balance until Austria had actually paid the American claims. I would not
wish to complicate the present bill now in Congress by bringing Austria
into the situation, so I think that my statement to the Austrian Minister will
carry this matter over to the next Congress in any event.
Very truly yours,
GARRARD B. WINSTON
32f Not printed.
32g Supra.

Submission to the Senate of the
international convention relating to
the regulation of aerial navigation,
done at Paris, October 13, 191933
33 On Jan. 12, 1934, President Roosevelt requested the Senate to return the
convention and accompanying papers. The request was granted by the
Senate Jan. 15, 1934.
[112] The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
Washington, June 15, 1926.
579.6 D 1/221a

579.6 D 1/221a
[Document 112]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
WASHINGTON, June 15, 1926.
THE PRESIDENT: The undersigned the Secretary of State has the honor to lay
before the President, with a view to its transmission to the Senate to receive
the advice and consent of that body to its ratification, if his judgment
approve thereof, the International Convention Relating to the Regulation of
Aerial Navigation with Articles 5 and 34 amended as recommended by the
International Commission for Air Navigation in the protocols of amendment
approved by the Commission on October 27, 1922 and June 30, 1923,
respectively. The protocols of amendments are transmitted with the
Convention.
In consequence of two decisions of the Supreme Council of the Paris Peace
Conference dated respectively March 12 and March 15, 1919, a
Commission designated the Aeronautical Commission was organized to
consider the question of regulating international air navigation. The objects
of the Commission were stated to be as follows:
1. To study all air questions which might be submitted to it by the
Supreme Council of the Conference of the Peace.
2. To study all air questions which the Commission might deem it
their duty to submit to the Supreme Council of the Conference of
the Peace.
3. To draft a Convention relating to Air Navigation.
The Commission was composed of the following Delegates: Two
representatives of each of the principal Powers, United States of America,
British Empire, France, Italy and Japan. One representative of each of the
following seven Powers with limited interests, designated by the Supreme

Council, namely, Belgium, Brazil, Cuba, Greece, Portugal, Rumania and
Serbia, which were to represent all the Powers with limited interests
assembled at the Peace Conference.
The United States was represented on the Commission by Admiral Knapp
and General Patrick. For the purposes of drafting minutes, of the
distribution of work to the Sub-Committees and of the collection of the
reports of the Sub-Committees, the Commission appointed a secretariat
composed of one secretary and one assistant secretary for each of the five
great Powers. The representatives of the United States on the Secretariat of
the Commission were Captain Morton and Lieutenant Kiely.
For the purpose of studying air questions on which the Commission
presented reports to the Supreme Council of the Peace Conference, the
Aeronautical 
Commission 
appointed 
three 
Sub-Committees. 
The
representatives of the United States on these Sub-Committees were as
follows:
Military Sub-Committee
Brigadier-General B. D. Foulois
Captain Luke MacNamee, U. S. N.
Technical Sub-Committee
President: Lieutenant-Colonel Butterfield
Members: Lieutenant-Colonel Butterfield
Lieutenant-Commander J. L. Callan, U. S. N., and
Lieutenant Ralph Kiely, U. S. N.
Legal, Commercial and Financial Sub-Committee
Commander Pollock, U. S. N.
Captain Bacon, A. S., U. S. N.

Lieutenant-Commander J. L. Callan, U. S. N.
As a result of the deliberations of the Aeronautical Commission a
Convention was prepared and was signed by certain countries on October
13, 1919. The Convention lays down certain rules for the regulation of
aircraft engaged in international traffic. Annexes to the Convention
prescribe a number of technical rules and regulations regarding the marking
of planes, the granting of certificates of airworthiness, qualifications of
pilots, signals and other requirements intended to promote safety in
international traffic by aircraft. The signature of the Convention was, by its
terms, left open until April 12, 1920, and the time was subsequently
prolonged until June 1, 1920. According to the records of the Department of
State, between October 13, 1919 and June 1, 1920, the Convention was
signed on the part of the following countries in addition to the United
States: The British Empire, France, Italy, Japan, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil,
China, Cuba, Ecuador, Greece, Guatemala, Panama, Poland, Portugal,
Rumania, the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, Siam,
Czechoslovakia and Uruguay.
 
I am informed that the Convention, as well as the Additional Protocol of
May 1, 1920, to the Convention, went into force on July 11, 1922, the
following signatory States having deposited their ratifications: Belgium,
Bolivia, The British Empire, France, Greece, Japan, Portugal, Kingdom of
the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, and Siam.
After the Convention as drafted had been thoroughly examined by
representatives of the interested Departments of this Government it was
decided to authorize Ambassador Wallace to sign the Convention and the
Additional Protocol of May 1, 1920, with reservations as indicated below.
Article 3 of the Convention recognizes the right of each of the contracting
States, for military reasons or in the interest of public safety, to prohibit the
aircraft of the other contracting States under the penalties provided by its
legislation and without distinction in this respect between its private aircraft
and those of the other contracting States, from flying over certain areas of
its territory. It was thought that the United States might desire to make some

distinction between its own aircraft and that of other countries and that its
private aircraft might conceivably be permitted to fly over areas forbidden
to foreign aircraft. Ambassador Wallace was therefore instructed to make
the following reservation to Article 3 at the time of signing the Convention:
“The United States expressly reserves, with regard to Article 3,
the right to permit its private aircraft to fly over areas over which
private aircraft of other contracting States may be forbidden to fly
by the laws of the United States, any provision of said Article 3 to
the contrary notwithstanding.”
Under Article 36 of the Convention, provisions relating to customs laws and
regulations in connection with international air navigation are made the
subject of a special agreement contained in Annex H of the Convention.
The Treasury Department was consulted regarding this matter before the
Convention was signed on behalf of the United States, and it advocated the
making of a general reservation against including customs matters in the
Convention. Accordingly, the following reservation was made with respect
to customs:
“The United States reserves complete freedom of action as to
customs matters and does not consider itself bound by the
provisions of Annex H or any articles of the Convention affecting
the enforcement of its customs laws.”
Article 5 of the Convention, as signed, provides that no contracting State
shall, except by a special and temporary authorization, permit the flight
above its territory of aircraft which does not possess the nationality of a
contracting State.
 
As to this article a reservation was made at the time of signing to the effect
that the United States reserves the right to enter into special treaties,
conventions and agreements regarding aerial navigation with any country of
the Western Hemisphere not a party to the Convention.

In the Additional Protocol of May 1, 1920 to the Convention it is stated that
the High Contracting Parties declare themselves ready to grant, at the
request of signatory or adhering States who are concerned, certain
derogations to Article 5 of the Convention, but only where they consider the
reasons involved worthy of consideration. On the same day that he signed
the Convention, namely, May 31, 1920, Ambassador Wallace signed the
Additional Protocol of May 1, 1920, and in doing so made the following
interpretative reservation:
“The United States signs the above Protocol with the
understanding that its construction and enforcement shall in no
way derogate from the entire freedom of the United States to
negotiate with non-contracting States of the Western Hemisphere
as regards the regulation and control of aerial navigation as set
forth in the Third Reservation of the United States to the
Convention.”
Article 34 provides for an International Commission for Air Navigation
clothed with certain executive and administrative functions and charged
with the duty, among others, of receiving proposals from and making
proposals to the contracting states for modification or amendment of the
provisions of the Convention; the collection and dissemination among the
contracting parties of information concerning air navigation, wireless
telegraphy, meteorology and medical science which may be of interest to air
navigation, and the making of modifications in the annexes to the
Convention, etc.
The Commission at a meeting held in London in October, 1922,
recommended an amendment of Article 5 of the Convention, which if
adopted would allow a contracting State under certain conditions to enter
into special conventions with non-contracting States permitting the aircraft
of the latter to fly over territory of the contracting State. The article if
amended as recommended would read as follows:
“No contracting State shall, except by a special and temporary
authorization, permit the flight above its territory of an aircraft
which does not possess the nationality of a contracting State,
unless it has concluded a special convention with the State in

which the aircraft is registered. The stipulations of such special
convention must not infringe the rights of the contracting parties
to the present Convention and must conform to the rules laid
down by the said Convention and its annexes. Such special
convention shall be communicated to the International
Commission for Air Navigation which will bring it to the
knowledge of the other contracting States.”
 
At a later meeting held in London in June 1923, the Commission proposed
amendments to certain provisions of Article 34 of the Convention. These
proposed amendments if adopted would effect certain modifications with
respect to the procedure under which the representatives of the contracting
States on the International Commission for Air Navigation would be
permitted to cast their votes on questions coming under the jurisdiction of
the Commission, and change the method of allocating the expenses of
organization and operation of the Commission among the States represented
thereon. The parts to be replaced, as well as the provisions to be substituted
therefor, are as follows, the latter being indicated in the paragraphs
underlined:33a
I. “Each of the five States first-named (Great Britain, the British
Dominions and India counting for this purpose as one State) shall
have the least whole number of votes which, when multiplied by
five, will give a product exceeding by at least one vote the total
number of the votes of all the other contracting States.
“All the States other than the five first named shall each have one
vote. …”
“Each State represented on the Commission (Great Britain, the
British Dominions and India counting for this purpose as one
State) shall have one vote.”
II. “Any modification of the provisions of any one of the Annexes
may be made by the International Commission for Air Navigation
when such modification shall have been approved by three-

fourths of the total possible votes which could be cast if all the
States were represented and shall become effective from the time
when it shall have been notified by the International Commission
for Air Navigation to all the contracting States.”*
“Any modification of the provisions of any one of the Annexes
may be made by the International Commission for Air Navigation
when such modification shall have been approved by three-
fourths of the total possible votes which could be cast if all the
States were represented: this majority must, moreover, include at
least three of the five following States: the United States of
America, the British Empire, France, Italy, Japan. Such
modification shall become effective from the time when it shall
have been notified by the International Commission for Air
Navigation to all the contracting States.”
III. “The expenses of organization and operation of the
International Commission for Air Navigation shall be borne by
the contracting States in proportion to the number of votes at their
disposal.”
“The expenses of organization and operation of the International
Commission for Air Navigation shall be borne by the contracting
States: the total shall be allocated in the proportion of two shares
each for the United States of America, the British Empire, Frame,
Italy and Japan and one share each for all the other States.”
 
In addition to the provisions of the Convention and Protocol concerning
which reservations were made as indicated above at the time the
Convention and Protocol were signed by this Government, I consider it
important to call your especial attention to certain other provisions as
follows: Under Article 34 of the Convention’ the International Commission
for Air Navigation is placed under the direction of the League of Nations. It
appears that it was proposed at the outset of the negotiations to make the
Commission an integral part of the League and in some of the earlier drafts
of the Convention, Article 35 indicated that this would be the status of the

Commission. However, this plan was not adopted and it would seem from
information recently obtained by the Department concerning the
Commission’s relation to the League, that it is practically autonomous. The
Department was informed in January of last year that there had been seven
meetings of the full Commission, three in Paris, two in London, one in
Brussels and one in Rome; that while the League was invited to have a
representative present it was in fact represented at but two of the sessions.
In order, however, to meet any objection to ratification of the Convention
because of the provision in Article 34 regarding the League it is suggested
that the Senate might desire to have the resolution giving its advice and
consent to ratification of the Convention contain a reservation on this point.
Article 37 of the Convention provides that in case of a disagreement
between two or more States relating to the interpretation of the Convention
the question in dispute shall be determined by the Permanent Court of
International Justice. It therefore is suggested that the Senate may desire to
include in the resolution giving its advice and consent to ratification a
reservation concerning the Permanent Court of International Justice.
Accordingly, I would recommend that, if this course meets with your
approval, the Senate be requested to take suitable action advising and
consenting to the ratification of the International Convention Relating to the
Regulation of Aerial Navigation with Articles 5 and 34 amended as
proposed, upon the conditions and understandings outlined in the following
suggested resolution to be made a part of the instrument of ratification:
Resolved (two thirds of the Senators present concurring therein),
That the Senate advises and consents to the ratification on the part
of the United States of the International Convention Relating to
the Regulation of Aerial Navigation with Articles 5 and 34
amended as recommended by the International Commission for
Air Navigation in the protocols of amendment approved by the
Commission on October 27, 1922, and June 30, 1923,
respectively, on the following conditions and understandings:
1. The United States expressly reserves, with regard to
Article 3, the right to permit its private aircraft to fly

over areas over which private aircraft of other
contracting States may be forbidden to fly by the laws
of the United States, any provision of said Article 3 to
the contrary notwithstanding.
2. The United States reserves the right to enter into
special treaties, conventions and agreements regarding
aerial navigation with any country in the Western
Hemisphere if such country be not a party to this
Convention, without conforming to the provisions of
Article 5 of the Convention.
3. The United States reserves complete freedom of
action as to customs matters and does not consider itself
bound by the provisions of Annex H or any articles of
the Convention affecting the enforcement of its customs
laws.
4. Ratification of the present Convention shall not be
taken to involve any legal relation on the part of the
United States to the League of Nations or the
assumption of any obligation by the United States under
the covenant of the League of Nations constituting Part
I of the Treaty of Versailles.
5. The United States reserves its freedom of action
under Article 37 with respect to the submission to the
Permanent Court of International Justice of any
disagreement that may arise between the United States
and any other State regarding the interpretation of the
Convention.
In addition to the authenticated copies of the Convention and the Protocols
of Amendment to Articles 5 and 34, I transmit herewith the following
documents:
(1) Tabulated statement showing the action taken by various
countries with respect to the Convention, the Additional Protocol

of May 1, 1920 and the Protocols containing the proposed
amendments to Articles 5 and 34.
(2) Translation of a statement dated January 15, 1926, prepared
by the International Commission for Aerial Navigation,
containing a brief summary of the Convention and its annexes;
information concerning the work of the Commission; and the
amount of the expenses of the Commission as pro-rated for the
year 1926 among each of the contracting states.34
(3) Publication of the International Commission for Aerial
Navigation, issued in June, 1925,35 showing; on pages 10 to 41
inclusive the annexes to the Convention as modified by the
Commission between July, 1922 and April, 1925; and on page 42
the Additional Protocol of May 1, 1920 which came into force on
the same date as the Convention.
The Departments of Commerce, War and Navy and the National Advisory
Committee for Aeronautics are in favor of this country’s becoming a party
to the Convention.
Respectfully submitted,
FRANK B. KELLOGG
 
[Enclosure 1]
Draft Letter From President Coolidge to the Senate35a

undated
TO THE SENATE: I transmit herewith a report which I have received from the
Secretary of State regarding a convention, relating to air navigation,
concluded at Paris in 1919, an authenticated copy of which, with related
papers, accompanies the report.
The Secretary of State has very properly called attention to provisions of
Articles 34 and 37 having to do with the League of Nations and the
Permanent Court of International Justice, respectively, and has indicated
how these provisions, and certain other provisions of the convention to
which this Government would not be in a position to give its unqualified
approval, might be covered by reservations, a form of which he has
suggested. I concur in the recommendation of the Secretary of State.
In view of the increasing importance of aviation as a means of international
communication, and of the desirability of adopting uniform rules governing
international traffic by aircraft, and in order that citizens of the United
States may be in a position to share the benefits to be derived from
international co-operation of the character contemplated by the convention,
I request the advice and consent of the Senate to the ratification, with
appropriate reservations, of the convention, with Articles 5 and 34 thereof
amended as recommended by the International Commission for Air
Navigation, in the Protocols of Amendment approved by the Commission
on October 27, 1922 and June 30, 1923, respectively.
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Washington .
[Enclosure 2]
International Convention Relating to the Regulation of Aerial Navigation, Done at Paris, October
13, 191935b
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, BELGIUM, BOLIVIA, BRAZIL, THE BRITISH EMPIRE, CHINA, CUBA, ECUADOR, FRANCE,
GREECE, GUATEMALA, HAITI, THE HEDJAZ, HONDURAS, ITALY, JAPAN, LIBERIA, NICARAGUA, PANAMA, PERU, POLAND,
PORTUGAL, ROUMANIA, THE SERB-CROAT-SLOVENE STATE, SIAM, CZECHO-SLOVAKIA AND URUGUAY, Recognising

the progress of aerial navigation, and that the establishment of regulations
of universal application will be to the interest of all; Appreciating the
necessity of an early agreement upon certain principles and rules calculated
to prevent controversy;
Desiring to encourage the peaceful intercourse of nations by means of aerial
communication; Have determined for these purposes to conclude a
Convention, and have appointed as their Plenipotentiaries the following
reserving the righ[t] of substituting others to sign the same convention:
The President of the United States of America:
The Honourable Frank Lyon Polk, Under Secretary of State;
His Majesty the King of the Belgians:
Mr. Paul Hymans, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Minister of State;
The President of the Republic of Bolivia:
Mr. 
Ismaël 
Montes, 
Envoy 
extraordinary 
and 
Minister
Plenipotentiary of Bolivia at Paris;
The President of the Republic of Brazil:
Mr. Olyntho de Magalhaës, Envoy extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of Brazil at Paris;
His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor
of India:
The Right Honourable David Lloyd George, M. P., First Lord of
this Treasury and Prime Minister;
And:
For the Dominion of Canada, by:
The Honourable Sir Albert Edward Kemp, K. C. M. G., Minister
of the Overseas Forces;
For the Commonwealth of Australia, by:
The Honourable George Foster Pearce, Minister of Defence;

For the Union of South Africa, by:
The Right Honourable Viscount Milner, G. C. B., G. C. M. G.;
For the Dominion of New Zealand, by:
The Honourable Sir Thomas Mackenzie, K. C. M. G., High
Commissioner for New Zealand in the United Kingdom;
For India, by:
The Right Honourable Baron Sinha, K. C, Under Secretary of
State for India;
The President of the Chinese Republic:
Mr. Vikyiun Wellington Koo, Envoy extraordinary and Minister
plenipotentiary of China at Washington;
The President of the Cuban Republic:
Mr. Antonio Sanchez de Bustamante, Dean of the Faculty of Law
in the University of Havana, President of the Cuban Society of
International Law;
The President of the Republic of Ecuador:
Mr. Enrique Dorn y de Alsùa, Envoy extraordinary and Minister
plenipotentiary of Ecuador at Paris;
The President of the French Republic:
Mr. Georges Clemenceau, President of the Council, Minister of
War;
His Majesty the King of the Hellenes:
Mr. Nicolas Politis, Minister for Foreign Affairs;
The President of the Republic of Guatemala:
Mr. Joaquim Mendez, formerly Minister of State for Public
Works and Public Instruction, Envoy extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of Guatemala at Washington, Envoy extraordinary
and Minister Plenipotentiary on special mission at Paris;

The President of the Republic of Haiti:
Mr. Tertullien Guilbaud, Envoy extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of Haïti at Paris;
His Majesty the King of the Hedjaz:
Mr. Rustem Haïdar;
The President of the Republic of Honduras:
Dr. Policarpe Bonilla, on special mission to Washington, formerly
President of the Republic of Honduras, Envoy extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary;
His Majesty the King of Italy,
The Honourable Tommaso Tittoni, Senator of the Kingdom,
Minister for Foreign Affairs;
His Majesty the Emperor of Japan,
Mr. K. Matsui, Ambassador extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of
H. M. the Emperor of Japan at Paris;
The President of the Republic of Liberia:
The Honourable C. D. B. King, Secretary of State;
The President of the Republic of Nicaragua:
Mr. Salvador Chamorro, President of the Chamber of Deputies;
The President of the Republic of Panama:
Mr. Antonio Burgos, Envoy extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of Panama at Madrid;
The President of the Republic of Peru:
Mr. Carlos G. Candamo, Envoy extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of Peru at Paris;
The President of the Polish Republic:
Mr. Ignace J. Paderewski, President of the Council of Ministers,
Minister for Foreign Affairs;

The President of the Portuguese Republic:
Dr. Affonso da Costa, formerly President of the Council of
Ministers;
His Majesty the King of Roumania:
Mr. 
Nicolas 
Misu, 
Envoy 
extraordinary 
and 
Minister
Plenipotentiary of Roumania at London;
His Majesty the King of the Serbs, the Croats, and the Slovenes:
Mr. Milenko R. Vesnitch, Envoy extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of H. M. the King of the Serbs, the Croats and the
Slovenes at Paris;
His Majesty the King of Siam:
His Highness Prince Charoon, Envoy extraordinary and Minister
Plenipotentiary of H. M. the King of Siam at Paris;
The President of the Czecho-Slovak Republic:
Mr. Karel Kramàř, President of the Council of Ministers;
The President of the Republic of Uruguay:
Mr. Juan Antonio Buero, Minister of Industry, formerly Minister
of Foreign Affairs;
WHO have agreed as follows:
 
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
ARTICLE 1
The High contracting Parties recognise that every Power has complete and
exclusive sovereignty over the air space above its territory.
For the purpose of the present Convention the territory of a State shall be
understood as including the national territory, both that of the mother

country and of the colonies, and the territorial waters adjacent thereto.
ARTICLE 2
Each contracting State undertakes in time of peace to accord freedom of
innocent passage above its territory to the aircraft of the other contracting
States, provided that the conditions laid down in the present Convention are
observed.
Regulations made by a contracting State as to the admission over its
territory of the aircraft of the other contracting States shall be applied
without distinction of nationality.
ARTICLE 3
Each contracting State is entitled for military reasons or in the interest of
public safety to prohibit the aircraft of the other contracting States, under
the penalties provided by its legislation and subject to no distinction being
made in this respect between its private aircraft and those of the other
contracting States, from flying over certain areas of its territory.
In that case the locality and the extent of the prohibited areas shall be
published and notified beforehand to the other contracting States.
ARTICLE 4
Every aircraft which finds itself above a prohibited area shall, as soon as
aware of the fact, give the signal of distress provided in Paragraph 17 of
Annex D and land as soon as possible outside the prohibited area at one of
the nearest aerodromes of the State unlawfully flown over.
CHAPTER II
NATIONALITY OF AIRCRAFT
ARTICLE 5
No contracting State shall, except by a special and temporary authorisation,
permit the flight above its territory of an aircraft which does not possess the

nationality of a contracting State.
 
ARTICLE 6
Aircraft possess the nationality of the State on the register of which they are
entered, in accordance with the provisions of Section I (c) of Annex A.
ARTICLE 7
No aircraft shall be entered on the register of one of the contracting States
unless it belongs wholly to nationals of such State.
No incorporated company can be registered as the owner of an aircraft
unless it possess the nationality of the State in which the aircraft is
registered, unless the President or chairman of the company and at least
two-thirds of the directors possess such nationality, and unless the company
fulfils all other conditions which may be prescribed by the laws of the said
State.
ARTICLE 8
An aircraft cannot be validly registered in more than one State.
ARTICLE 9
The contracting States shall exchange every month among themselves and
transmit to the International Commission for Air Navigation referred to in
article 34 copies of registrations and of cancellations of registration which
shall have been entered on their official registers during the preceding
month.
ARTICLE 10
All aircraft engaged in international navigation shall bear their nationality
and registration marks as well as the name and residence of the owner in
accordance with Annex A.

CHAPTER III
CERTIFICATES OF AIRWORTHINESS [AND] COMPETENCY
ARTICLE 11
Every aircraft engaged in international navigation shall, in accordance with
the conditions laid down in Annex B, be provided with a certificate of
airworthiness issued or rendered valid by the State whose nationality it
possesses.
ARTICLE 12
The commanding officer, pilots, engineers and others members of the
operating crew of every aircraft shall, in accordance with the conditions laid
down in Annex E, be provided with certificates of competency and licences
issued or rendered valid by the State whose nationality the aircraft
possesses.
ARTICLE 13
Certificates of airworthiness and of competency and licences issued or
rendered valid by the State whose nationality the aircraft possesses, in
accordance with the regulations established by Annex B and Annex E and
hereafter by the International Commission for Air Navigation, shall be
recognised as valid by the other States.
Each State has the right to refuse to recognise for the purpose of flights
within the limits of and above its own territory certificates of competency
and licences granted to one of its nationals by another contracting State.
ARTICLE 14
No wireless apparatus shall be carried without a special licence issued by
the State whose nationality the aircraft possesses. Such apparatus shall not
be used except by members of the crew provided with a special licence for
the purpose.

Every aircraft used in public transport and capable of carrying ten or more
persons shall be equipped with sending and receiving wireless apparatus
when the methods of employing such apparatus shall have been determined
by the International Commission for Air Navigation.
This Commission may later extend the obligation of carrying wireless
apparatus to all other classes of aircraft in the conditions and according to
the methods which it may determine.
CHAPTER IV
ADMISSION TO AIR NAVIGATION ABOVE FOREIGN TERRITORY
ARTICLE 15
Every aircraft of a contracting State has the right to cross the air space of
another State without landing. In this case it shall follow the route fixed by
the State over which the flight takes place. However, for reasons of general
security it will be obliged to land if ordered to do so by means of the signals
provided in Annex D.
Every aircraft which passes from one State into another shall, if the
regulations of the latter State require it, land in one of the aerodromes fixed
by the latter. Notification of these aerodromes shall be given by the
contracting States to the International Commission for Air Navigation and
by it transmitted to all the contracting States.
The establishment of international airways shall be subject to the consent of
the States flown over.
 
ARTICLE 16
Each contracting State shall have the right to establish reservations and
restrictions in favour of its national aircraft in connection with the carriage
of persons and goods for hire between two points on its territory.

Such reservations and restrictions shall be immediately published, and shall
be communicated to the International Commission for Air Navigation,
which shall notify them to the other contracting States.
ARTICLE 17
The aircraft of a contracting State which establishes reservations and
restrictions in accordance with Article 16, may be subjected to the same
reservations and restrictions in any other contracting State, even though the
latter State does not itself impose the reservations and restrictions on other
foreign aircraft.
ARTICLE 18
Every aircraft passing through the territory of a contracting State, including
landing and stoppages reasonably necessary for the purpose of such transit,
shall be exempt from any seizure on the ground of infringement of patent,
design or model, subject to the deposit of security the amount of which in
default of amicable agreement shall be fixed with the least possible delay
by the competent authority of the place of seizure.
CHAPTER V
RULES TO BE OBSERVED ON DEPARTURE WHEN UNDER WAY AND ON LANDING
ARTICLE 19
Every aircraft engaged in international navigation shall be provided with:
(a.) A certificate of registration in accordance with Annex A;
(b.) A certificate of airworthiness in accordance with Annex B;
(c.) Certificate and licences of the commanding officer, pilots and
crew in accordance with Annex E;
(d.) If it carries passengers, a list of their names;
(e.) If it carries freight, bills of lading and manifest;

(f.) Log books in accordance with Annex C;
(g.) If equipped with wireless, the special licence prescribed by
Article 14.
ARTICLE 20
The log books shall be kept for two years after the last entry.
 
ARTICLE 21
Upon the departure or landing of an aircraft, the authorities of the country
shall have, in all cases, the right to visit the aircraft and to verify all the
documents with which it must be provided.
ARTICLE 22
Aircraft of the contracting States shall be entitled to the same measures of
assistance for landing, particularly in case of distress, as national aircraft.
ARTICLE 23
With regard to the salvage of aircraft wrecked at sea the principles of
maritime law will apply, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary.
ARTICLE 24
Every aerodrome in a contracting State, which upon payment of charges is
open to public use by its national aircraft, shall likewise be open to the
aircraft of all the other contracting States.
In every such aerodrome there shall be a single tariff of charges for landing
and length of stay applicable alike to national and foreign aircraft.
ARTICLE 25

Each contracting State undertakes to adopt measures to ensure that every
aircraft flying above the limits of its territory and that every aircraft
wherever it may be, carrying its nationality mark, shall comply with the
regulations contained in Annex D.
Each of the contracting States undertakes to ensure the prosecution and
punishment of all persons contravening these regulations.
CHAPTER VI
PROHIBITED TRANSPORT
ARTICLE 26
The carriage by aircraft of explosives and of arms and munitions of war is
forbidden in international navigation. No foreign aircraft shall be permitted
to carry such articles between any two points in the same contracting State.
ARTICLE 27
Each State may, in aerial navigation, prohibit or regulate the carriage or use
of photographic apparatus. Any such regulations shall be at once notified to
the International Commission for Air Navigation, which shall communicate
this information to the other Contracting States.
 
ARTICLE 28
As a measure of public safety, the carriage of objects other than those
mentioned in articles 26 and 27 may be subjected to restrictions by any
contracting State. Any such regulations shall be at once notified to the
International Commission for Air Navigation, which shall communicate this
information to the other contracting States.
ARTICLE 29
All restrictions mentioned in Article 28 shall be applied equally to national
and foreign aircraft.

CHAPTER VII
STATE AIRCRAFT
ARTICLE 30
The following shall be deemed to be State aircraft:—
(a.) Military aircraft.
(b.) Aircraft exclusively employed in State service, such as posts,
customs, police.
Every other aircraft shall be deemed to be a private aircraft.
All state aircraft other than military, customs and police aircraft shall be
treated as private aircraft and as such shall be subject to all the provisions of
the present Convention.
ARTICLE 31
Every aircraft commanded by a person in military service detailed for the
purpose shall be deemed to be a military aircraft.
ARTICLE 32
No military aircraft of a contracting State shall fly over the territory of
another contracting State nor land thereon without special authorisation. In
case of such authorisation the military aircraft shall enjoy, in principle, in
the absence of special stipulation the privileges which are customarily
accorded to foreign ships of war.
A military aircraft which is forced to land or which is requested or
summoned to land shall by reason thereof acquire no right to the privileges
referred to in the above paragraph.
ARTICLE 33

Special arrangements between the States concerned will determine in what
cases police and customs aircraft may be authorised to cross the frontier.
They shall in no case be entitled to the privileges referred to in Article 32.
 
CHAPTER VIII
INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION FOR AIR NAVIGATION
ARTICLE 34
There shall be instituted, under the name of the International Commission
for Air Navigation, a permanent Commission placed under the direction of
the League of Nations and composed of: Two Representatives of each of the
following States: The United States of America, France, Italy and Japan;
One Representative of Great Britain and one of each of the British
Dominions and of India; One Representative of each of the other
contracting States.
Each of the five States first-named (Great Britain, the British Dominions
and India counting for this purpose as one State) shall have the least whole
number of votes which, when multiplied by five, will give a product
exceeding by at least one vote the total number of the votes of all the other
contracting States.
All the States other than the five first named shall each have one vote.
The International Commission for Air Navigation shall determine the rules
of its own procedure and the place of its permanent seat, but it shall be free
to meet in such places as it may deem convenient. Its first meeting shall
take place at Paris. This meeting shall be convened by the French
Government, as soon as a majority of the signatory States shall have
notified to it their ratification of the present Convention.
The duties of this Commission shall be:

(a.) To receive proposals from or to make proposals to any of the
contracting States for the modification or amendment of the
provisions of the present Convention, and to notify changes
adopted;
(b.) To carry out the duties imposed upon it by the present Article
and by Articles 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 27, 28, 36, and 37 of the present
Convention;
(c.) To amend the provisions of the Annexes A–G;
(d.) To collect and communicate to the contracting States
information of every kind concerning international air navigation;
(e.) To collect and communicate to the contracting States all
information relating to wireless telegraphy, meteorology and
medical science which may be of interest to air navigation;
(f.) To ensure the publication of maps for air navigation in
accordance with the provisions of Annex F;
(g.) To give its opinion on questions which the States may submit
for examination.
Any modification of the provisions of any one of the Annexes may be made
by the International Commission for Air Navigation when such
modification shall have been approved by three fourths of the total possible
votes which could be cast if all the States were represented and shall
become effective from the time when it shall have been notified by the
International Commission for Air Navigation to all the contracting States.
Any proposed modification of the Articles of the present Convention shall
be examined by the International Commission for Air Navigation, whether
it originates with one of the contracting States or with the Commission
itself. No such modification shall be proposed for adoption by the
contracting States, unless it shall have been approved by at least two-thirds
of the total possible votes.

All such modifications of the Articles of the Convention (but not of the
provisions of the Annexes) must be formally adopted by the contracting
States before they become effective.
The expenses of organisation and operation of the International
Commission for Air Navigation shall be borne by the contracting States in
proportion to the number of votes at their disposal.
The expenses occasioned by the sending of technical delegations will be
borne by their respective States.
CHAPTER IX
FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 35
The High Contracting Parties undertake as far as they are respectively
concerned to co-operate as far as possible in international measures
concerning:
(a.) The collection and dissemination of statistical, current, and
special meteorological information, in accordance with the
provisions of Annex G;
(b.) The publication of standard aeronautical maps, and the
establishment of a uniform system of ground marks for flying, in
accordance with the provisions of Annex F;
(c.) The use of wireless telegraphy in air navigation, the
establishment of the necessary wireless stations, and the
observance of international wireless regulations.
ARTICLE 36
General provisions relative to customs in connection with international air
navigation are the subject of a special agreement contained in Annex H to
the present Convention.

Nothing in the present Convention shall be construed as preventing the
contracting States from concluding, in conformity with its principles,
special protocols as between State and State in respect of customs, police,
posts and other matters of common interest in connection with air
navigation. Any such protocols shall be at once notified to the International
Commission for Air Navigation which shall communicate this information
to the other contracting States.
ARTICLE 37
In the case of a disagreement between two or more States relating to the
interpretation of the present Convention, the question in dispute shall be
determined by the Permanent Court of International Justice to be
established by the League of Nations, and until its establishment by
arbitration.
If the parties do not agree on the choice of the arbitrators, they shall proceed
as follows: Each of the parties shall name an arbitrator, and the arbitrators
shall meet to name an umpire. If the arbitrators cannot agree, the parties
shall each name a third State, and the third States so named shall proceed to
designate the umpire, by agreement or by each proposing a name and then
determining the choice by lot.
Disagreement relating to the technical regulations annexed to the present
Convention, shall be settled by the decision of the International
Commission for Air Navigation by a majority of votes.
In case the difference involves the question whether the interpretation of the
Convention or that of a regulation is concerned, final decision shall be made
by arbitration as provided in the first paragraph of this Article.
ARTICLE 38
In case of war, the provisions of the present Convention shall not affect the
freedom of action of the contracting States either as belligerents or as
neutrals.
ARTICLE 39

The provisions of the present Convention are completed by the Annexes A
to H, which, subject to Article 34 (c), shall have the same effect and shall
come into force at the same time as the Convention itself.
ARTICLE 40
The British Dominions and India shall be deemed to be States for the
purposes of the present Convention.
The territories and nationals of Protectorates or of territories administered
in the name of the League of Nations, shall, for the purposes of the present
Convention, be assimilated to the territory and nationals of the Protecting or
Mandatory States.
 
ARTICLE 41
States which have not taken part in the war of 1914–1919 shall be permitted
to adhere to the present Convention.
This adhesion shall be notified through the diplomatic channel to the
Government of the French Republic, and by it to all the signatory or
adhering States.
ARTICLE 42
A State which took part in the war of 1914–1919 but which is not a
signatory of the present Convention, may adhere only if it is a member of
the League of Nations or, until January 1, 1923, if its adhesion is approved
by the Allied and Associated Powers signatories of the Treaty of Peace
concluded with the said State. After January 1, 1923, this adhesion may be
admitted if it is agreed to by at least three-fourths of the signatory and
adhering States voting under the conditions provided by Article 34 of the
present Convention.
Applications for adhesions shall be addressed to the Government of the
French Republic, which will communicate them to the other contracting

Powers. Unless the State applying is admitted ipso facto as a Member of the
League of Nations, the French Government will receive the votes of the
said Powers and will announce to them the result of the voting.
ARTICLE 43
The present Convention may not be denounced before January 1, 1922. In
case of denunciation, notification thereof shall be made to the Government
of the French Republic, which shall communicate it to the other contracting
Parties. Such denunciation shall not take effect until at least one year after
the giving of notice, and shall take effect only with respect to the Power
which has given notice.
THE PRESENT CONVENTION shall be ratified.
Each Power will address its ratification to the French Government, which
will inform the other signatory Powers.
The ratifications will remain deposited in the archives of the French
Government.
The present Convention will come into force for each signatory Power, in
respect of other Powers which have already ratified, forty days from the
date of the deposit of its ratification.
On the coming into force of the present Convention, the French
Government will transmit a certified copy to the Powers which under the
Treaties of Peace have undertaken to enforce rules of aerial navigatian in
conformity with those contained in it.
DONE at Paris, the thirteenth day of October nineteen hundred and nineteen in
a single copy which shall remain deposited in the archives of the French
Government, and of which duly authorised copies shall be sent to the
contracting States.
The said copy, dated as above, may be signed until the twelfth day of April
nineteen hundred and twenty inclusively.

IN FAITH WHEREOF the hereinafter-named Plenipotentiaries whose powers have
been found in good and due form have signed the present Convention in the
French, English and Italian languages, which are equally authentic.
[SEAL] HUGH C. WALLACE
[SEAL] ROLIN-JAEQUEMYNS
[SEAL] ISMAEL MONTES
[SEAL] RAUL FERNANDES
[SEAL] EYRE A. CROWE
[SEAL] GEORGE H. PERLEY
[SEAL] ANDREW FISHER
[SEAL] R. A. BLANKENBERG
[SEAL] THOMAS MACKENZIE
[SEAL] EYRE A. CROWE
[SEAL] V. K. WELLINGTON KOO
[SEAL] RAFAEL MARTINEZ ORTIZ
[SEAL] E. DORN Y DE ALSUA
[SEAL] S. PICHON
[SEAL] N. POLITIS
[SEAL] GUILLERMO MATOS PACHECO
[SEAL] VITTORIO SCIALOJA
[SEAL] K. MATSUI
[SEAL] ANTONIO BURGOS
[SEAL] I. J. PADEREWSKI
[SEAL] AFFONSO COSTA
[SEAL] ALEX. VAIDA VOEVOD
[SEAL] DR. ANTE TRUMBIČ
[SEAL] CHAROON
[SEAL] STEFAN OSUSKY
[SEAL] J. A. BUERO
[For text of annexes, see League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 11, No. 297,
page 243; also Malloy, Treaties, 1910–1923, vol. III, page 3782. For text of
Annex A, as completed by the decisions of the International Commission
for Air Navigation dated July 13, 1922, Oct. 25, 1922, Feb. 28, 1923, June
26, 1923, Mar. 3, 1924, Oct. 14, 1924, and Apr. 6, 1925, see International

Commission for Air Navigation, Official Bulletin No. 8, June 1925, page
42.]
 
ADDITIONAL PROTOCOL TO THE CONVENTION OF OCTOBER 13TH, 1919, RELATING TO THE REGULATION OF AERIAL NAVIGATION
THE HIGH CONTRACTING PARTIES declare themselves ready to grant, at the request of
signatory or adhering States who are concerned, certain derogations to
Article V of the Convention, but only where they consider the reasons
involved worthy of consideration.
The requests should be addressed to the Government of the French
Republic who will lay them before the International Commission on Aerial
Navigation provided for in Article 34 of the Convention.
The International Commission on Aerial Navigation will examine each
request, which may only be submitted for the acceptance of the contracting
States if it has been approved by at least a two-thirds majority of the total
possible number of votes, that is to say, of the total number of votes which
could be given if the Representatives of all the States were present.
Each derogation which is granted must by [be] expressly accepted by the
contracting States before coming into effect.
The derogation granted will authorise the contracting State profiting thereby
to allow the aircraft of one or more named non-contracting States to fly
over its territory, but only for a limited period of time fixed by the text of
the decision granting the derogation.
At the expiration of this period the derogation will be automatically
renewed for a similar period unless one of the contracting States has
declared its opposition to such renewal.
Further, the High Contracting Parties decide to fix June 1st, 1920, as the
date up to which the present Protocol may be signed, and, on account of the
bearing which the present Protocol has on the Convention of October 13th,

1919, to prolong until that date the period under which the above mentioned
Convention may be signed.
DONE at Paris, the first of May nineteen hundred and twenty in a single copy
which shall remain deposited in the archives of the Government of the
French Republic, and of which authenticated copies will be transferred to
the Contracting States.
The said copy, dated as above, may be signed up to and inclusive of the first
day of June, nineteen hundred and twenty.
IN FAITH WHEREOF, the undermentioned Plenipotentiaries, whose powers have been
found in good and due form, have signed the present Protocol, of which the
French, English and Italian text will be recognised as of equal validity.
 
HUGH C. WALLACE
E. DE GAIFFIER
J. C. ARTEAGA
DERBY
GEORGE H. PERLEY
ANDREW FISHER
THOMAS MACKENZIE
R. A. BLANKENBERG
DERBY
VIKYUIN WELLINGTON KOO
RAFAEL MARTINEZ ORTIZ

E. DORN Y DE ALSUA
A. MILLERAND
A. ROMANOS
BONIN
K. MATSUI
R. A. AMADOR
ERASME PILTZ
JOÂO CHAGAS
D. J. GHIKA
DR. ANTE TRUMBIČ
CHAROON
STEFAN OSUSKY
J. C. BLANCO
[Enclosure 3—Translation]
Protocol Relative to an Amendment to Article 5 to the Convention for the Regulation of Aerial
Navigation of October 13, 191935c
The International Commission on Aerial Navigation in the course of its
second session held at London under the Presidency of General Sir W.
Sefton Brancker, assisted by Mr. Albert Roper, Secretary General, approved
at the sitting of October 25, 1922, in accordance with the provisions of
Article 34 of the Convention making regulations for aerial navigation, an
amendment to Article 5 of the said Convention which shall be worded as
follows, in French, English, and Italian:35d

ARTICLE 5
No contracting State shall, except by a special and temporary
authorization, permit the flight above its territory of an aircraft
which does not possess the nationality of a contracting State,
unless it has concluded a special convention with the State in
which the aircraft is registered. The stipulations of such special
convention must not infringe the rights of the contracting parties
to the present Convention and must conform to the rules laid
down by the said Convention and its annexes. Such special
convention shall be communicated to the International
Commission for Air Navigation which will bring it to the
knowledge of the other contracting States.
The undersigned, duly authorized thereto, declare they accept, in the name
of the States they represent, the foregoing amendment which is proposed
for final acceptance by the contracting States.
The protocol will be kept open for the signature of States that are now
contracting Parties to the Convention; it will be ratified and the ratifications
shall be deposited as soon as possible at the permanent seat of the
Commission.
It shall go into force as soon as the States that are now contracting parties to
the Convention shall have effected the deposit of their ratifications.
The States which will become contracting parties to the Convention may
adhere to the present Protocol.
A certified copy of this Protocol shall be forwarded by the Secretary
General to all the contracting States and also to the other States that have
signed the Convention for the regulation of aerial navigation.
DONE in London, October twenty-seven, one thousand nine hundred twenty-
two, in a single copy which will be deposited in the archives of the
Commission.

W. S. BRANCKER, Major-General,
President of the Second Session of the I. C. A. N.
ALBERT ROPER,
Secretary General of the I. C. A. N.
Signed:
For Belgium: E. DE GAIFFIER
For Great Britain: ERIC PHIPPS
For the Dominion of Canada: PETER C. LARKIN
For the Commonwealth of Australia: JOSEPH COOK
For the Union of South Africa: ERIC PHIPPS
For the Dominion of New Zealand: JAMES ALLEN
For India: ERIC PHIPPS
For France: PIERRE ETTENNE FLANDIN
For Japan: SHIZUMA
OKUYAMA
For Portugal: J. CHAGAS
For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes: SPALAIKOVITCH
 
[In furnishing this authenticated copy of the protocol the Secretary General
of the International Commission for Air Navigation indicated that the
following signatures had also been deposited: For Greece: LEON V. MELAS
For Persia: PRINCE SAMAD
For Siam: CHAROON]
[Enclosure 4—Translation]
Protocol Relative to an Amendment to Article 34 to the Convention for the Regulation of Aerial
Navigation of October 13, 191936
The International Commission on Aerial Navigation in the course of its
fourth session held at London under the Presidency of General Sir W.
Sefton Brancker, assisted by Mr. Albert Roper, Secretary General, approved
at the sitting of June 30, 1923, in accordance with the provisions of Article
34 of the Convention making regulations for aerial navigation, amendments
to certain subsections of Article 34 of the said Convention which shall be
worded as follows, in French, English, and Italian:37

ARTICLE 34
There shall be instituted, under the name of the International
Commission for Air Navigation, a permanent Commission placed
under the direction of the League of Nations and composed of:
Two Representatives of each of the following States: the United
States of America, France, Italy and Japan;
One Representative of Great Britain and one of each of the British
Dominions and of India;
One Representative of each of the other contracting States.
Each State represented on the Commission (Great Britain, the
British Dominions and India counting for this purpose as one
State) shall have one vote.
The International Commission for Air Navigation shall determine
the rules of its own procedure and the place of its permanent seat,
but it shall be free to meet in such places as it may deem
convenient. Its first meeting shall take place at Paris. This
meeting shall be convened by the French Government, as soon as
a majority of the signatory States shall have notified to it their
ratification of the present Convention.
The duties of this Commission shall be:
a) To receive proposals from or to make proposals to
any of the contracting States for the modification or
amendment of the provisions of the present Convention,
and to notify changes adopted;
b) To carry out the duties imposed upon it by the
present Article and by Articles 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 27, 28,
36 and 37 of the present Convention.
c) To amend the provisions of the Annexes A-G;

d) To collect and communicate to the contracting States
information of every kind concerning international air
navigation;
e) To collect and communicate to the contracting States
all 
information 
relating 
to 
wireless 
telegraphy,
meteorology and medical science which may be of
interest to air navigation;
f) To ensure the publication of maps for air navigation
in accordance with the provisions of Annex F;
g) To give its opinions on questions which the States
may submit for examination.
Any modification of the provisions of any one of the Annexes
may be made by the International Commission for Air Navigation
when such modification shall have been approved by three-
fourths of the total possible votes which could be cast if all the
States were represented: this majority must, moreover, include at
least three of the five following States: the United States of
America, the British Empire, France, Italy, Japan. Such
modification shall become effective from the time when it shall
have been notified by the International Commission for Air
Navigation to all the contracting States.
Any proposed modification of the Articles of the present
Convention shall be examined by the International Commission
for Air Navigation, whether it originates with one of the
contracting States or with the Commission itself. No such
modification shall be proposed for adoption by the contracting
States, unless it shall have been approved by at least two-thirds of
the total possible votes.
All such modifications of the Articles of the Convention (but not
of the provisions of the Annexes) must be formally adopted by the
contracting States before they become effective.

The expenses of organization and operation of the International
Commission for Air Navigation shall be borne by the contracting
States: the total shall be allocated in the proportion of two shares
each for the United States of America, the British Empire, France,
Italy and Japan and one share each for all the other States.
The expenses occasioned by the sending of technical delegations
will be borne by their respective States.
The undersigned, duly authorized thereto, declare they accept, in the name
of the States they represent, the foregoing amendments which are proposed
for final acceptance by the contracting States.
The protocol will be kept open for the signature of States that are now
contracting Parties to the Convention; it will be ratified and the ratifications
shall be deposited as soon as possible at the permanent seat of the
Commission.
 
It shall go into force as soon as the States that are now contracting parties to
the Convention shall have effected the deposit of their ratifications.
The States which will become contracting parties to the Convention may
adhere to the present Protocol.
A certified copy of this Protocol shall be forwarded by the Secretary
General to all the contracting States and also to the other States that have
signed the Convention for the regulation of aerial navigation.
DONE in London, June thirty, one thousand nine hundred and twenty-three, in
a single copy which will be deposited in the archives of the Commission.
W. S. BRANCKER, Major-General, President of the Fourth Session of the I. C. A.
N.
ALBERT ROPER,
Secretary General of the I. C. A. N.
Signed:

For Belgium: A. OBERT DE THIEUSTES
For Great Britain: CREWE
For Canada: PETER C. LARKIN
For Australia: W. S. BRANCKER
For the Union of South Africa: E. WALTON
For the Dominion of New Zealand: J. ALLEN
For India: CREWE
For France: PIERRE-ETIENNE FLANDIN
For Greece: LEON. V. MELAS
For Italy: ROMANO AVEZZANA
For Japan: T. SHIZUMA
S. OKUYAMA
For Persia: PRINCE SAMAD
For Portugal: JOAO CHAGAS
For Siam: CHAROON
In furnishing this authenticated copy of the protocol the Secretary General
of the International Commission for Air Navigation indicated that the
following signatures had also been deposited: For the Irish Free State: JAMES
MCNEILL
For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes: M. SPALAIKOVTTCH
 
[Enclosure 5]
TABULATED STATEMENT SHOWING THE ACTION TAKEN BY VARIOUS COUNTRIES WITH RESPECT TO THE CONVENTION FOR THE REGULATION
OP AERIAL NAVIGATION, THE ADDITIONAL PROTOCOL OF MAY 1, 1920, TO THE CONVENTION, AND THE PROTOCOLS CONTAINING THE PROPOSED
AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLES 5 AND 34
Names of States
Convention for the regulation of aerial navigation
(Paris, Oct. 13, 1919)
Date 
of
signature
Date 
of
accession
Date of deposit
of ratifications
Date 
of
adhesion
I. CONTRACTING STATES
Belgium
Oct. 
13,
1919
June 1, 1922
British Empire:

Great 
Britain 
and
Northern Ireland
do
do
Dominion of Canada
do
do
Commonwealth 
of
Australia
do
do
Union of South Africa do
do
Dominion 
of 
New
Zealand
do
do
Irish Free State
do
India
do
do
Bulgaria
July 
5,
1923
France
Oct. 
13,
1919
June 1, 1922
Greece
do
do
Italy
do
Mar. 13, 1923
Japan
do
June 1, 1922
Persia
July 
11,
1922
Poland
Oct. 
13,
1919
Nov. 26, 1924
Portugal
do
June 1, 1922
Rumania
do
May 31, 1924
Kingdom of the Serbs,
Croats and Slovenes
do
June 1, 1922
Siam
do
do
Czechoslovak
Republic
do
Nov. 23, 1923
Uruguay
do
July 13, 1924
II. SIGNATORY STATES
United 
States 
of
America.
do
Bolivia
do
June 1, 1922

Brazil
do
China
do
Cuba
do
Ecuador
do
Guatemala
do
Liberia
Mar. 
29,
1922
Nicaragua
Dec. 
31,
1920
Panama
Oct. 
13,
1919
Peru
June 
22,
1920
* The Convention has been denounced by Bolivia with effect as from the
30th August 1924.
NOTE: The dates in tabulation are those given by the International
Commission for Air Navigation The Department of State is informed that
Chile has decided to adhere to the convention.
 
Names of States
Additional protocol to the convention (Paris, May
1, 1920)
Date 
of
signature
Date 
of
accession
Date 
of 
the
deposit 
of
ratifications
Date 
of
adhesion
I. CONTRACTING STATES
Belgium
May 
1,
1920
June 1, 1922
British Empire:
Great 
Britain 
and
Northern Ireland
do
do
Dominion of Canada do
do

Commonwealth 
of
Australia
do
do
Union of South Africa do
do
Dominion 
of 
New
Zealand
do
Irish Free State
do
India
May 
1,
1920
do
Bulgaria
Nov. 
28,
1924
France
May 
1,
1920
June 1, 1922
Greece
do
do
Italy
do
Apr. 10, 1923
Japan
do
June 1, 1922
Persia
July 
11,
1922
Poland
May 
1,
1920
Nov. 26, 1924
Portugal
do
Oct. 7, 1922
Rumania
do
May 31, 1924
Kingdom of the Serbs,
Croats and Slovenes
do
June 1, 1922
Siam
do
do
Czechoslovak
Republic
do
Nov. 23, 1923
Uruguay
do
II. SIGNATORY STATES
United 
States 
of
America*
May 
1,
1920
Bolivia
do
June 1, 1922
Brazil
June 
28,
1921

China
May 
1,
1920
Cuba
do
Ecuador
do
Guatemala
do
Liberia
Mar. 
29,
1922
Nicaragua
Dec. 
31,
1920
Panama
May 
1,
1920
Peru
June 
22,
1920
* The protocol was by its terms left open for signature up to and including
June 1, 1920. It was signed on behalf of the United States on May 31, 1920.
 
Names of States
Protocol relative to an
amendment to article 5 of
the convention (London,
Oct. 27, 1922)
Protocol relative to an
amendment to article 34 of
the convention (London,
June 30, 1923)
Date 
of
signature
Date 
of 
the
deposit 
of
ratifications
Date 
of
signature
Date 
of 
the
deposit 
of
ratifications
I. CONTRACTING STATES
Belgium
Dec. 
22,
1922
Apr. 19, 1923
Sept. 
11,
1923
Oct. 19, 1923
British Empire:
Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
Mar. 
28,
1923
Dec. 19, 1923
Sept. 
28,
1923
Nov. 20, 1924
Dominion 
of
Canada
Apr. 
6,
1923
do
Mar. 
17,
1924
Do.
Commonwealth
of Australia
Mar. 
28,
1923
do
Dec. 
19,
1923
Do.

Union of South
Africa
do
do
Dec. 
13,
1923
Do.
Dominion of New
Zealand
do
do
Nov. 
27,
1923
Do.
Irish Free State
do
Sept. 
23,
1924
Do.
India
Mar. 
28,
1923
do
Dec. 
14,
1923
Do.
Bulgaria*
France
Nov. 
21,
1922
Dec. 26, 1924
June 
30,
1923
Dec. 26, 1924
Greece
Dec. 
1,
1923
Mar. 7, 1925
Dec. 
1,
1923
Mar. 7, 1925
Italy*
Jan. 
24,
1924
June 13, 1924
Japan
Mar. 
10,
1923
Aug. 4, 1925
Aug. 
27,
1923
Aug. 4, 1925
Persia
Apr. 
7,
1924
July 8, 1925
Apr. 
7,
1924
Nov. 10, 1925
Poland
Portugal
Feb. 
2,
1923
July 30, 1924
Dec. 
3,
1923
Rumania
Kingdom of the
Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes.
May 
18,
1923
Jan. 
15,
1925
Siam
Aug. 
21,
1923
Feb. 20, 1924
Nov. 
6,
1923
July 7, 1925
Czechoslovak
Republic*
Uruguay
II. SIGNATORY STATES
United States of
America

Bolivia
Brazil
China
Cuba
Ecuador
Guatemala
Liberia
Nicaragua
Panama
Peru
* Italy, Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia which were not parties to the
Convention at the time that the Protocol of Amendment to Article 5 was
adopted by the International Commission for Air Navigation have since
given notice of their adhesion to this Protocol. Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia
have given notice of their adhesion to the Protocol of Amendment to Article
34.
33a The paragraphs underlined in the original are printed in italics.
* The Commission is not authorized under the Convention to modify Annex
H or any of the Articles of the Convention. [Footnote in the original.]
34 Not printed.
35 International Commission for Air Navigation: Convention Relating to the
Regulation of Aerial Navigation Dated 13th October 1919 (Paris, June
1925). The annexes to the convention are not reprinted in Foreign
Relations.
35a Sent June 16, 1926.
35b Filed separately as unperfected treaty No. T–8.
35c Filed with unperfected treaty No. T–8.
35d The text of article 5 which follows is reproduced from the English text
which appeared in the original protocol in columns parallel with the French
and Italian texts.
36 Filed with unperfected treaty No. T–8.

37 The text of article 34 which follows is reproduced from the English text
which appeared in the original protocol in columns parallel with the French
and Italian texts.

Convention between the United States
and 
other 
powers 
revising 
the
international sanitary convention of
January 17, 1912,38 signed June 21,
1926
38 Malloy, Treaties, 1910–1923, vol. III, p. 2972.
[113] The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
Washington, February 25, 1925.
512.4 B 2/–
[114] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Daeschner)
Washington, October 8, 1925.
512.4 B 2/1
[115] The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Bérenger)
Washington, March 24, 1926.
512.4 B 2/13
[116] Convention Between the United States and Other Powers
Revising the International Sanitary Convention of January 17, 1912,

Signed at Paris, June 21, 1926
Done at Paris the twenty-first day of June, nineteen hundred and twenty-six,
in a single copy, which will remain deposited in the archives of the
Government of the French Republic; and of which certified copies will be
transmitted through the diplomatic channel to the other Contracting Parties.
Treaty Series No. 762
[117] Procès-Verbal of the Deposit of Ratifications of the International
Sanitary Convention by Belgium, Spain, France, Great Britain,
Monaco, and the Soudan
Done at Paris March 10, 1928.
Treaty Series No. 762
[118] Procès-Verbal of the Deposit of Ratifications of the International
Sanitary Contention by Czechoslovakia
Done at Paris March 28, 1928.
Treaty Series No. 762
[119] Procès-Verbal of the Deposit of Ratifications of the International
Sanitary Convention by the United States of America
Done at Paris, May 22, 1928.
Treaty Series No. 762

512.4 B 2/–
[Document 113]
The French Ambassador (Daeschner) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, February 25, 1925.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: The French Government, which had received on various
occasions propositions looking to a revision of the International Sanitary
Convention of January 17, 1912, had not up to date been able under the
circumstances to gratify those requests. I have the honor to inform Your
Excellency that it now seems possible for the French Government to
contemplate the meeting of a conference which would be given charge of
that revision.
The Committee of the International Office of Public Hygiene conducted at
several of its sessions a study of the amendments that it might be advisable
to introduce in the text of the said convention.
It was suggested to constitute into a conference the Committee of the
International Office of Public Hygiene, whose members furnished with full
powers would draw up and sign a new convention. It did not seem possible
to proceed in this way as there are countries that are not parties to the Office
and as certain States would like to assign technical officers on commercial
and navigation questions to their delegates, who are specialists in hygiene
questions.
But it would be advantageous to have the countries that belong to the Office
of Hygiene include their representatives therein among their delegates. In
order to save these last-named gentlemen duplicated travelling expenses the
French Government suggests that the date for the opening of the Sanitary
Conference be one close to that of the end of one of the sessions of the
Committee of the Office.

I should then be very much obliged to Your Excellency if you would kindly
let me know whether the Government of the United States intends to send
delegates with full powers to a Sanitary Conference that would be held in
Paris and whether it accepts the date of Monday, October 26, 1925, as the
date of the opening of the said Conference.39
I have the honor to beg you kindly to have the draft of revision, forwarded
herewith in seven copies, of the Sanitary Convention of January 17, 1912,
as drawn up by the Committee of the International Office of Public
Hygiene,40 examined by the hygienic departments of the Federal
Government and to forward to me in good time the remarks of such
departments, together, as far as possible, with a French translation.
Be pleased [etc.]
E. DAESCHNER
39 In despatch No. 5271, June 10, 1925, the Ambassador in France reported
that the Conference had been postponed until May 10, 1926.
40 Enclosure not printed.

512.4 B 2/1
[Document 114]
The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Daeschner)
WASHINGTON, October 8, 1925.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to inform you that your note of February 25,
1925, concerning participation by the United States, by delegates with full
powers, in an International Conference to be held at Paris in May 1926 for
the purpose of revising the International Sanitary Convention of January 17,
1912, has had the careful consideration of the appropriate health officials of
the United States, as has had also the draft of revision enclosed with your
note.
These officials are of the opinion that it is extremely advisable to have a
revision of the existing sanitary convention. The draft of revision which you
furnished is in general approved by them when considered in connection
with certain changes and explanations adopted by the Committee of the
International Office of Public Hygiene as reported upon pages 279, et seq.,
of the Procès-Verbaux of the October, 1924 session. The Government of the
United States is, therefore, pleased to inform you, in reply to the two
inquiries of your note, that as at present advised, it will send a delegate, or
delegates, with full powers to the International Conference at Paris for the
purpose of revising the International Sanitary Convention of January 17,
1912.
However, certain suggested changes in the draft are now having the
consideration of the Public Health officials, and the Government of the
United States reserves to itself the right to propose these later.
At this time the Government of the United States desires to indicate the
importance it attaches to American representation on the International
Quarantine Board at Alexandria, Egypt, in view of the increased number of
American vessels now passing through the Suez Canal, or trading directly
with Egypt, and to give notice of its desire that the question of appropriate

American representation on the Board be given a place in the agenda of the
Conference.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

512.4 B 2/13
[Document 115]
The Secretary of State to the French Ambassador (Bérenger)
WASHINGTON, March 24, 1926.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of March
16 [15], 1926,41 concerning participation by the United States in the
International Conference to meet at Paris on May tenth, next, for the
purpose of revising the International Sanitary Convention of 1912, and to
inform you in reply that while the representatives of the United States to
this Conference have not yet been actually appointed, the American
Ambassador at Paris was instructed by cable on March eighteenth41 to
advise your Government that they will be Surgeon General Hugh S.
Cumming, Senior Surgeon Taliaferro Clark and Surgeon W. W. King, all of
the Public Health Service, and that the Counselor of the American Embassy
at Paris will also be delegated in case other governments intend to send
diplomatic representatives as well as technical ones.42 The Embassy was
also instructed to inform your Government that the representatives of the
United States at the Conference will be furnished with Full Powers.
Accept [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
J. BUTLER WRIGHT
41 Not printed.
41 Not printed.
42 On Mar. 24 Ambassador Herrick informed the Department that technical
delegates would suffice.

Treaty Series No. 762
[Document 116]
Convention Between the United States and Other Powers
Revising the International Sanitary Convention of January 17,
1912, Signed at Paris, June 21, 192643
INTERNATIONAL SANITARY CONVENTION
[List of heads of states and plenipotentiaries is omitted.]
Who, after depositing their full powers, found to be in good and due form,
have agreed to the following provisions: PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
For the purposes of this Convention, the high contracting parties adopt the
following definitions: 1. The word circonscription designates a fully
defined part of territory, for example: a province, a government, a district, a
department, a canton, an island, a commune, a city, a city district, a village,
a port, a community, et cetra, regardless of the area and population of those
parts of territory.
2. The word observation means isolation of the persons either on board a
ship or in a sanitary station before they are given free pratique.
The word surveillance means that the persons are not isolated, are
immediately given free pratique, but are reported to the health authorities in
the several places they are to visit and subjected to a medical examination
by which their health condition is ascertained.
3. The word équipage includes all persons who are not on board for the
mere purpose of being carried from one country to another, but who are
employed in any capacity whatsoever in the service of the ship or persons
on board, or of the cargo.
4. The word jour means an interval of twenty-four hours.

 
TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER I—PROVISIONS TO BE OBSERVED BY THE GOVERNMENTS OF THE COUNTRIES PARTICIPATING IN THE PRESENT
CONVENTION ON THE APPEARANCE OF PLAGUE, CHOLERA, YELLOW FEVER, OR CERTAIN OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES IN THEIR
TERRITORY
SECTION I.—Notification and subsequent communications to other countries
ARTICLE 1
Each Government shall immediately notify the other Governments and, at
the same time the International Office of Public Hygiene;
(1) The first authentic case of plague, cholera, or yellow fever
discovered in its territory;
(2) The first authentic case of plague, cholera, or yellow fever
which occurs outside the limits of local areas already affected;
(3) The existence of an epidemic of typhus or of smallpox.
ARTICLE 2
Every notification prescribed in Article 1 shall be accompanied, or very
promptly followed, by detailed information as to—
(1) Where the disease has appeared;
(2) The date of its appearance, its source and its type;
(3) The number of established cases and the number of deaths;
(4) The extent of the area or areas affected;
(5) In the case of plague, the existence of that disease or of an
unusual mortality among rats;

(6) In the case of cholera, the number of germ carriers when these
have been discovered;
(7) In the case of yellow fever, the presence and relative
prevalence (index) of stegomyia calopus (aedes Egypti);
(8) The measures taken.
ARTICLE 3
The notifications contemplated in Articles I and II are to be addressed to the
Diplomatic Missions or failing them to consular offices in the capital of the
infected country and shall be held at the disposition of consular officers
established in its territory.
These notifications shall also be addressed to the International Office of
Public Hygiene which shall communicate them immediately to all
diplomatic missions, or failing them, to the Consulates, in Paris, as well as
to the principal public health authorities of the participating countries.
Those prescribed under Article I shall be addressed by telegram.
The telegrams addressed by the International Office of Public Hygiene to
the Governments of countries participating in the present Convention or to
the principal public health authorities of these countries, and the telegrams
transmitted by these Governments and by these authorities under this
Convention, are treated like State telegrams and enjoy the priority accorded
to such telegrams by Article V of the International Telegraphic Convention
of July 10/22, 1875.
ARTICLE 4
The notification and the information contemplated in Articles 1 and 2 shall
be followed by subsequent communications sent regularly to the
International Office of Public Hygiene so as to keep the Governments
informed of the progress of the epidemic.
These communications, which shall be as frequent and as complete as
possible and shall take place at least once a week with regard to the number

of cases and deaths, shall indicate in particular the precautions adopted with
a view to preventing the spread of the disease. They shall specify the
measures enforced upon the departure of vessels to prevent exportation of
the disease, and especially the measures taken with regard to rats or insects.
ARTICLE 5
The Governments undertake to reply to any request for information which
is made to them by the International Office of Public Hygiene in regard to
epidemic diseases mentioned in the Convention, which occur in their
territory, and in regard to circumstances likely to affect the transmission of
these diseases from one country to another.
ARTICLE 6
Since rats* are the principal agents by which bubonic plague is spread, the
Governments undertake to make use of all means in their power to diminish
this danger and constantly to keep themselves informed of the condition of
the rats in their ports as regards plague infection, by frequent and periodical
examinations; and in particular to carry out the systematic collection and
the bacteriological examination of rats in every plague-infected area, during
a period of not less than six months from the finding of the last plague-
infected rat.
The methods and the results of these examinations shall be communicated
in ordinary circumstances at regular intervals, and in the case of plague
every month, to the International Office of Public Hygiene in order that
Governments may be kept uninterruptedly informed by that Office of the
condition of ports in regard to plague amongst rats.
On the first discovery of plague among rats on land, in a port free from
infection during the previous six months, the communications shall be sent
by the most rapid ways.
ARTICLE 7
In order to facilitate the fulfilment of duties put upon it by this Convention,
and having regard to the benefits derived from the information furnished by

the epidemiological intelligence service of the League of Nations, including
its Eastern Bureau at Singapore, and of other analogous bureaus, as well as
by the Pan-American Sanitary Bureau, the International Office of Public
Hygiene is empowered to make the needful arrangements with the Health
Committee of the League of Nations, as well as with the Pan-American
Sanitary Bureau and other similar organizations.
It stands understood that the relations established under the arrangements
above indicated will not involve any derogation from the provisions of the
Convention of Rome of December 9, 1907, and cannot work the effect of
substituting any other sanitary body for the International Office of Public
Hygiene.
ARTICLE 8
As it is of primary importance that the foregoing provisions be promptly
and scrupulously complied with, the Governments recognize the necessity
of giving instructions to the appropriate services in regard to the application
of these provisions.
As notification is of no value unless every Government be itself informed,
in good time, of cases of plague, cholera, yellow fever, typhus, or smallpox,
and also of suspected cases of these diseases which occur in its territory,
countries participating in the Convention undertake to make it compulsory
to declare such cases.
ARTICLE 9
It is recommended that neighboring countries should make special
arrangements, with the object of organizing direct exchange of information
between the head of the department concerned as regards territories that are
contiguous or have close commercial relations. These arrangements shall be
communicated to the International Office of Public Hygiene.
 
SECTION II.—Conditions which warrant considering that the measures
prescribed by the convention are or have ceased to be applicable to arrivals

from particular areas ARTICLE 10
The notification of imported cases of plague, cholera or yellow fever shall
not lead to the adoption of the measures prescribed in the following Chapter
II in regard to arrivals from the area in which they occurred.
But the measures may be adopted when a first case of plague or yellow
fever has occurred which is recognized as a non-important case, or when
the cases of cholera from a foyer* or when exanthematous fever or smallpox
exists in epidemic form.
ARTICLE 11
In order that the measures prescribed in Chapter II may be limited to places
which are actually stricken, Governments must restrict their application to
arrivals from defined local areas in which the diseases coming under the
present Convention have appeared under the conditions indicated in the
second paragraph of Article 10.
But this limitation of an infected local area must be accepted only on the
express condition that the Government of the country in which this area is
comprised shall take the measures necessary (1) for checking the spread of
the epidemic and (2) for applying the measures prescribed by Article 13
below.
ARTICLE 12
The Government of a country in which an infected area is situated will
inform other Governments and the International Office of Public Hygiene in
the manner specified in Article 3, when the danger of infection from that
area has ceased, and when all the preventive measures have been taken.
From the time of this information the measures prescribed in Chapter ii will
no longer be applicable to arrivals from the area in question, except in
exceptional circumstances, which must be established.
SECTION III.—Measures at the ports and on the departure of vessels ARTICLE 13
The competent authority shall be obliged to take effectual measures—

(1) To prevent the embarkation of persons showing symptoms of
plague, cholera, yellow fever, exanthematous typhus or smallpox,
and of persons in such relations with the sick as to render them
liable to transmit the infection of these diseases;
(2) In the case of plague, to prevent rats gaining access to ships;
(3) In the case of cholera, to see that the drinking water and
foodstuffs taken on board is wholesome, and that water taken in
as ballast is disinfected if necessary;
(4) In the case of yellow fever, to prevent mosquitoes gaining
access to ships;
(5) In the case of exanthematous typhus, to secure the delousing
of all suspects before their embarkation;
(6) In the case of smallpox, to subject to disinfection worn
garments and rags before they are compressed.
ARTICLE 14
Governments undertake to maintain in and around their large ports and, as
far as possible, in and around their other ports, a sanitary service possessing
an organization and equipment capable of carrying out the application of
the prophylactic measures in the case of the diseases coming under this
Convention and especially the measures laid down in Articles 6, 8 and 13.
The said Governments will supply at least once a year to the International
Office of Public Hygiene a statement showing in the case of each of their
ports the condition of its sanitary organization commensurate with the
provisions of the preceding paragraph. The Office will forward such
information through the proper channels to the principal health authorities
of the participating countries either directly or through some other
international sanitary organization in accordance with the arrangements
concluded under Article 7.
CHAPTER II—MEASURES OF DEFENSE AGAINST THE DISEASES MENTIONED IN CHAPTER I ARTICLE 15

Any ship, whatever port it comes from, may be subjected by the sanitary
authority to a medical inspection, and if circumstances require it, to a
thorough examination.
The sanitary measures and actions to which a ship may be subjected on
arrival shall be determined by the actual condition found to exist on board
and the sanitary particulars of the voyage.
It rests with each Government, taking into account the information
furnished under the provisions of Section I, Chapter I, and of Article 14 of
this Convention, as well as the obligations placed upon it by Section II,
Chapter I, to determine what procedure is applicable in its own ports to
arrivals from any foreign port, and in particular to decide whether, from the
point of view of the procedure to be applied, a particular foreign port should
be considered as infected.
The measures as provided in this Chapter must be regarded as constituting a
maximum within the limits of which Governments may regulate the
procedure to be applied to ships on their arrival.
SECTION I.—Notification of measures prescribed ARTICLE 16
Every Government is bound to communicate immediately to the Diplomatic
Mission or, failing that, to the Consul of the infected country, residing in its
capital, as well as to the International Office of Public Hygiene which shall
immediately make them known to the other Governments, the measures
which it considers necessary to prescribe with regard to arrivals from that
country. Such information will in like manner be held at the disposition of
other diplomatic or consular representatives established in its territory.
It also is bound to communicate, through the same channels, the withdrawal
of these measures or any modifications thereof.
In the absence of a Diplomatic Mission or a Consulate in the capital, the
communications shall be made direct to the Government of the country
concerned.
SECTION II.—Merchandise and baggage—Importation and transit ARTICLE 17

Subject to the provisions of the last paragraph of Article 50, the entry of
merchandise and baggage arriving by land or by sea for import or for transit
may not be prohibited nor may merchandise or baggage be detained at land
frontiers or in ports. The only measures which may be prescribed with
regard to such merchandise and baggage are specified in the following
paragraphs: (a) In the case of plague, body linen, wearing apparel and
bedding which have been in recent use may be subjected to disinsectisation,
and, if necessary, to disinfection.
Merchandise coming from an infected local area and likely to harbor
plague-infected rats may be unloaded only on condition that the precautions
necessary to prevent the escape of rats and to ensure their destruction are
taken as far as practicable.
(b) In the case of cholera, body linen, wearing apparel and bedding which
have been in recent use may be subjected to disinfection.
In derogation of the provisions of this Article, the importation of fresh fish,
shellfish and vegetables may be prohibited unless they have undergone a
treatment calculated to destroy cholera vibrios.
 
(c) In the case of exanthematous typhus, body linen, wearing apparel and
bedding which have been in recent use, as well as rags not carried as
merchandise in large quantities, may be subjected to disinsectisation.
(d) In the case of smallpox, body linen, wearing apparel and bedding which
have been in recent use, as well as rags not carried as merchandise in large
quantities, may be subjected to disinfection.
ARTICLE 18
It rests with the authority of the country to which the merchandise and
things are consigned to decide in what manner and at what place
disinfection shall be carried out and what shall be the methods adopted to
secure the destruction of rats or insects (fleas, lice, mosquitos, et cetera).
These operations must be performed in such a fashion as to injure articles as

little as possible. Clothes and other articles of small value, including rags
not carried in [as] merchandise in large quantities, may be destroyed by fire.
It rests with each State to settle questions of compensation for damage
caused by disinfection, deratisation or disinsectisation, or by the destruction
of the things referred to above.
If, on account of these measures, charges are levied by the sanitary
authority, either directly or indirectly through a company or an individual,
the rates of these charges must be in accordance with a tariff made public
beforehand and so drawn up that the State and the sanitary authority shall,
on the whole, derive no profit from its application.
ARTICLE 19
Letters and correspondence, printed matter, books, newspapers, business
documents, et cetera, shall not be subject to any sanitary measure. Post
parcels shall be subjected to restriction only if their contents include articles
on which the measures provided by Article 17 of the present Convention
may be enforced.
ARTICLE 20
When merchandise or baggage has been subjected to the operations
prescribed in Article 17, any interested party can require the sanitary
authorities to issue a free certificate showing the measures that have been
taken.
SECTION III.—Provisions relating to emigrants ARTICLE 21
The sanitary authorities in a country of emigration must subject its
emigrants to a medical examination before their departure.
 
It is recommended that special arrangements be made between the countries
of emigration, immigration and transit, with a view to laying down the
conditions under which this examination shall be considered satisfactory by

them, so that rejections on medical grounds at the frontier of the countries
of transit and destination may be reduced to a minimum.
It is also recommended that these arrangements should determine what
preventive measures against infectious diseases shall be applied to
emigrants in the country of departure.
ARTICLE 22
It is recommended that, at the towns or ports of embarkation for emigrants,
there should be an adequate health and sanitary administration having
especially (1) a service for medical examination and treatment, as well as
the necessary medical and prophylactic equipment; (2) an establishment
supervised by the State where emigrants may be subjected to the health
formalities, temporarily housed, and undergo all necessary medical
examinations and have their food and drinking supplies examined; (3)
premises situated at the port where medical examinations shall be made at
the time of the final embarkation.
ARTICLE 23
It is recommended that emigrant ships be provided with a sufficient
quantity of vaccines (anti-smallpox, anti-cholera, et cetera), in order to
permit, if necessary, of vaccinations during the voyage.
SECTION IV.—Measures at ports and marine frontiers A. PLAGUE
ARTICLE 24
A ship shall be regarded as infected:
(1) if it has a case of human plague on board;
(2) or if a case of human plague broke out more than six days
after embarkation;
(3) or if plague-infected rats are found on board.
A ship shall be regarded as suspected:

(1) if a case of human plague broke out in the first six days after
embarkation;
(2) or if investigations regarding rats have shown the existence of
an unusual mortality without determining the cause thereof.
The ship shall continue to be regarded as suspicious until it has been
subjected to the measures prescribed by this Convention at a suitably
equipped port.
 
A ship shall be regarded as uninfected, notwithstanding its having come
from an infected port if there has been no human or rat plague on board
either at the time of departure, or during the voyage, or at the time of
arrival, and the investigations regarding rats have not shown the existence
of an unusual mortality.
ARTICLE 25
Plague-infected ships shall undergo the following measures:
(1) Medical inspection;
(2) The patients shall immediately be landed and isolated;
(3) All persons who have been in contact with the patients and
those whom the health authority of the port has reason to consider
suspect[s] shall be disembarked if possible. They may be
subjected to observation or surveillance, or to a period of
observation followed by surveillance,* provided that the total
duration of these measures does not exceed six days from the time
of arrival of the ship.
It rests with the sanitary authority of the port, after taking into
consideration the date of the last case, the condition of the ship
and the local possibilities, to take that one of these measures
which seems to it preferable. During the same period the crew

may be prevented from going ashore except on duty made known
to the sanitary authority;
(4) Bedding which has been used, and such soiled linen, wearing
apparel and other articles as are, in the opinion of the sanitary
authority, infected shall be disinsectised and, if there be occasion,
disinfected;
(5) The parts of the ship which have been occupied by persons
suffering from plague or which, in the opinion of the sanitary
authority, are infected, shall be disinsectised and, if there be
occasion, disinfected;
(6) The sanitary authority may order deratisation before the
discharge of cargo, if it is of opinion, having regard to the nature
of the cargo, and the way in which it is loaded, that it is possible
to effect a total destruction of rats without removing it. In this
case, the ship cannot be subjected to a new deratisation after
discharge. In other cases the complete destruction of rats on board
must be effected when the holds are empty. In the cases of ships
in ballast, this shall be done as soon as possible before taking
cargo.
 
Destruction of rats shall be carried out so as to avoid, as far as possible,
damage to the ship and cargo (if any). The operation must not last longer
than twenty-four hours. All charges made in respect to these operations of
deratisation as also all contingent indemnity claims, shall be settled in
accordance with the principles laid down in Article 18.
If a ship is only to discharge a part of its cargo, and if the port authorities
consider that it is impossible to undertake complete deratisation, the said
ship shall be allowed to remain in the port for the time required to discharge
that part of its cargo, provided that all precautions, including isolation, are
taken to the satisfaction of the sanitary authority to prevent rats from
passing from ship to shore, either with unladen goods or otherwise.

The discharge of cargo shall be carried out under the supervision of the
sanitary authority, who shall take all measures necessary to prevent the men
employed on this duty from becoming infected. The men shall be subjected
to observation or to surveillance for a period not exceeding six days from
the time when they have ceased to work at the unloading of the ship.
ARTICLE 26
Plague-suspected ships shall undergo the measures indicated in Nos. 1, 4, 5
and 6 of Article 25.
In addition, the crew and passengers may be subjected to surveillance
which shall not exceed six days, reckoned from the date of the ship’s
arrival. The crew may be prevented during the same period from going
ashore except on duty made known to the Sanitary Authority.
ARTICLE 27
Ships uninfected with plague shall be given free pratique immediately, with
the reservation that the sanitary authority of the port of arrival may
prescribe the following measures with regard to them:
(1) Medical inspection to determine whether the condition of the
ship corresponds to the definition of a healthy ship;
(2) Destruction of rats on board under the conditions specified in
(6) of Article 25 in exceptional cases and for well-founded
reasons which will be communicated in writing to the Captain of
the ship;
(3) The crew and passengers may be subjected to surveillance
during a period which shall not exceed six days reckoned from
the date on which the ship left the contaminated port. The crew
may be prevented during the same period from going ashore
except on duty made known to the sanitary authority.

ARTICLE 28
All ships, except those employed in national coastwise service, must be
periodically deratised, or be permanently kept in such a condition that rat
population is reduced to the minimum. In the first case they receive
Deratisation Certificates, and in the second Deratisation Exemption
Certificates.
Governments shall make known through the International Office of Public
Hygiene those of their ports possessing the equipment and personnel
necessary for the deratisation of ships.
A deratisation certificate or a deratisation exemption certificate shall be
issued only by the sanitary authority of the aforesaid ports. The certificate
shall be valid for six months. One additional month however may be
allowed in the case of a ship proceeding to its home port.
If no valid certificate is produced, the sanitary authority at the ports
mentioned in the second paragraph of this Article may after inquiry and
inspection:
(a) Directly perform the deratisation of the vessel, or cause it to
be done under its direction and supervision. When completed to
its satisfaction it shall issue a dated Deratisation Certificate. It
shall decide on each case what process shall be employed
practically to exterminate the rats on board, particulars of the
mode of deratising applied and of the number of rats destroyed
must be entered on the Certificate. Destruction of rats must be
accomplished in a manner that will as far as possible save the ship
and cargo (if any) from injury. The operation must not last longer
than 24 hours. In the case of vessels in ballast, it must be done
before loading. All charges on account of these operations of
deratization and all claims, if any, for damages shall be settled
according to the terms of Article 18.
(b) Issue a Deratisation Exemption Certificate stating the date and
grounds if it is satisfied that the ship is maintained in such a
condition that the rat population is reduced to a minimum.

The deratisation and deratisation exemption certificates shall be drawn up
as far as possible in a uniform manner. Forms of such certificates will be
prepared by the International Office of Public Hygiene.
The competent authority of each country undertakes each year to furnish the
International Office of Public Hygiene with a statement of the measures
taken under this article and the number of ships which have been subjected
to deratisation, or which have been granted deratisation exemption
certificates, at the ports referred to in the second paragraph of this Article.
The International Office of Public Hygiene is requested to take in
accordance with Article 14 all steps for the interchange of information as to
the action taken under this Article and the results obtained.
The provisions of this Article do not affect the rights accorded to sanitary
authorities by Articles 24–27 of this Convention.
The Governments shall see that all requisite and practicable measures are
taken by the competent authorities to accomplish the destruction of rats in
ports and the dependent and neighboring parts as well as on lighters and
coastwise vessels.
B. CHOLERA
ARTICLE 29
A ship shall be regarded as infected if there is a case of cholera on board, or
if there has been a case of cholera during the five days previous to the
arrival of the ship in port.
A ship shall be regarded as suspected if there has been a case of cholera at
the time of departure or during the voyage, but no fresh case in the five
days previous to arrival. The ship shall continue to be regarded as suspect
until it has been subjected to the measures prescribed by the present
Convention.
A ship shall be considered uninfected notwithstanding that it came from an
infected port or that it may have on board persons proceeding from an

infected area if there has been no case of cholera at the time of departure,
during the voyage, or on arrival.
Cases presenting the clinical symptoms of cholera in which no cholera
vibrios have been found or in which vibrios not strictly showing the
characteristics of cholera vibrio have been found, shall be subject to all
measures required in the case of cholera.
Germ carriers discovered on the arrival of the ship shall be submitted after
disembarkation to all the obligations which may be imposed on such a case
by the laws of the country of arrival on its own, nationals.
ARTICLE 30
Cholera infected ships shall be subjected to the following measures:
(1) Medical inspection:
(2) The patients shall be immediately landed and isolated;
(3) The crew and passengers may also be landed and either be
kept under observation or subjected to surveillance during a
period not exceeding five days reckoned from the date of arrival.
However, persons who can show that they have been immunized
from cholera by vaccination effected less than six months, and
more than six days before, may be subjected to surveillance but
not to observation.
(4) Bedding which has been used, soiled linen, wearing apparel
and other articles, including foodstuffs, which in the opinion of
the sanitary authority of the port have been recently
contaminated, shall be disinfected;
(5) The parts of the vessel which have been occupied by cholera
patients or which are considered by the health authorities as being
contaminated, shall be disinfected;

(6) Unloading shall be carried out under the supervision of the
sanitary authority, who will take all measures necessary to
prevent the infection of the men engaged in unloading. They shall
be subjected to observation or to surveillance which shall not
exceed five days from the time when they cease unloading;
(7) When the drinking water stored on board is considered
suspicious it shall be turned off after being disinfected and
replaced after disinfection of the tanks by a supply of water of
good quality;
(8) The health authority may prohibit the turning off without
previous disinfection of water ballast if it has been taken in at an
infected port;
(9) It may be forbidden to let run or throw human dejections or
the residuary waters of the vessel into the waters of the port,
unless they are first disinfected.
ARTICLE 31
Vessels suspected of cholera shall be subjected to the measures prescribed
under Nos. (1), (4), (5), (7), (8) and (9) of Article 30.
The crew and passengers may be subjected to a surveillance not to exceed
five days from the arrival of the vessel. It is recommended that the landing
of the crew be prevented during the same period except for purposes
connected with the service and made known to the sanitary authority of the
port.
ARTICLE 32
If the ship has been declared infected or suspected only because of cases on
board presenting the clinical features of cholera, and two bacteriological
examinations, made with an interval of not less than 24 hours between
them, have not revealed the presence of cholera or any other suspicious
vibrios, it shall be classed as uninfected.

ARTICLE 33
Vessels uninfected with cholera shall be granted pratique, immediately.
The health authority of the port of arrival may order in their case the
measures provided under Nos. (1), (7), (8) and (9) of Article 30.
The crew and the passengers may be subjected to a surveillance not to
exceed five days from the date of arrival of the ship. The landing of the
crew may be forbidden during the same period except for purposes
connected with the service and made known to the sanitary authority of the
port.
ARTICLE 34
Since anti-cholera vaccination is a method of proved efficacy in checking
cholera epidemics, and consequently in lessening the likelihood of the
spread of the disease, it is recommended that sanitary administrations will,
in the largest measure possible, and as often as practicable, apply specific
vaccination in cholera hotbeds and grant certain advantages as regards
restrictive measures to persons who agree to be vaccinated.
C. YELLOW FEVER
ARTICLE 35
A ship shall be regarded as infected if there is a case of yellow fever on
board, or if there was one at the time of departure or during the voyage.
A ship shall be regarded as suspected if it had no case of yellow fever but
arrives after a voyage of less than six days from an infected port or from an
uninfected port in close relation with endemic centers of yellow fever, or if
when it arrived having been more than six days out there is reason to
believe that it may carry winged Stegomyia (Aedes Egypti) from the said
port.
A ship shall be regarded as uninfected, notwithstanding its having come
from a yellow fever infected port, if having had no case of yellow fever on

board and arrived after more than six days on the way there is no reason to
believe that it carries winged Stegomyia, or when it proves to the
satisfaction of the sanitary authority of the port of arrival:
(a) That during its stay in the port of departure it kept at a
distance of more than 200 metres from the inhabited land and at
such a distance from the pontoons as to make the access of
Stegomyia improbable;
(b) Or that at the time of departure it was subjected to effective
fumigation in order to destroy mosquitoes.
ARTICLE 36
Ships infected with yellow fever shall undergo the following measures:
(1) Medical inspection;
(2) The patients shall be landed, and those of them who are in the
first five days of the disease shall be isolated so as to prevent
contamination by mosquitoes;
(3) The other persons who land shall be subjected to observation
or surveillance not exceeding six days reckoned from the time of
landing;
(4) The ship will be moored at least 200 metres from the inhabited
land and at such a distance from the pontoons as will render the
access of Stegomyia improbable;
(5) Mosquitoes at all stages of evolution shall be destroyed on
board as far as possible before discharge of cargo. If unloading
takes place before the destruction of mosquitoes, the personnel in
charge of that work will be subjected to observation or to
surveillance for not more than six days from the time when they
ceased unloading.
ARTICLE 37

Ships suspected of yellow fever may be subjected to the measures specified
in (1), (3), (4) and (5) of Article 36.
Nevertheless, if the voyage has lasted less than six days and if the ship
meets the conditions specified under letters (a) and (b) in the subsection of
Article 35 relating to uninfected ships, it shall only be subjected to the
measures prescribed by Article 36, (1) and (3) and to fumigation.
When 30 days have elapsed after the departure of the ship from the infected
port, and no case has occurred during its voyage, the ship may be granted
free pratique subject to preliminary fumigation should the sanitary authority
deem it necessary.
ARTICLE 38
Ships uninfected with yellow fever shall be granted free pratique after
medical inspection.
ARTICLE 39
The measures prescribed in Articles 36 and 37 concern only those regions
in which the Stegomyia exists, and they shall be applied with due
consideration to the climatic conditions prevailing in the countries
concerned and also the Stegomyian index.
In other regions they shall be applied to the extent considered necessary by
the sanitary authority.
ARTICLE 40
The masters of ships which have touched at ports infected with yellow fever
are specially advised to cause a search to be made for mosquitoes and their
larvae during the voyage and to secure their systematic destruction in all
accessible parts of the ship, particularly in the store rooms, galleys, boiler
rooms, water tanks and other places specially likely to harbor Stegomyia.
 
D. EXANTHEMATOUS TYPHUS

ARTICLE 41
Ships which, during the voyage have had or at the time of their arrival, have
a case of typhus on board, may be subjected to the following measures:
(1) Medical inspection;
(2) The patients shall immediately be landed, isolated and
deloused;
(3) Other persons reasonably suspected to harbor lice, or to have
been exposed to infection, shall also be deloused, and may be
subjected to surveillance for a time to be specified, but which
shall never be more than 12 days, reckoned from the date of
delousing;
(4) Bedding which has been used, and such linen, wearing
apparel, and other articles as the sanitary authority of the port
considers to be infected, shall be disinfected;
(5) The parts of the ship which have been occupied by persons ill
with typhus, and that the sanitary authority regard as infected,
shall be disinfected.
The ship shall immediately be given free pratique.
It rests with each Government to take after disembarkation the measures
which it considers appropriate to secure the surveillance of persons who
arrive on a ship which had no case of exanthematous typhus on board, but
who left an area where typhus is epidemic less than 12 days before.
E. SMALLPOX
ARTICLE 42
Ships which have had a case of smallpox on board either during the voyage
or at the time of arrival, may be subjected to the following measures:
(1) Medical inspection;

(2) The patients shall immediately be landed and isolated;
(3) Other persons reasonably suspected to have been exposed to
infection on board, and who, in the opinion of the sanitary
authority, are not sufficiently protected by recent vaccination, or
by a previous attack of smallpox, may be subjected to vaccination
followed by surveillance, the period of surveillance being
specified in each case according to the circumstances, but never
to exceed 14 days, reckoned from the date of arrival;
(4) Bedding which has been used, soiled linen, wearing apparel,
and other articles which the sanitary authority of the port
considers to be infected, shall be disinfected;
(5) Only those parts of the ship which have been occupied by
persons ill with smallpox and which the sanitary authority regards
as infected shall be disinfected.
The ship shall immediately be given free pratique.
It rests with each Government to take after disembarkation the measures
which it considers appropriate to secure the surveillance of persons who are
not protected by vaccination and arrive on a ship that had no smallpox on
board, but left an area where smallpox is epidemic less than 14 days before.
ARTICLE 43
It is recommended that ships calling in countries where smallpox is
epidemic, shall take all precautions possible to secure the vaccination or
revaccination of the crew.
It is also recommended that governments should make vaccination and
revaccination as general as possible, especially in ports and border regions.
F. COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 44

The captain and the ship’s physician must answer all questions that are put
to them by the sanitary authority with regard to the health of the ship during
the voyage.
When the captain and the physician declare that there has not been any case
of plague, cholera, yellow fever, exanthematous typhus or smallpox, and no
unusual mortality among rats on the ship since the time of its departure, the
sanitary authority may require them to make a solemn or sworn declaration.
ARTICLE 45
In applying the measures set forth in the preceding subsections A., B., C.,
D. and E, the sanitary authority will take into account the presence of a
physician on board and the actual preventive measures taken in the course
of the voyage, especially for the destruction of rats.
The sanitary authorities of the countries that find it convenient to come to
an agreement on the matter may exempt from medical inspection and other
measures uninfected ships carrying a physician specially commissioned by
their country.
ARTICLE 46
It is recommended that Governments take into account, as to the treatment
to be applied to arrivals from another country, measures taken in the latter
country to combat infectious diseases and to prevent their transmission to
other countries.
 
Ships arriving from ports which fulfill the conditions set out in Articles 14
and 51, do not derive from that alone any right to special advantages at the
port of arrival, but the Governments agree to take into the fullest
consideration the measures already taken in those ports, so that all the
measures taken at the port of arrival with regard to ships coming from those
ports shall be reduced to a minimum. To that end and in order to put
shipping, commerce and traffic to as little inconvenience as possible, it is
recommended that special arrangements in accordance with Article 57 of

this Convention be made in all cases where it would seem advantageous to
do so.
ARTICLE 47
Ships arriving from an infected area which have been submitted to
sufficient sanitary measures to the satisfaction of the sanitary authority,
shall not undergo those measures again on their arrival at another port,
whether or not the latter belongs to the same country, provided nothing has
happened since which would call for the application of the sanitary
measures above referred to and the ships have not called at an infected port,
except for coaling.
A ship shall not be considered as having stopped at a port, when without
having been in communication with the shore it has landed passengers only
and their luggage and the mail, or has taken on board only mails [sic] or
passengers, with or without their luggage, who have not communicated
with the port or with a contaminated area. In the case of yellow fever the
vessel must, in addition, have kept wherever possible not less than two
hundred metres from inhabited land and at such a distance from the
pontoons as to make access of Stegomyia improbable.
ARTICLE 48
The port authority who imposes sanitary measures shall, whenever
requested, deliver to the captain, or any other interested person, a certificate
specifying the nature of the measures and the methods employed, the parts
of the ship treated, and the reasons why the measures have been applied.
It may also in the same way, on demand, issue free of charge to passengers
who have arrived by an infected ship a certificate stating the date of their
arrival and the measures to which they and their luggage have been
subjected.
SECTION V.—General Provisions ARTICLE 49
It is recommended—

(1) That bills of health be issued free in all ports;
(2) That fees for consular visas be reduced by way of reciprocity,
so as not to represent more than the cost of the service rendered;
(3) That the bill of health be made out in at least one of the
languages known to maritime world, in addition to that of the
country where it is issued;
(4) That special agreements in the spirit of Article 57 of this
Convention be made with a view to doing away gradually with
consular visas and bills of health.
ARTICLE 50
It is desirable that the number of ports furnished with an organization and
equipment sufficient for the reception of a ship, whatever its health
conditions may be, should be in each country commensurate with the
importance of the trade and shipping. However, without prejudice to the
right of Governments to make agreements for the establishment of common
sanitary stations, every country must provide at least one port on each of its
seacoasts with the abovementioned organization and equipment.
Furthermore, it is recommended that all large seaports should be so
equipped that uninfected ships at least may undergo immediately upon their
arrival, the prescribed sanitary measures without being sent to another port
for this purpose.
Every infected or suspected ship which arrives in a port not equipped for its
reception must proceed, at its own risk and peril, to one of the ports opened
to ships of the category to which it belongs.
Governments shall make known to the International Office of Public
Hygiene what ports are open to arrivals from ports infected with plague,
cholera, or yellow fever, and in particular those open to infected or
suspected ships.
ARTICLE 51

It is recommended that there be set up in large seaports:
(a) A regular port medical service, and permanent medical
surveillance of the health condition of crews and of the
inhabitants of the port;
(b) An outfit for the transport of the sick and suitable premises for
their isolation, and for keeping suspected persons under
observation;
(c) Installations necessary for efficient disinfection and
disinsectisation; bacteriological laboratory, and a force prepared
to attend to urgent vaccination against smallpox or against other
diseases;
(d) A supply of drinking water of quality beyond suspicion for the
use of the port, and a system affording all possible security for the
removal of waste, filth and waste water:
(e) A competent and adequate staff and necessary equipment for
the deratisation of ships, yards, docks and warehouses;
(f) A permanent organization for the detection and examination of
rats.
It is also recommended that warehouses and docks should as far as possible
be rat proof, and that the sewer system of the port be separate from that of
the town.
ARTICLE 52
Governments will refrain from making any sanitary inspection of ships
passing through their territorial waters* without stopping at the ports or on
the coasts of their respective countries.
If the ship, for any reason whatever, should stop at a port or on the coast, it
would be subjected to the sanitary laws and regulations of the country to

which the port or coast belongs as far as permitted by international
conventions.
ARTICLE 53
Special measures may be prescribed regarding any ship in an exceptionally
bad sanitary condition likely to facilitate the spread of the diseases
mentioned in this Convention, especially crowded ships.
ARTICLE 54
Ships unwilling to comply with obligations imposed by the port authority,
in virtue of the provisions of this Convention, shall be at liberty to put out
to sea.
Such ships may, however, be permitted to land goods if the ship is isolated
and if the goods are subjected to the measures provided by Chapter II.,
Section II., of this Convention.
Such ships may also be authorized to disembark passengers at their request,
on the condition that such passengers submit to the measures prescribed by
the sanitary authority.
The ship, while kept isolated, may also take on fuel, stores and water.
ARTICLE 55
Each Government undertakes to have a single sanitary tariff only, which
shall be published, and the charges therein shall be moderate. This tariff
will be applied in ports to all ships, without distinction being made between
the national and foreign flags, and to foreigners in the same conditions as to
the country’s own nationals.
 
ARTICLE 56
International coasting traffic will come under special regulations, to be
agreed upon by the countries concerned. Nevertheless the provisions of

Article 28 of the present Convention shall be applicable to them in all cases.
ARTICLE 57
The Governments, taking into account their peculiar situation, may
conclude special agreements amongst themselves, in order to make the
sanitary measures prescribed by this Convention more efficacious and less
cumbersome. The text of such agreements shall be communicated to the
International Office of Public Hygiene.
SECTION VI.—Measures at land frontiers—Travellers—Railways—Frontier
Zones—River-Ways ARTICLE 58
Observations shall not be established at land frontiers.
Persons showing symptoms of the diseases mentioned in this Convention
alone may be detained at frontiers.
This principle does not deprive a State of the right to close a portion of its
frontiers if need be. The places through which border traffic will
exclusively be allowed shall be designated, and in such cases duly equipped
sanitary stations shall be set up at the places thus designated. Notice of
these measures shall immediately be given to the neighboring country
concerned.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the present Article, persons having been
in contact with a person ill with pulmonary plague, may be retained at land
frontiers under observation for not more than seven days reckoned from the
time of arrival.
Persons who have been in contact with a person ill with exanthematous
typhus may be submitted to delousing.
ARTICLE 59
In trains coming from infected areas it is important that the railway crew
keep watch on the way over the state of health of the travellers.

Medical intervention shall be limited to inspection of travellers and care of
the sick and the latters’ companions if there be occasion. When this
inspection is resorted to, it shall, as far as possible, be combined with the
Custom examination in order that travellers may suffer as little delay as
possible.
ARTICLE 60
Railway cars running in countries where yellow fever exists must be so
arranged as to be as little suited as possible for the transport of Stegomyia.
 
ARTICLE 61
Travellers coming from an area which lies under the conditions coming
under the second paragraph of Article 10 of this Convention may be
subjected on arrival at their destination to surveillance for not more than six
days reckoned from the date of their arrival in the case of plague, five days
in the case of cholera, six days in the case of yellow fever, twelve days in
the case of exanthematous typhus, or fourteen days in the case of smallpox.
ARTICLE 62
With respect to diseases coming under this Convention, Governments,
notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, reserve the right in exceptional
cases to take special measures in regard to certain classes of persons who do
not offer satisfactory sanitary guarantees, especially persons travelling or
crossing the frontier in bands. The provisions of this paragraph are not
applicable to emigrants save the provisions of Article 21.
These measures may include the establishment at frontiers of sanitary
stations, sufficiently equipped, to ensure the surveillance, and the
observation if necessary, of the persons concerned, as well as for their
medical examination, disinfection, disinsectisation and vaccination.
As far as possible, these exceptional measures should be made the subject
of special arrangements between adjoining States.

ARTICLE 63
Railway cars for passengers, mails or luggage and freight cars may not be
detained at the frontier.
If, however, one of the carriages is infected or has been occupied by any
person suffering from plague, cholera, exanthematous typhus, or smallpox,
it shall be detained all the time required to undergo the prophylactic
measures indicated for each case.
ARTICLE 64
The measures concerning the crossing of frontiers by railroad and postal
employees are within the province of the administrations concerned. They
shall be combined so as not to hinder the service.
ARTICLE 65
The regulation of frontier traffic and questions pertaining thereto, shall be
left to special arrangements between the contiguous countries in accordance
with the provisions of this Convention.
 
ARTICLE 66
It shall be the province of the Government of the riparian Nations to
regulate the sanitary regime of lakes and river routes by means of special
arrangements.
TITLE II. SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE SUEZ CANAL AND NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES
SECTION I.—Measures with respect to ordinary vessels hailing from
contaminated northern ports and appearing at the entrance of the Suez
Canal or in Egyptian ports ARTICLE 67
Ordinary uninfected vessels hailing from a plague or cholera infected port
of Europe or the basin of the Mediterranean and presenting themselves for

passage through the Suez Canal shall be allowed to pass through in
quarantine.
ARTICLE 68
Ordinary uninfected vessels wishing to make a landing in Egypt may stop at
Alexandria or Port Said.
If the port of departure is contaminated by plague, Article 37 will be
applicable.
If the port of departure is contaminated by cholera, Article 33 will be
applicable.
The sanitary authority of the port may substitute for surveillance
observation either on board or in a quarantine-station.
ARTICLE 69
The measures to which infected or suspected vessels shall be subjected
which hail from a plague or cholera infected port of Europe or the shores of
the Mediterranean or the Black Sea, and which desire to effect a landing in
one of the Egyptian ports or to pass through the Suez Canal, shall be
determined by the Sanitary, Maritime and Quarantine Board of Egypt in
conformity with the stipulations of the present Convention.
ARTICLE 70
The regulations of the Sanitary, Maritime and Quarantine Board of Egypt
shall be revised with the least possible delay to conform with the
stipulations of this Convention. In order to become effective, they must be
accepted by the several Powers represented on the Board. They shall
establish the regime to which ships, passengers and merchandise are to be
subjected. They shall decide the minimum number of medical officers to be
attached to each station, the method of recruitment, the salaries, and duties
of such medical officers and all officials appointed to carry out under the
orders of the Sanitary, Maritime and Quarantine Board of Egypt the
supervision and the execution of preventive measures.

The names of the physicians and officials shall be proposed to the Egyptian
Government by the Sanitary, Maritime and Quarantine Board of Egypt,
through its President.
SECTION II.—Measures in the Red Sea A. MEASURES WITH RESPECT TO ORDINARY VESSELS HAILING FROM THE SOUTH
AND APPEARING IN PORTS OF THE RED SEA OR BOUND TOWARD THE MEDITERRANEAN
ARTICLE 71
Independently of the general provisions in Title I, concerning the
classification of and the régime of infected, suspected, or uninfected
vessels, the special provisions contained in the ensuing articles are
applicable to ordinary vessels coming from the south and entering the Red
Sea.
ARTICLE 72
Uninfected ships.—Uninfected ships may pass through the Suez Canal in
quarantine. When the ship is to touch at an Egyptian port:
(a) If the port of departure is infected by plague, the ship must
have been six full days on the way else the passengers who land
and the crews shall be kept under surveillance until the six days
are completed.
Loading and unloading of cargo will be allowed with due
observance of the necessary measures to prevent the landing of
rats;
(b) If the port of departure is infected by cholera, the ship may
receive free pratique, but every passenger or member of the crew
who disembarks when five days have not elapsed since the date of
departure from the infected port, will be subjected to surveillance
until the completion of that time.
The sanitary authority of the port may in all cases where that authority
considers it necessary, substitute observation on board or in a quarantine

station for surveillance. In all cases the sanitary authority may make the
bacteriological examinations which it considers necessary.
ARTICLE 73
Suspected ships.—Suspected ships having a physician on board may, if
regarded by the sanitary authority as presenting sufficient guarantees, be
allowed to pass through the Suez Canal in quarantine under the regulations
provided for in Article 70.
 
When the ship is to stop at an Egyptian port:
(a) In the case of plague, the provisions of Article 6 are
applicable, but surveillance may be replaced by observation;
(b) In the case of cholera, the provisions of Article 31 are
applicable with the same reservation as to observation instead of
surveillance.
ARTICLE 74
Infected ships.—(a) Plague.—The measures laid down in Article 25 are
applicable. Where danger of infection exists, the ship may be required to
moor at Moses’ Wells or any other place named by the sanitary authority of
the port.
Passage in quarantine may be granted before the expiration of the six days
required by the regulations, if the sanitary authority of the port considers it
possible.
(b) Cholera.—The measures laid down in Article 30 are applicable. The
ship may be required to moor at Moses’ Wells or any other place, and in
case of a serious outbreak on board, may be sent off to Tor so that
vaccination and, if occasion demands, the treatment of the patients may take
place.

The ship cannot be authorized to pass through the Suez Canal until the
sanitary authority is satisfied that the ship, passengers and crew no longer
present any danger.
B. MEASURES WITH RESPECT TO ORDINARY VESSELS HAILING FROM THE INFECTED PORTS OF HEDJAZ DURING THE PILGRIMAGE SEASON
ARTICLE 75
If plague or cholera prevails in Hedjaz during the time of the Mecca
pilgrimage, vessels coming from the Hedjaz or from any other part of the
Arabian coast of the Red Sea without having embarked there any pilgrims
or similar groups of persons, and which have not had any suspicious
occurrence on board during the voyage, shall be placed in the category of
ordinary suspected vessels. They shall be subjected to the preventive
measures and to the treatment imposed on such vessels.
If they are bound for Egypt they may undergo, in a sanitary establishment
designated by the Sanitary, Maritime, and Quarantine Board, an observation
of five days for cholera and six days for the plague from the date of their
embarkation. They shall be subjected, moreover, to all the measures
prescribed for suspected vessels (disinfection, et cetera), and shall not be
granted pratique until they have passed a favorable medical examination.
It shall be understood that if the vessels have had suspicious occurrences
during the voyage they shall pass the observation period at Moses Spring,
which shall last five days for cholera and six days for the plague.
 
SECTION III.—Organization surveillance ARTICLE 76
The medical inspection prescribed by the Regulations may take place at
night on ships that come up to pass through the canal if lighted by
electricity, and whenever the sanitary authority of the port is satisfied that
the lighting facilities are adequate.
The supervision and performance of the prophylactic measures applied in
the Suez Canal, and at the quarantine establishments, shall be entrusted to a

corps of sanitary guards. These guards shall have the status of police
officers with the right to make requisitions in cases where the sanitary
regulations are infringed.
SECTION IV.—Passage through the Suez Canal in quarantine ARTICLE 77
The health authority of the port of Suez shall grant the passage through in
quarantine, and the Sanitary Maritime and Quarantine Board shall be
immediately informed thereof. Doubtful cases shall be decided by that
Board.
ARTICLE 78
As soon as the permit provided for in the preceding article is granted, a
telegram shall be sent to the authority of the port named by the Captain as
his next port of call and also to the port of final destination. The despatch of
the telegram is at the expense of the vessel.
ARTICLE 79
Each country shall establish penalties against vessels which abandon the
route indicated by the captain and unduly approach one of the ports within
its territory, cases of vis major and enforced sojourn being excepted.
ARTICLE 80
Upon a vessel’s being spoken, the captain shall be obliged to declare
whether he has on board any gangs of native stokers or of wageearning
employees of any description who are not inscribed on the crew list or the
register kept for this purpose.
The following questions in particular shall be asked the captains of all
vessels arriving at Suez from the south, and shall be answered under oath or
solemn declaration:
Have you any helpers: stokers or other workmen, not inscribed on
your crew list or on the special register? What is their nationality?
Where did you embark them?

 
The sanitary physicians shall ascertain the presence of these helpers and if
they discover that any of them are missing they should carefully seek the
cause of their absence.
ARTICLE 81
A health officer and at least two guards of the sanitary service shall board
the vessel and accompany her to Port Said. Their duty shall be to prevent
communications and see to the execution of the prescribed measures during
the passage through the canal.
ARTICLE 82
All embarkations, landings, and transshipments of passengers or cargo are
forbidden during the passage through the Suez Canal.
However, passengers may embark at Suez or Port Said in quarantine.
ARTICLE 83
Vessels passing through in quarantine shall make the trip from Suez to Port
Said or vice versa, without lying up.
In case of stranding or of being compelled to lie up, the necessary
operations shall be performed by the personnel on board, all
communications with the employees of the Suez Canal Company being
avoided.
ARTICLE 84
When troops are conveyed through the canal on suspicious or infected
vessels passing through in quarantine, the trip shall be made in the daytime
only. If it is necessary to stop at night in the canal, the vessels shall anchor
in Lake Timsah or the Great Lake.
ARTICLE 85

Vessels passing through in quarantine are forbidden to stop in the harbor of
Port Said except in the cases contemplated in articles 82 and 86.
The supply and preparation of food on board vessels shall be effected with
the means at hand on the vessels.
Stevedores or any other persons who may have gone on board shall be
isolated on the quarantine barge. They shall undergo the regulation
measures.
ARTICLE 86
When it is absolutely necessary for vessels passing through in quarantine to
take on coal or oil at Suez or Port Said, they shall perform this operation
under the necessary guarantee for isolation and sanitary surveillance that
may be ordered by the Sanitary, Maritime and Quarantine Board of Egypt.
When it is possible to maintain a strict supervision of coaling on board the
vessel and to prevent all contact with the persons on board, the coaling of
the vessel by the workmen of the port may be permitted. At night the place
where the coaling is done should be efficiently illuminated by electric
lights.
ARTICLE 87
The pilots, electricians, agents of the Company, and sanitary guards must
leave the vessel at Port Said outside of the port between the jetties, and
thence conducted directly to the quarantine barge where they shall undergo
the measures that may be deemed necessary.
ARTICLE 88
The war vessels hereinafter specified shall enjoy the benefits of the
following provisions when passing through the Suez Canal: They shall be
recognized by the quarantine authority as uninfected upon the production of
a certificate issued by the physicians on board, countersigned by the
commanding officer, and affirming under oath or solemn declaration:

(a) That there has not been any case of plague or cholera on board
either at the time of departure or during the passage;
(b) That a careful examination of all persons on board, without
any exception, has been made less than twelve hours before the
arrival in the Egyptian port, and that it revealed no case of these
diseases.
These vessels shall be exempted from the medical examination and
immediately receive pratique.
The quarantine authorities shall nevertheless have a right to cause their
agents to perform the medical examination on board war vessels whenever
they deem it necessary.
Suspicious or infected war vessels shall be subjected to the regulations in
force.
Only fighting units shall be considered as war vessels, transports and
hospital ships falling under the category of ordinary vessels.
ARTICLE 89
The Sanitary, Maritime, and Quarantine Board of Egypt is authorized to
organize through Egyptian territory, by rail, in quarantine trains the transit
of the mails and ordinary passengers coming from infected countries.
SECTION V.—Sanitary measures applicable to the Persian Gulf ARTICLE 90
The sanitary régime established by Title I of the present Convention shall
be applied, as regards vessels navigating the Persian Gulf, by the health
authorities of the ports both of departure and arrival.
 
TITLE III. PROVISIONS SPECIALLY APPLICABLE TO PILGRIMAGES
CHAPTER I—GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 91
The provisions of Article 13 are applicable to persons and objects bound for
Hedjaz or the Kingdom of Irak and who are to be embarked on a pilgrim
ship, even if the port of embarkation is not infected.
ARTICLE 92
When cases of plague or cholera or other epidemic disease exist in the port,
no embarkation shall be made on pilgrim ships until after the persons,
assembled in groups have been subjected to an observation for the purpose
of ascertaining that none of them is stricken with those diseases.
It shall be understood that, in executing this measure, each Government
may take into account the local circumstances and possibilities.
In the case of cholera the persons agreeing to being vaccinated there and
then by the physician of the sanitary authority shall be submitted to the
medical inspection only at the time of the vaccination. They shall not be
required to submit to the observation provided for in this article.
ARTICLE 93
Pilgrims must be provided with a round trip ticket or have deposited
sufficient money for the return journey, and, if circumstances permit, prove
that they command the means necessary for the accomplishment of the
pilgrimage.
ARTICLE 94
Only mechanically propelled ships shall be permitted to carry pilgrims on
long voyages.
ARTICLE 95
Pilgrim ships that are Red Sea coasters intended for short passages known
as “coasting voyages” shall be subject to the provisions in the special
regulations published by the Sanitary, Maritime and Quarantine Board of
Egypt.

ARTICLE 96
A ship, which, in addition to ordinary passengers, among whom pilgrims of
the upper classes may be included, carries pilgrims in less proportion than
one pilgrim per 100 tons gross, shall not be considered a pilgrim-ship.
 
This exemption applies only to the ship, and the pilgrims carried therein,
irrespective of class, shall remain subject to all measures prescribed for
them in this Convention.
ARTICLE 97
The captain or the agent of the shipping company, as the sanitary authority
may elect, must pay all sanitary taxes that may be levied on pilgrims. These
taxes must be included in the price of the ticket.
ARTICLE 98
As far as possible, pilgrims who embark or disembark at sanitary stations
must have no contact with one another at the landing-places.
Pilgrims who are landed must be distributed at the camp in as small groups
as possible.
They must be supplied with good drinking water, obtained either from local
sources or by distillation.
ARTICLE 99
Victuals brought by pilgrims shall be destroyed if the sanitary authority
considers it necessary.
CHAPTER II—PILGRIM SHIPS—SANITARY STATIONS
SECTION I.—General Conditions Applying to Ships ARTICLE 100

The ships must be capable of accommodating the pilgrims in the between-
decks. Outside of the space reserved for the crew, it must provide for each
person, irrespective of age, an area of 1.50 square metres, i. e. 16 English
square feet, and a height between-decks of at least 1.80 metres, i. e. about 6
English feet.
It is forbidden to accommodate pilgrims under the first between-deck, that
is below the water line.
Satisfactory ventilation must be ensured and below the upper between-deck
must be supplemented by mechanical ventilation.
In addition to the space reserved for pilgrims, the ship must provide, on the
upper deck, for each person, irrespective of age, a free area of not less than
0.56 square metres, i. e. about 6 English square feet, in addition to the area
upon the upper deck, reserved for temporary hospital, the crew, shower
baths, and latrines, and for the working of the ship.
ARTICLE 101
On deck places must be set apart, screened from view, of which a sufficient
number must be for the exclusive use of women.
 
These places shall be provided with water pipes under pressure, and
provided with taps or douches in such a way as to furnish at all times sea
water for the use of the pilgrims even if the ship is lying at anchor.
There shall be one tap or douche for every hundred or fraction of 100
pilgrims.
ARTICLE 102
The vessel must be provided, in addition to closets for the crew, with
latrines, fitted with a flushing apparatus or with a water tap.
Some of these latrines shall be reserved exclusively for women.

Latrines must be in the proportion of two per 100 pilgrims, or fraction of
100.
There must be no water closets in the hold.
ARTICLE 103
The vessel must have two places for cooking set apart for the use of the
pilgrims.
ARTICLE 104
Infirmaries meeting proper conditions of safety and wholesomeness must be
reserved for the accommodation of the sick. They must be on the main deck
unless in the opinion of the sanitary authority equally healthy
accommodations can be provided elsewhere.
They must be constructed so as to allow persons suffering from infectious
diseases and persons who have been in contact with them, to be isolated
according to the nature of their illness.
The infirmaries, including temporary infirmaries, must be capable of
accommodating at the rate of 3 square metres, i. e. about 32 English square
feet per patient, not less than 4 per 100 or fraction of 100 of the pilgrims
taken on board.
The infirmaries must be provided with special latrines.
ARTICLE 105
Every vessel shall have on board the medicines, disinfectants, and articles
necessary for the care of the sick. The regulations made for this kind of
vessels by each Government shall determine the nature and quantity of the
medicines. Every vessel must also carry the needful immunizing agents,
especially cholera and smallpox vaccines. The care and the remedies shall
be furnished free of charge to the pilgrims.
ARTICLE 106

Every vessel embarking pilgrims shall have on board a physician holding a
regular diploma who must be acceptable to the Government of the country
of the first port in which pilgrims embarked on the outward journey. A
second physician meeting the same conditions shall be embarked as soon as
the number of pilgrims carried by the vessel exceeds one thousand.
ARTICLE 107
The captain shall be obliged to have handbills posted on board in a position
which is conspicuous and accessible to those interested. They shall be in the
principal languages of the countries inhabited by the pilgrims embarked,
and show:
1. The destination of the vessel;
2. The price of the tickets;
3. The daily ration of water and food allowed to each pilgrim
according to the regulations of the country of origin;
4. A price list of victuals not comprised in the daily ration and to
be paid for extra.
ARTICLE 108
The heavy baggage of the pilgrims shall be registered and numbered. The
pilgrims will be allowed to keep with them only such articles as are
absolutely necessary. The regulations made by each Government for its
vessels will determine the nature, quantity, and dimensions of the said
articles.
ARTICLE 109
Extracts from the provisions of Chapters I, II (sections I, II and III), and III
of the present Title shall be posted, in the form of regulations, in the
language of the nationality of the vessel as well as in the principal language
of the countries inhabited by the pilgrims embarked, in a conspicuous and

accessible place on each deck and between decks on every vessel carrying
pilgrims.
SECTION II.—Measures to be taken before departure ARTICLE 110
At least three days before departure the captain, or in the absence of the
captain the owner or agent, of every pilgrim ship must declare his intention
to embark pilgrims to the competent authority of the port of departure. In
ports of call the captain, or in the absence of the captain the owner or agent,
of every pilgrim ship must make this same declaration twelve hours before
the departure of the vessel. This declaration must indicate the intended day
of sailing and the destination of the vessel.
 
ARTICLE 111
Upon the declaration prescribed by the preceding article being made, the
competent authority shall proceed to the inspection and measurement of the
vessel at the expense of the captain.
The inspection only shall be made if the captain is already provided with a
certificate of measurement issued by the competent authority of his country,
unless it is suspected that the document no longer corresponds to the actual
state of the vessel.
ARTICLE 112
The competent authority shall not permit the departure of a pilgrim ship
until he has ascertained:
(a) That the vessel has been put in a state of perfect cleanliness
and, if necessary, disinfected;
(b) That the vessel is in a condition to undertake the voyage
without danger; that she is provided with the necessary plant and
appliances for use in case of shipwreck, accident or fire,
particularly a wireless apparatus for sending and receiving

messages, that may be operated independently of the main
engine-room; that she carries a sufficient number of life-saving
devices; that she is properly outfitted, appointed, ventilated, and
provided with awnings of sufficient thickness and size to shelter
the decks, and that there is nothing on board that is or may
become injurious to the health or safety of the passengers;
(c) That, in addition to the stores for the vessel and the crew, there
are provisions and fuel of good quality on board in places where
they can be suitably stored and in sufficient quantity for all the
pilgrims and for the entire duration of the voyage;
(d) That the drinking water taken on board is of good quality; that
there is a sufficient quantity thereof; that the tanks of drinking
water on board are protected against all tainting and closed in
such a way that the water can only be let out through the stop
cocks or pumps. The devices for letting water out called
“suckers” are absolutely forbidden;
(e) That the vessel had a distilling apparatus capable of producing
at least 5 liters of water per head each day for every person
embarked, including the crew;
(f) That the vessel has a disinfecting chamber whose safety and
efficiency have been ascertained by the health authority of the
port of embarkation of the pilgrims;
(g) That the crew comprises a physician holding a diploma and as
well informed as possible on questions of maritime health and
exotic pathology, and who must be acceptable to the Government
of the first port where pilgrims embarked on the outward journey,
and that the vessel has a supply of medicines in accordance with
Article 105;
(h) That the deck of the vessel is free from all cargo and other
encumbrances;

(i) That the arrangements of the vessel are such that the measures
prescribed by Section III hereinafter may be executed.
ARTICLE 113
The captain shall not sail until he has in his possession:
1. A list viseed by the competent authority and showing the name
and sex, of the pilgrims who have been taken on board, and total
number of the pilgrims whom he is authorized to embark;
2. A document stating the name, nationality, and tonnage of the
vessel, the name of the captain and of the physician, the exact
number of persons embarked (crew, pilgrims, and other
passengers), the nature of the cargo, and the port of departure.
The competent authority shall indicate on the bill of health whether the
number of pilgrims allowed by the regulations is reached or not, and, in
case it is not reached, the additional number of passengers which the vessel
is authorized to embark in subsequent ports of call.
SECTION III.—Measures to be taken during the passage ARTICLE 114
The deck intended for the pilgrims shall remain free from encumbering
objects during the voyage and shall be reserved day and night for the
persons on board and be placed gratuitously at their service.
ARTICLE 115
Every day the space between decks shall be cleaned carefully and scrubbed
with sand while the pilgrims are on deck.
ARTICLE 116
The latrines intended for the passengers as well as those for the crew shall
be kept neat and be cleansed and disinfected three times a day, and oftener
if needed.
ARTICLE 117

The excretions and dejections of persons showing symptoms of plague or
cholera, dysentery or any other disease preventing their using the infirmary
latrines shall be collected in vessels containing a disinfecting solution.
These vessels shall be emptied into the infirmary latrines which shall be
thoroughly disinfected after each projection of matter.
 
ARTICLE 118
Articles of bedding, carpets, and clothing which have been in contact with
the patients mentioned in the preceding article shall be immediately
disinfected. The observance of this rule is especially recommended with
regard to the clothing of persons who come near to these patients and which
may have become soiled.
Such of the articles mentioned above as have no value shall be thrown
overboard, if the vessel is neither in a port nor a canal, or else destroyed by
fire. The others shall be disinfected as directed by the ship physician.
ARTICLE 119
The quarters occupied by the patients and referred to in Article 104 shall be
thoroughly and regularly disinfected.
ARTICLE 120
The quantity of drinking water allowed daily to each pilgrim free of charge,
whatever be his age, shall be at least 5 liters.
ARTICLE 121
If there is any doubt about the quality of the drinking water or any
possibility of its contamination either at the place of its origin or during the
course of the voyage, the water shall be boiled or otherwise sterilized, and
the captain shall be obliged to throw it overboard at the first port in which a
stop is made and in which he is able to procure a better supply. He may only
take it on board after the tanks shall have been disinfected.

ARTICLE 122
The physician shall examine the pilgrims, attend the patients, and see that
the rules of hygiene are observed on board. He shall especially:
1. Satisfy himself that the provisions dealt out to the pilgrims are
of good quality, that their quantity is in conformity with the
obligations assumed, and that they are suitably prepared;
2. Satisfy himself that the requirements of article 120 relative to
the distribution of water are observed;
3. If there is any doubt about the quality of the drinking water,
remind the captain in writing of the provisions of Article 121;
4. Satisfy himself that the vessel is maintained in a constant state
of cleanliness, and especially that the latrines are cleaned in
accordance with the provisions of Article 116;
5. Satisfy himself that the lodgings of the pilgrims are maintained
in a healthful condition, and that, in case of transmissible disease,
they are disinfected in conformity with Article 119;
6. Keep a diary of all the sanitary incidents occurring during the
course of the voyage and present on request this diary to the
competent authority of the port of call or arrival.
ARTICLE 123
The persons intrusted with the care of patients suffering with the plague,
cholera or other diseases shall alone have access to them and shall have no
contact with the other persons on board.
ARTICLE 124
In case of a death occurring during the voyage, the captain shall make note
of the death opposite the name on the list viseed by the authority of the port
of departure, besides entering on his journal the name of the deceased

person, his age, where he comes from, the presumable cause of his death
according to the physician’s certificate, and the date of the death.
In case of death by a transmissible disease, the body shall be wrapped in a
shroud saturated with a disinfecting solution and thrown overboard.
ARTICLE 125
The captain shall see that the prophylactic measures executed during the
voyage are recorded in the ship’s journal. This journal shall be presented by
him to the competent authority of the port of arrival.
In each port of call the captain shall have the list prepared in accordance
with Article 113 viséed by the competent authority.
In case a pilgrim is landed during the course of the voyage, the captain shall
note the fact on the list opposite the name of the pilgrim.
In case of an embarkation, the persons embarked shall be mentioned on this
list in conformity with the aforementioned Article 113 and before it is
viséed again by the competent authority.
ARTICLE 126
The bill of health delivered at the port of departure shall not be changed
during the course of the voyage. If this requirement is not complied with,
the vessel may be treated as an infected vessel.
It shall be viséed by the health authority of each port of call, who shall note
thereon:
1. The number of passengers landed or embarked in that port;
2. The incidents occurring at sea and affecting the health or life of
the persons on board;
3. The sanitary condition of the port of call.

SECTION IV.—Measures to be taken on the arrival of pilgrims in the Red Sea A.
SANITARY MEASURES APPLICABLE TO PILGRIM SHIPS BOUND FROM THE SOUTH TOWARD HEDJAZ
ARTICLE 127
Pilgrim ships hailing from the south and bound for Hedjaz shall first stop at
the sanitary station of Camaran, where they shall be subjected to the
measures prescribed in the following articles.
ARTICLE 128
Vessels recognized as uninfected after a medical inspection shall obtain
pratique when the following operations are completed: The pilgrims shall
be landed; take a shower or sea bath; and their soiled linen and the part of
their wearing apparel and baggage which appears suspicious in the opinion
of the health authority shall be disinfected. The duration of these operations,
including debarkation and embarkation, shall not exceed forty-eight hours.
Provided the time limit be not exceeded, the sanitary authority may perform
such bacteriological examinations as may be deemed necessary.
If no real or suspected case of plague or cholera is discovered during these
operations, the pilgrims shall be reembarked immediately and the vessel
shall proceed toward Jeddah.
Vessels found, on medical inspection, to be uninfected shall not undergo the
measures prescribed hereinabove, if the following conditions are fulfilled:
(1) All pilgrims on board have been immunized against cholera
and smallpox;
(2) The requirements of this Convention have been strictly
followed;
(3) There is no reason to doubt the declaration of the captain and
doctor of the ship to the effect that no case of plague, cholera or
smallpox has occurred on board, either at the time of departure or
during the voyage.

For plague, the provisions of Article 27 shall be applied with regard to the
rats which may be found on board the vessels.
ARTICLE 129
Suspicious vessels on board of which there were cases of plague in the six
days following the embarkation and on board of which an unusual mortality
of rats is discovered or cases of cholera at the time of departure but no new
case in the last five days, shall be treated in the following manner: The
pilgrims shall be landed; take a shower or sea bath; and their soiled linen
and the part of their wearing apparel and baggage which appears suspicious
in the opinion of the health authority shall be disinfected; the parts of the
vessel that have been occupied by the patients shall be disinfected. The
duration of these operations, including debarkation and embarkation, shall
not exceed forty-eight hours. Provided this period is not exceeded, such
bacteriological examination as may be considered necessary by the sanitary
authority may be made.
If no real or suspected case of plague or cholera is discovered during these
operations, the pilgrims shall be reembarked immediately and the vessel
shall proceed to Jeddah.
For plague, the provisions of Article 26 shall be applicable with regard to
the rats which may be found on board.
ARTICLE 130
Infected vessels, that is, those having cases of plague or cholera on board or
having had cases of plague more than six days after embarkation, or cholera
on board within five days, or on board of which rats infected by plague
have been discovered, shall undergo the following treatment: The persons
stricken with plague or cholera shall be landed and isolated at the hospital.
The other passengers shall be landed and isolated in groups comprising as
few persons as possible, so that the whole number may not suffer with and
for a particular group in which plague or cholera should develop.
The soiled linen, wearing apparel, and clothing of the crew and passengers,
as well as the vessel, shall be disinfected.

However the local health authority may decide that the unloading of the
heavy baggage and the cargo is not necessary, and that only a part of the
vessel need be disinfected.
The passengers shall remain in the Camaran establishment five or six days
according as whether the case is plague or cholera. If a new case should
occur after disembarkation, the period of observation shall be extended by
five days for cholera and six days for plague, to date from the isolation of
the last case.
For plague, the measures prescribed by Article 25 shall be applied with
regard to the rats which may be found on board the vessels.
When these operations have been completed, the ship, having reembarked
its pilgrims, shall be sent on to Jeddah.
ARTICLE 131
Ships, to which Articles 128, 129 and 130 apply, will be subject to medical
inspection on board on arrival at Jeddah.
If the result is favorable, the ship shall receive free pratique.
If, on the other hand, well established cases of plague or cholera have
occurred on board during the voyage, or at the time of arrival at Jeddah, the
sanitary authority of the Hedjaz may take all necessary measures subject to
the provisions of Article 54.
ARTICLE 132
Every sanitary station designed to receive pilgrims should be provided with
a trained, experienced, and sufficiently numerous staff, as well as with all
the buildings and apparatus necessary to insure the application, in their
entirety, of the measures to which said pilgrims are subject.
B. SANITARY MEASURES APPLICABLE TO PILGRIM SHIPS HAILING FROM NORTH OF PORT SAID AND BOUND TOWARD HEDJAZ
ARTICLE 133

If plague or cholera is not found to exist in the port of departure or its
neighborhood, and if no case of plague or cholera has occurred during the
passage, the vessel shall be immediately granted pratique.
ARTICLE 134
If plague or cholera is known to exist in the port of departure or its vicinity,
or if a case of plague or cholera has occurred during the voyage, the vessel
shall be subjected at Tor to the rules established for vessels coming from the
south and stopping at Camaran. The vessels shall thereupon be granted
pratique.
SECTION V.—Measures to be taken upon the return of pilgrims A. PILGRIM SHIPS RETURNING
NORTHWARD
ARTICLE 135
Every vessel bound for Suez or for a Mediterranean port, having on board
pilgrims or similar masses of persons, and hailing from a port of Hedjaz or
from any other port on the Arabian coast of the Red Sea, must repair to Tor
in order to undergo there the observation and the sanitary measures
indicated in Articles 140 to 142.
ARTICLE 136
Pending the creation at the port of Akaba of a quarantine station meeting the
requirements, pilgrims going from the Hedjaz to Akaba by sea shall
undergo the necessary quarantine measures at Tor before landing at Akaba.
ARTICLE 137
Vessels bringing pilgrims back toward the Mediterranean shall pass through
the canal in quarantine only.
 
ARTICLE 138

The agents of navigation companies and captains are warned that, after
completing their observation period at the sanitary station of Tor, the
Egyptian pilgrims will alone be permitted to leave the vessel permanently in
order to return thereupon to their homes.
Only those pilgrims will be recognized as Egyptians or as residents of
Egypt who are provided with a certificate of residence issued by an
Egyptian authority and conforming to the established model, Pilgrims other
than Egyptians, can not be landed in an Egyptian port after leaving Tor,
except by special permit under special conditions imposed by the Egyptian
health authority, in accord with the Sanitary, Maritime and Quarantine
Board of Egypt. Consequently, navigation agents and captains are warned
that the transshipment of pilgrims not residents of Egypt at Tor, Suez, Port
Said, or Alexandria is forbidden except under a special permit for each case.
Vessels having pilgrims on board who are not Egyptian nationals shall be
subject to the rules applicable to these pilgrims and shall not be received in
any Egyptian port of the Mediterranean.
ARTICLE 139
Egyptian pilgrims shall undergo an observation of three days and a medical
examination and if there be occasion, disinfection and disinsectisation at
Tor, or any other station designated by the Sanitary, Maritime and
Quarantine Board of Egypt; pilgrims shall not be permitted to enter any
Egyptian port in the Mediterranean.
ARTICLE 140
If plague or cholera is found to exist in Hedjaz or in the port from which the
vessel hails, or if it has existed in Hedjaz during the course of the
pilgrimage, the vessel shall be subjected at Tor to the rules adopted at
Camaran for infected vessels.
The persons stricken with plague or cholera shall be landed and isolated in
the hospitals. The other passengers shall be landed and isolated in groups
composed of as few persons as possible, so that the whole number may not

suffer with any particular group in which the plague or cholera should
develop.
The soiled linen, wearing apparel, and clothing of the crew and passengers,
as well as the baggage and cargo suspected of contamination shall be landed
and disinfected. Their disinfection as well as that of the vessel shall be
thorough.
However, the local health authority may decide that the unloading of the
heavy baggage and the cargo is not necessary, and that only a part of the
vessel need undergo disinfection.
 
The measures provided in Article 25 shall be applied with regard to the rats
which may be found on board.
All the pilgrims shall be subjected to an observation of six full days from
the day on which the disinfecting operations are completed, in the case of
plague and five days in the case of cholera. If a case of plague or cholera
has appeared in one section, the period of six or five days shall not begin
for this section until the day on which the last case was discovered.
ARTICLE 141
In the case contemplated in the preceding article, the Egyptian pilgrims
shall be subjected, besides, to an additional observation of three days.
ARTICLE 142
If plague or cholera is not found to exist either in Hedjaz or in the port from
which the vessel hails, and has not been known to exist in Hedjaz during the
course of the pilgrimage, the vessel shall be subjected at Tor to the rules
adopted at Camaran for uninfected vessels.
The pilgrims shall be landed and take a shower or sea bath, and their soiled
linen or the part of their wearing apparel and baggage which may appear

suspicious in the opinion of the health authority shall be disinfected. The
duration of these operations shall not exceed seventy-two hours.
However, a pilgrim ship, if it has had no plague or cholera patients during
the course of the voyage from Djeddah to Yambo or Tor and if the
individual medical examination made at Tor after debarkation establishes
the fact that it contains no such patients, may be authorized by the Sanitary
Maritime and Quarantine Board of Egypt to pass through the Suez Canal in
quarantine even at night when the following four conditions are fulfilled:
1. Medical attendance shall be given on board by one or several
physicians graduated and duly accepted;
2. The vessel shall be provided with disinfecting chambers in
good working order;
3. It shall be shown that the number of pilgrims does not exceed
that authorized by the pilgrimage regulations;
4. The captain shall bind himself to repair directly to the port
which he names as his next call port.
The sanitary tax to be paid to the Quarantine administration shall be the
same as the pilgrims would have paid had they remained in quarantine three
days.
ARTICLE 143
A vessel which has had a suspicious case on board during the voyage from
Tor to Suez may be sent back to Tor.
 
ARTICLE 144
The transshipment of pilgrims is strictly forbidden in Egyptian ports except
by special permit and on the conditions laid down by the Egyptian Sanitary
authority in accord with the Maritime Sanitary and Quarantine Board of
Egypt.

ARTICLE 145
Vessels leaving Hedjaz and having on board pilgrims who are bound for a
port on the African shore of the Red Sea shall proceed directly to the
quarantine station named by the territorial authority to which that port
belongs, where they shall submit to the same quarantine procedure as at Tor.
ARTICLE 146
Vessels sailing from Hedjaz or from a port on the Arabian coast of the Red
Sea, in which neither the plague nor cholera prevails, which have no
pilgrims or similar groups of people on board, and have had no suspicious
occurrence during the voyage, shall be granted pratique at Suez after a
favorable medical inspection.
ARTICLE 147
Passengers coming from the Hedjaz who have accompanied the pilgrimage
shall be subject to the same measures as pilgrims. The appellation of
merchant or any other will not exempt them from the measures applicable
to the pilgrims.
B. RETURNING PILGRIMS GOING NORTH BY CARAVAN
ARTICLE 148
Whatever the sanitary condition in the Hedjaz may be, pilgrims travelling
by caravan must repair to one of the quarantine stations upon their route,
there to undergo according to circumstances the measures prescribed by
Articles 140 or 142 for pilgrims who have been landed.
C. PILGRIMS RETURNING SOUTHWARD
ARTICLE 149
In the event of the pilgrimage being infected, pilgrim ships, returning to
places south of the Straits of Bab-el-Mandeb, may be required, by
directions of the Consular Authority of the countries to which the pilgrims
are going to stop at Camaran and there undergo medical inspection.

 
SECTION VI.—Measures applicable to pilgrims travelling by the Hedjaz
Railway ARTICLE 150
The Governments of the countries through which the Hedjaz railway passes
shall make all necessary arrangements to organize the sanitary supervision
of pilgrims during their journey to the Holy Places, and the application of
prophylactic measures in order to prevent the dissemination of infectious
diseases presenting epidemic features bearing in mind the principles of the
present Convention.
SECTION VII.—Sanitary information concerning the pilgrimage ARTICLE 151
The Sanitary Maritime and Quarantine Board of Egypt will transmit
periodically, and if occasion arises, by the speediest route, to the sanitary
authorities of all the countries interested, and concurrently, to the
International Office of Public Hygiene under the conditions provided by
this convention, all sanitary information and reports that may come to its
knowledge during the pilgrimage concerning the sanitary condition of the
Hedjaz and the countries through which the pilgrims pass. It will also get up
an annual report which shall be sent to the said authorities and the
International Office of Public Hygiene.
CHAPTER III—SANCTIONS
ARTICLE 152
Every captain convicted of not having conformed, in the distribution of
water, provisions, or fuel, to the obligations assumed by or for him, shall be
liable to a fine of not more than fifty francs (gold) for every failure. This
fine shall be collected for the benefit of the pilgrim who shall have been the
victim of the default, and who shall prove that he has vainly demanded the
execution of the agreement made.
ARTICLE 153

Every infraction of Article 107 shall be punished by a fine of not more than
750 francs (gold).
ARTICLE 154
Every captain who has committed or knowingly permitted any fraud
whatever concerning the list of pilgrims or the bill of health provided for in
Article 113 shall be liable to a fine of not more than 150 francs (gold).
 
ARTICLE 155
Every captain of a vessel arriving without a bill of health of the port of
departure, or without a visé of the ports of call, or who is not provided with
the list required by the regulations and regularly kept in accordance with
Article 113 and Articles 125 and 126, shall be liable in each case to a fine of
not more than three hundred francs (gold).
ARTICLE 156
Every captain convicted of having or having had on board more than 100
pilgrims without the presence of a graduated physician according to the
provisions of Article 106 shall be liable to a fine of not more than 7500
francs (gold).
ARTICLE 157
Every captain convicted of having or having had on board a greater number
of pilgrims than that which he is authorized to embark according to the
provisions of subsection (1) of Article 113 shall be liable to a fine of not
more than 125 francs (gold) for each pilgrim in excess.
The pilgrims in excess of the regular number shall be landed at the first
station at which a competent authority resides, and the captain shall be
obliged to furnish the landed pilgrims with the money necessary to pursue
their voyage to their destination.
ARTICLE 158

Every captain convicted of having landed pilgrims at a place other than
their destination, except with their consent, or excepting cases of vis major,
shall be liable to a fine of not more than 500 francs (gold) for each pilgrim
wrongfully landed.
ARTICLE 159
All other infractions of the provisions relative to pilgrim ships are
punishable by a fine of not less than 250 nor more than 2500 francs (gold).
ARTICLE 160
Every violation proven in the course of a voyage shall be noted on the
ship’s papers as well as on the list of pilgrims. The competent authority
shall draw up a report thereof and deliver it to the proper party.
ARTICLE 161
Contraventions of Articles 152 to 159 inclusive will be certified by the
sanitary authority of the port at which the ship has called.
Penalties will be imposed by the competent authority.
 
ARTICLE 162
All agents called upon to assist in the execution of the provisions of the
present Convention with regard to pilgrim ships are liable to punishment in
conformity with the laws of their respective countries in case of faults
committed by them in the application of the said provisions.
TITLE IV. SURVEILLANCE AND EXECUTION
I. SANITARY, MARITIME, AND QUARANTINE BOARD OF EGYPT
ARTICLE 163

The stipulations of Appendix III of the Sanitary Convention of Venice of
January 30, 1892,44 concerning the composition, powers and duties, and
operation of the Sanitary, Maritime, and Quarantine Board of Egypt, are
confirmed as they appear in the khedival decrees under date of June 19,
1893, and December 25, 1894, as well as in the ministerial decision of June
19, 1893.45
The said decrees and decisions are annexed to the present convention.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the said decrees and decisions the high
contracting parties agree that—
I. The number of Egyptian delegates on the Egyptian Sanitary,
Maritime and Quarantine Board shall be increased to five:
(1) The President of the Board, appointed by the
Egyptian Government, and who will only have a casting
vote;
(2) A European doctor of medicine, Inspector-General
of the Sanitary, Maritime and Quarantine Service;
(3) Three delegates appointed by the Egyptian
Government.
II. The Veterinary Service of the Sanitary, Maritime and
Quarantine Board shall be transferred to the Egyptian
Government.
The following conditions shall be observed:
(1) The Egyptian Government will collect sanitary taxes
on imported cattle not to exceed those now collected by
the Egyptian Sanitary, Maritime and Quarantine Board;
(2) 
The 
Egyptian 
Government 
undertakes 
in
consequence to pay annually to the Sanitary, Maritime
and Quarantine Board a sum representing the average

of the excess of receipts over the expenditures of the
said service during the three budgetary years preceding
the date on which the present Convention is put into
force.
(3) The measures to be taken for the disinfection of
cattle ships, of skins, and of other animals’ derivatives,
shall be as in the past in charge of the Sanitary,
Maritime and Quarantine Board.
(4) The foreign personnel now in the veterinary service
of the Sanitary, Maritime and Quarantine Board will be
granted the benefit of the salaries appropriated by Law
No. 28 of 1923, regarding the conditions of service and
the retirement or discharge of officials, employees or
agents of foreign nationality.
Grading of salaries shall be as provided by the above-mentioned
law. The other details will be fixed by an agreement between the
Egyptian Government and the Sanitary, Maritime and Quarantine
Board.
III. On account of the great distance between the Port of Suakim
and the headquarters of the Egyptian Sanitary, Maritime and
Quarantine Board at Alexandria, and the fact that the pilgrims and
passengers who disembark in this port of Suakim concern from
the sanitary point of view only the territory of the Soudan, the
sanitary administration of this port will be detached from the said
Board.
ARTICLE 164
The ordinary expenses resulting from the provisions of the present
convention, especially those relating to the increase of the personnel
belonging to the Sanitary, Maritime, and Quarantine Board of Egypt, shall
be covered by means of an annual supplementary payment by the Egyptian
Government of the sum of 4,000 Egyptian pounds, which may be taken

from the surplus revenues from the lighthouse service remaining at the
disposal of said Government.
However, the proceeds of a supplementary quarantine tax of ten tariff
dollars per pilgrim to be collected at Tor shall be deducted from this sum.
In case the Egyptian Government should find difficulty in bearing this share
of the expenses, the Powers represented in the Sanitary, Maritime, and
Quarantine Board shall reach an understanding with that Government in
order to insure the participation of the latter in the expenses contemplated.
ARTICLE 165
The Sanitary, Maritime, and Quarantine Board of Egypt shall undertake the
task of bringing the provisions of the present convention into conformity
with the regulations at present enforced by it in regard to the plague,
cholera, and yellow fever, as well as with the regulations relative to arrivals
from the Arabian ports of the Red Sea during the pilgrim season.
 
To the same end it shall, if occasion arises, revise the general regulations of
the sanitary, maritime, and quarantine police at present in force.
These regulations, in order to become effective must be accepted by the
various powers represented on the Board.
II. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 166
The proceeds from the sanitary taxes and fines collected by the Sanitary,
Maritime and Quarantine Board shall in no case be employed for objects
other than those within the province of the said Board.
ARTICLE 167
The High Contracting Parties agree to have a set of instructions prepared by
their health departments for the purpose of enabling captains of vessels,

especially when there is no physician on board, to enforce the provisions
contained in the present convention with regard to plague, cholera, and
yellow fever.
TITLE V. FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 168
The present Convention supersedes, as between the High Contracting
Parties, the provisions of the Convention signed at Paris on January 17th,
1912, and also, the case arising, those of the Convention signed at Paris on
December 3rd, 1903. These two last named Conventions will remain in
force as between the High Contracting Parties and any State which is a
party thereto and is not a party to the present Convention.
ARTICLE 169
The present Convention will bear to-day’s date and may be signed up to
October 1st of the current year.
ARTICLE 170
The present Convention shall be ratified and the ratifications shall be
deposited at Paris as soon as possible. It shall not come into force until it
has been ratified by ten of the High Contracting Parties. Thereafter it will
take effect as regards each High Contracting Party from the date of the
deposit of its ratification.
 
ARTICLE 171
The States which have not signed the present convention shall be permitted
to adhere thereto upon request. Notice of this adhesion shall be given
through diplomatic channels to the Government of the French Republic and
by the latter to the other Contracting Parties.
ARTICLE 172

Any of the High Contracting Parties may declare, at the moment either of
his signature, ratification or accession, that his acceptance of the present
Convention does not include neither all nor any of the protectorates,
colonies, possessions or mandated territories, and may subsequently accede,
in accordance with the preceding Article, on behalf of any one of its
protectorates, colonies, possessions or mandated territories excluded by
such declaration.
In faith whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the present
Convention.
Done at Paris the twenty-first day of June, nineteen hundred and twenty-six,
in a single copy, which will remain deposited in the archives of the
Government of the French Republic; and of which certified copies will be
transmitted through the diplomatic channel to the other Contracting Parties.
For Afganistan: ISLAMBEK KHOUDOIAR KHAN
For Albania: Dr. OSMAN
For Germany: FRANOUX
HAMEL
For Argentina: F. A. DE TOLEDO
For Austria: Dr. ALFRED GRUNBERGER
For Belgium: VELGHE
For Brazil: CARLOS CHAGAS
GILBERTO MOURA COSTA
For Bulgaria: B. MORFOFF
TOCHKO PÉTROFF
For Chile: ARMANDO QUEZADA
For China: S. K. YAO
SCIE TON FA
For Colombia: MIGUEL JIMÉNEZ LOPEZ
For Cuba: R. HERNANDEZ PORTELA
For Denmark: TH. MADSEN
For Danzig: CHODZKO
STADE
For the Dominican Republic: BETANCES

For Egypt: FAKHRY
Dr. M. EL GUINDY
For Ecuador: J. ILLINGOURTH
For Spain: MARQUIS DE FAURA
Dr. F. MURILLO
For the United States of America: H. S. GUMMING
W. W. KING
For Ethiopia: LAGARDE, DUC D’ENTOTTO
For Finland: ENCKELL
For France: CAMILLE BARRÈRE
HARISMENDY
NAVAILLES
Dr. A. CALMETTE
LÉON BERNARD
For Algeria: Dr. RAYNAUD
For West Africa: Dr. PAUL GOUZIEN
For East Africa: THIROUX
For Indo-China: Dr. L’HERMINIER
Dr. N. BERNARD
For the States of Syria, Grand-Liban, Alaouites and Djebel-Druse: HARISMENDY
For all other colonies, protectorates, possessions and territories under
French mandate: AUDIBERT
For the British Empire: G. S. BUCHANAN
JOHN MURRAY
For Canada: J. A. AMYOT
For Australia: W. C. SAWERS
For New Zealand: SYDNEY PRICE JAMES
For India: D. T. CHADWICK
For the Union of South Africa: PHILIP STOCK
For Greece: AL. C. CARAPANOS
D. MATARANGAS
For Guatemala: FRANCISCO A. FIGUEROA
For Haiti: GEORGES AUDAIN
For Hedjaz: Dr. MAHMOUD HAMOUDE
For Honduras: RUBÉN AUDINO AGUILAR
For Hungary: Dr. CH. GROSCH
For Italy: ALBERT LUTRARIO

GIOVANNI VITTORIO REPETTI
ODOARDO HUETTER
G. ROCCO
GIUSEPPE DRUETTI
For Japan: H. MATSUSHIMA
MITSUZO TSURUMI
For Liberia: R. LEHMANN
N. OOMS
For Lithuania: Dr. PR. VAICIUSKA
For Luxembourg: Dr. PRAUM
For Morocco: HARISMENDY
Dr. RAYNAUD
For Mexico: R. CABRERA
For Monaco: F. ROUSSEL
Dr. MARSAN
For Norway: SIGURD BENTZON
For Paraguay: R. V. CABALLERO
For The Netherlands: DOUDE VAN TROOSTWYK
N. M. JOSEPHUS JITTA
DE VOGEL
VAN DER PLAS
For Peru: P. MIMBELA
For Persia, ad referendum:
Dr. ALI KHAN PARTOW AAZAM
MANSOUR CHARIF
For Poland: CHODZKO
For Portugal: RICARDO JORGE
For Rumania: Dr. J. CANTACUZÈNE
For San Marino: Dr. GUELPA
For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes: M. SPALAÏKOVITCH
For Salvador: CARLOS R. LARDÈ-ARTHÈS
For the Soudan: OLIVER FRANCIS HAYNES ATKEY
For Switzerland: DUNANT
CARRIÈRE
For Czechoslovakia: Dr. LADISLAV PROCHAZKA
For Tunis: NAVAILLES
For Turkey: A. FÉTHY

For the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics: J. DAVTIAN
J. MAMMOULIA
L. BRONSTEINO. MEBOURNOUTOFF
N. FREYBERG
AL. SYSSINE
V. EGORIEW
For Uruguay: A. HEROSA
For Venezuela, ad referendum:
JOSÉ IG. CARDENAS
 
ANNEXES
[Here follow the texts of the khedival decrees of June 19, 1893, and
December 25, 1894, and the ministerial decision of June 19, 1893, referred
to in article 163, p. 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 116].]
PROTOCOL OF SIGNATURE
The undersigned Plenipotentiaries met on the date of this day for the
purpose of signing the International Sanitary Convention.
The Plenipotentiaries of the German Empire referring to Article 25 make
express reservations as to the power granted by the Convention to several
governments to enforce the observation in case of bubonic plague.
The Plenipotentiaries of Brazil declare they are empowered to sign the
Convention and referendum under the reservations entered in the minutes of
the last plenary session.
The Plenipotentiaries of Chili declare that they join in the reservations made
by the Plenipotentiaries of Brazil and Portugal.
The Plenipotentiaries of China express reservations in the name of their
Government concerning the engagement appearing in Article 8, 2nd
Section, that it would be compulsory to declare the diseases coming under
the Convention.

In the name of their Government the Plenipotentiaries of Egypt renew the
express reservations made by them concerning the presence at the
Convention of a delegate representing the Soudan. They furthermore
declare that the said presence could not in any way affect the rights of
sovereignty of Egypt.
The Plenipotentiaries of Spain declare they make in the name of their
Government a reservation identical with that of the Plenipotentiaries of the
United States of America concerning article 12.
The Plenipotentiaries of the United States of America formally declare that
their signing the International Sanitary Convention of this date is not to be
construed to mean that the United States of America recognizes a régime or
entity acting as Government of a signatory or adhering Power when that
régime or entity is not recognized by the United States as the Government
of that Power. They further declare that the participation of the United
States of America in the International Sanitary Convention of this date does
not involve any contractual obligation on the part of the United States to a
signatory or adhering Power represented by a régime or entity which the
United States does not recognize as representing the Government of that
Power, until it is represented by a Government recognized by the United
States.
The Plenipotentiaries of the United States of America declared,
furthermore, that their Government reserves to itself the right to decide
whether from the standpoint of the measures to be applied a foreign district
is to be considered as infected and to decide what measures shall be applied
to arrival in its own ports under special circumstances.
The great work accomplished by the International Sanitary Convention and
the many new provisions carried could not be referred by telegraph to Her
Majesty the Queen of the Kings and to His Imperial and Royal Highness
Prince Tafari Makonnen, Heir to and Regent of the Empire and the Delegate
of the Ethiopian Empire declares that he must refrain from signing the
Convention before he receives the necessary instructions.
The British Plenipotentiaries declare that their signing does not bind any
part of the British Empire that is a distinct member of the League of

Nations and would not sign separately or adhere to the Convention.
They further declared that they reserve the right not to apply the provisions
of the 2nd subsection of article 8 to all the Protectorates, Colonies,
Possessions or Countries under the British mandate which might be parties
to the Convention and which on practical grounds might be unable to give
full effect to those provisions relative to the compulsory declaration of the
diseases referred to in the said article.
The Delegate of Canada reserves for his Government the right to decide
whether from the viewpoint of the measures to be applied a foreign district
is to be considered as infected and to decide what measures shall be applied
to arrivals in Canadian ports under special circumstances. Subject to that
reservation the Delegate from Canada declares that his Government is ready
to take into consideration the obligations of article 12 of the Convention
and the official information it may receive concerning the existence of the
diseases in foreign countries.
The Delegate of India declares that he is authorized to sign the International
Sanitary Convention under the reservation that on grounds of a practical
nature India is not in a position to assume the obligations resulting from
article 8 in so far as it has to do with the obligatory declaration of the
diseases named in said article, except in large cities or in cases of epidemic.
The British Plenipotentiaries declare and wish to have it made a record that
the reservation of the Plenipotentiaries of Persia about article 90 cannot in
any way modify the present status quo pending an agreement to be arrived
at between the Persian and British Governments.
The Plenipotentiaries of the Finnish Republic declare that immunization
from cholera does not constitute a sufficient guarantee and that their
Government reserves to itself notwithstanding the provisions of article 30,
the right to make, if the occasion arises, immune persons undergo
observation.
On the other hand, considering that the traffic of the Finnish border could
only go over two railways in the east very close to each other and a single
railway in the west which does not make it permissible to contemplate a

partial closing of the frontier, Finland in order to avoid the complete closing
in case of epidemic reserves to itself the right to set up observation if
occasion arises notwithstanding the provisions in article 58.
The Plenipotentiaries of Japan declare that their Government reserves to
itself the right: 1. To forward through the Eastern bureau of Singapore the
notices and information, the mailing of which to the International Office of
Public Hygiene is required by the Convention; 2. To take such measures as
the sanitary authorities may deem necessary with regard to carriers of
cholera vibrios.
The Plenipotentiaries of Lithuania declare that though adhering to the
Convention, they make special reservations as to its being put into practice
between Lithuania and Poland as long as normal relations between the two
countries shall not have been restored.
These reservations are of particular importance with respect to the
provisions in articles 9, 16, 57 and 66.
The Plenipotentiaries of The Netherlands declare in the name of their
Government that it reserves to itself with regard to the Dutch East Indies to
enforce the measures provided in article 10, sub-section 2 in the same
degree to arrivals from districts afflicted with murine plague.
They further declare that their Government reserves to itself with respect to
the Dutch East Indies the right to put on article 27–2 a construction to the
effect that the destruction of rats referred to in that article may be applied to
vessels taking a cargo from a district afflicted with murine plague when the
sanitary authority believes that the cargo is likely to carry rats and is stowed
in such a way as to make it impossible to affect the search provided in the
last sub-section of article 24.
The Plenipotentiaries of Persia declare that there is nothing warranting any
special provision concerning the Persian Gulf being retained in the
Convention. The fact that there is in the Convention article 90 constituting
Section V of Title II, prevents their signing without making the most
express reservations. The Plenipotentiaries of Persia further declare that the
status quo could not in any way bind their Government. Again they reserve

for their Government the right not to apply the provisions of article 8
relative to the obligatory declaration of the diseases coming under the said
article.
 
The Plenipotentiary of Portugal declares that he is authorized by his
Government to sign the Convention ad referendum with the reservations
entered in the minutes of the last plenary session.
The Plenipotentiary of Turkey declares that Turkey would not relinquish by
any treaty the right of being represented in the Sanitary, Maritime and
Quarantine Board of Egypt. On the other hand taking into consideration the
stipulations in the Convention of the Straits signed at Lausanne and the
special conditions of the Straits of Bosphorus and Dardanelles, he reserves
the right for the Sanitary Administration of Turkey to put a sanitary guard
on board any merchant vessel going through the Straits without a physician
and coming from an infected port so as to prevent that vessel from calling at
any Turkish port. It is understood, however, that the delay and expenses that
such a guard may entail will be very slight.
The Plenipotentiaries of the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics, calling
to mind the declarations made by them on May 26, at the session of the first
Commission concerning article 7 of the draft of Convention declare they
have no objection to offer to the provisions relative to the right of the
International Office of Public Hygiene to make arrangements with other
sanitary agencies; but they are of the opinion that that right flows from the
arrangement of Rome of 1907 which defines the functions of the Office.
They therefore believe that the provision hereinabove referred to is but a
confirmation of that right and should only appear in the minutes and not be
made an article of the Convention itself.
The Plenipotentiaries of the Union of the Soviet and Socialist Republics call
to mind that at the time article 12 of the Convention was under
consideration they cast their votes against the provision granting the
Governments the right to prolong in exceptional cases the application of
sanitary measures notwithstanding the declaration of the State concerned
that there is no longer any danger of the disease.

They hold that that provision may infringe upon one of the fundamental
principles of the previous conventions and become a cause of
misunderstanding that could arise from its application.
They therefore declare that in the spirit of the Convention that provision can
only be considered in exceptional cases when the Government to which the
afflicted district belongs does not meet the obligations laid down by the
Convention in that respect.
The Plenipotentiaries of the Soviet Socialist Republics call to mind that the
reservations already made by them in second Commission concerning the
functions, duties and powers of the sanitary, maritime and quarantine board
of Egypt. They particularly wish to emphasize the fact that articles 70 and
164 in particular confer upon that board the right to set up different sanitary,
maritime and quarantine police regulations on condition that those
regulations in order to be capable of execution must be accepted by the
different Powers represented in the Council. Inasmuch as the Union of the
Soviet Socialist Republics is not yet represented in the sanitary, maritime
and quarantine board of Egypt, the Delegation of the Union wishes to
reserve the rights of its Government to accept or not to accept the measures
worked out by that board.
The undersigned make a formal acknowledgment of the reservations
hereinabove set forth and declare that their own countries reserve to
themselves the right to invoke the benefit thereof as against the countries in
whose name they were made.
In witness whereof, the Plenipotentiaries have signed this Protocol.
Done in Paris, June 21, 1926.
For Afghanistan: ISLAMBECK KHOUDOIAR KHAN
For Albania: Dr. OSMAN
For the German Empire: FRANOUX
HAMEL
For the Argentine Republic: F. A. DE TOLEDO
For Austria: Dr. ALFRED GRUNBERGER

For Belgium: VELCHE
For Brazil:CARLOS CHAGAS
GILBERTO MOURA COSTA
For Bulgaria:B. MORFOFF
TOCHKO PÉTROFF
For Chile: ARMANDO QUEZADA
For China: S. K. YAO
SCIE TON FA
For Colombia: MIGUEL JIMÉMEZ LOPEZ
For Cuba: R. HERNANDEZ PORTELA
For Denmark: TH. MADSEN
For Dantzig: CHODZKO
STADE
For the Dominican Republic: BETANCES
For Egypt: FAKHRY
Dr. M. EL GUINDY
For Ecuador:J. ILLINGOURTH
For Spain:MARQUIS DE FAURA
Dr. F. MURILLO
For the United States of America: H. S. CUMMING
W. W. KING
For Ethiopia: LAGARDE DUO D’ENTOTTO
For Finland: ENCKELL
For France: CAMILLE BARRÈRE
HARISMENDY
NAVAILLES
Dr. A. CALMETTE
LÉON BERNARD
For Algeria: Dr. RAYNAUD
For Western Africa: Dr. PAUL GOUZIEN
For Eastern Africa: THIROUX
For Indo-China: Dr. L’HERMINIER
Dr. N. BERNARD
For the States of Syria, the Great Lebanon, Alaouïtes and Djebel-Druse:
HARISMENDY
For all of the other colonies, Protectorates, Possessions and Territories
under the rule of France: AUDIBERT

For the British Empire: G. S. BUCHANAN
JOHN MURRAY
For Canada: J. A. AMYOT
For Australia: W. C. SAWERS
For New Zealand: SYDNEY PRICE JAMES
For India: D. T. CHADWICK
For the Union of South Africa: PHILIP STOCK
For Greece: AL C. CARAPANOS
D. MATARANGAS
For Guatemala: FRANCISCO A. FIGUEORA
For Haiti: GEORGES AUDAIN
For the Hedjaz: Dr. MAHMOUD HAMOUDÉ
For Honduras: RUBÉN AUDINO AGUILAR
For Hungary: Dr. CH. GROSCH
For Italy: ALBERT LUTRARIO
GIOVANNI VITTORIO REPETTI
ODOARDO HUETTER
G. ROCCO
GUISEPPE DRUETTI
For Japan: H. MATSUSHIMA
MITSUZO TSURUMI
For the Republic of Liberia: R. LEHMANN
N. OOMS
For Lithuania: Dr. PR. VAICIUSKA
For Luxemburg: Dr. PRAUM
For Morocco: HARISMENDY
Dr. RAYNAUD
For Mexico: R. CABRERA
For Monaco: F. ROUSSEL
Dr. MARSAN
For Norway: SIGURD BENTZON
For Paraguay: R. V. CABALLERO
For the Netherlands: DOUDE VAN TROOSTWYK
N. M. JOSEPHUS JITTA
DE VOGEL
VAN DER PLAS
For Peru: P. MIMBELA

For Persia, ad referendum:
Dr. ALI KHAN PARTOW AAZAM
MANSOUR CHARIF
For Poland: CHODZKO
For Portugal: RICARDO JORGE
For Rumania: Dr. J. CANTACUZÈNE
For San Marino: Dr. GUELPA
For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes: M. SPALAIKOVÏTCH
For Salvador: CARLOS R. LARDÉ-ARTHÈS
For the Soudan: OLIVER FRANCIS HAYNES ATKEY
For Switzerland: DUNANT
CARRIÈRE
For Czechoslovakia: Dr. LADISLAV PROCHAZKA
For Tunis: NAVAILLES
For Turkey: A. FÈTHY
For the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics: J. DAVTIAN
J. MAMMOUUA
L. BRONSTEIN
O. MEBOURNOUTOFF
N. FREYBERG
AL. SYSSINE
V. EGORIEW
For Uruguay: A. HFROSA
For Venezuela, ad referendum:
JOSÉ IG. CARDENAS
43 Signed and proclaimed in the French language; this translation is
reprinted from the Department of State Treaty Series. Ratification advised
by the Senate, with understandings and conditions, Mar. 22, 1928; ratified
by the President, Apr. 7, 1928; ratification of the United States deposited
with the Government of the French Republic, May 22, 1928; proclaimed by
the President, June 21, 1928.
* The provisions of this Convention regarding rats are applicable to the case
of other rodents, and in general to other animals known to be the means of
spreading plague. [Footnote in the original.]

* A “foyer” exists when the occurrence of new cases outside the immediate
surroundings of the first cases proves that the spread of the disease has not
been limited to the place where it began. [Footnote in the original.]
* In all cases where the present Convention refers to “Surveillance” the
sanitary authority may substitute “Observation” as an exceptional measure
in the case of persons who do not offer adequate sanitary guarantees.
Persons under observation or surveillance must submit to all clinical or
bacteriological investigations which are considered necessary by the
sanitary authority. [Footnote in the original.]
* The expression “territorial waters” must be understood in its strictly
juridical sense. It does not include Suez, Panama and Kiel Canals.
[Footnote in the original.]
44 British and Foreign State Papers, vol. LXXXIV, p. 12.
45 Malloy, Treaties, 1910-1923, vol. III. 3013, 3018, and 3019; 45 Stat (pt. 2)
2533, 2536, 2537.

Treaty Series No. 762
[Document 117]
Procès-Verbal of the Deposit of Ratifications of the International
Sanitary Convention by Belgium, Spain, France, Great Britain,
Monaco, and the Soudan
[Translation]
Pursuant to Article 170 of the International Sanitary Convention signed at
Paris June 21, 1926, the instrument of ratifications of that International Act
by:
His Majesty the King of the Belgians
His Majesty the King of Spain
The President of the French Republic
His Majesty the King of Great Britain, Ireland and British
territories beyond the seas, Emperor of India
His Serene Highness the Prince of Monaco
The Governor General representing the sovereign authority of
Soudan,
found to be in good and due form, have been deposited in the archives of
the Government of the French Republic, in the name of
His Majesty the King of the Belgians
by His Excellency Baron GAIFFIER D’HESTROY
His Ambassador at Paris;
His Majesty the King of Spain
by His Excellency Mr. QUINONES DE LEON

His Ambassador at Paris
The President of the French Republic
by Mr. BRIAND, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the French Republic
His Majesty the King of Great Britain, Ireland and the British
territories beyond the seas, Emperor of India
by His Excellency Marquis CREWE
His Ambassador at Paris,
His Serene Highness the Prince of Monaco
by Count de MALEVILLE,
His Minister at Paris;
The Governor General representing the sovereign authority of
Soudan
by His Excellency Marquis CREWE, Ambassador of His Britannic
Majesty at Paris,
The instrument of ratifications of His Majesty the King of Spain contains
the following reservations:
First Reservation on Article 12 of the Convention
“The Government of His Catholic Majesty declares that
ratification of the International Sanitary Convention is not to be
construed to mean that Spain recognizes a régime or entity acting
as Government of a signatory or adhering Power when that
regime or entity is not recognized by Spain as the Government of
that Power; it further declares that the participation of Spain in the
International Sanitary Convention does not involve any
contractual obligation on the part of Spain to a signatory or
adhering Power represented by a regime or entity which Spain
does not recognize as representing the Government of that Power
until it is represented by a Government recognized by Spain.”
Second Reservation

“The Government of His Catholic Majesty reserves to itself the
right to decide whether, from the standpoint of the measures to be
applied to a foreign district, it is to be considered as infected and
to decide what measures shall be applied under special
circumstances to arrivals in its own ports.”
Reservations to Article 49 of the Convention
“The Government of His Catholic Majesty, while approving in
principle the recommendations in Article 49 of the Convention
and feeling desirous of hereafter succeeding in freely delivering
bills of health and reducing consular fees for the visa of said bills
of health, under the head of reciprocity, so that they shall
represent only the cost of the service rendered, can not refrain
from calling attention to the fact that at present the law in force in
Spain does not make it possible to grant those concessions which
in any event could only be granted in accordance with the law of
Spain.”
“It is further declared that the instrument of ratifications by His
Catholic Majesty does not apply to the Spanish territories in the
Gulf of Guinea which shall form the subject of a special adhesion
as provided in Articles 171 and 172 of the Convention when the
sanitary measures that are contemplated shall have been
promulgated for those territories.”
In accordance with Article 172 of the Convention, the instrument of
ratifications by His Majesty the King of Great Britain, Ireland and the
British territories beyond the seas, Emperor of India, states that the said
ratifications applied:
“Only to Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Dominion of
New Zealand (including the mandate territory of West Samoa)
and the Union of South Africa (but not the mandate territory of
Southern and Western Africa) without prejudice, however, to the
right hereafter to ratify with regard to the Dominion of Canada,
the Commonwealth of Australia, and the Empire of India, or the
right of hereafter adhering to everything in which the Dominions,

Colonies, Possessions or mandate Territories hereby excluded
from this ratification are concerned.”
In accordance with Article 172 of the Convention, the instrument of
ratifications by the President of the French Republic says that they apply:
“To France, Algeria, French West Africa, French East Africa, the
French Colonies and Protectorates in Indo-China, or of the other
French colonies and possessions, the mandate States of Syria,
Great Lebanon, “Alaouites” and Jebel Druze, the mandate
territories of Togo and of Cameroon.”
 
A certified copy of this procès-verbal shall be sent to the contracting
Powers.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned have drawn up this procès-verbal and affixed
their seals thereto.
Done at Paris March 10, 1928.
[SEAL] E. DE GAIFFIER
[SEAL] J. QUINONES DE LÉON
[SEAL] A. BRIAND
[SEAL] CREWE
[SEAL] HENRI DE MALEVILLE
[SEAL] CREWE

Treaty Series No. 762
[Document 118]
Procès-Verbal of the Deposit of Ratifications of the International
Sanitary Contention by Czechoslovakia
[Translation]
In accordance with the provisions of Article 170 of the International
Sanitary Convention signed at Paris June 21, 1926, the Minister of the
Czechoslovak Republic this day called at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
the French Republic and deposited the instrument of ratifications of that
International Act by His Excellency the President of the Czechoslovak
Republic.
The instrument being, upon examination, found to be in good and due form,
has been entrusted to the Government of the French Republic to be kept in
its archives.
A certified copy of this procès-verbal shall be sent to the contracting
Powers.
Done at Paris March 28, 1928.
[SEAL] A. BRIAND
[SEAL] STEFAN OSUSKY

Treaty Series No. 762
[Document 119]
Procès-Verbal of the Deposit of Ratifications of the International
Sanitary Convention by the United States of America
[Translation]
In accordance with the provisions of Article 170 of the International
Sanitary Convention signed at Paris June 21, 1926, the Ambassador of the
United States of America at Paris this day called at the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the French Republic and deposited the instrument of ratifications
by His Excellency the President of the Republic of the United States of
America, of that International Act, the following reservations being made:
1. The ratification of this international sanitary convention is not
to be construed to mean that the United States of America
recognizes a regime or entity acting as government of a signatory
or adhering power when that regime or entity is not recognized by
the United States as the government of that power.
2. The participation of the United States of America in this
international sanitary convention does not involve any contractual
obligation on the part of the United States to a signatory or
adhering power represented by a régime or entity which the
United States does not recognize as representing the government
of that power until it is represented by a government recognized
by the United States.
3. The government of the United States of America reserves to
itself the right to decide whether from the standpoint of the
measures to be applied a foreign district is to be considered as
infected and to decide what measures shall be applied to arrival in
its own ports under special circumstances.

This instrument being, upon examination, found to be in good and due
form, has been entrusted to the Government of the French Republic to be
kept in its archives.
A certified copy of this procès-verbal shall be sent to the contracting
Powers.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned have drawn up this procès-verbal and affixed
their seals thereto.
Done at Paris, May 22, 1928.
[SEAL] A. BRIAND
[SEAL] MYRON T. HERRICK

Preliminary 
Conference 
on 
Oil
Pollution 
of 
Navigable 
Waters,
Washington, June 8–16, 192646
46 For proceedings of the Conference, see Preliminary Conference on Oil
Pollution of Navigable Waters, Washington, June 8–16, 1926 (Washington,
Government Printing Office, 1926).
[120] Final Act of the Preliminary Conference on Oil Pollution of
Navigable Waters
Done at the City of Washington this sixteenth day of June, one thousand
nine hundred and twenty-six.
Treaty Series No. 736A

Treaty Series No. 736A
[Document 120]
Final Act of the Preliminary Conference on Oil Pollution of
Navigable Waters47
At the invitation of the Government of the United States a preliminary
conference of experts met at Washington on June 8, 1926, to consider
questions relating to the pollution of navigable waters by oil, the object of
the conference being to facilitate an exchange of views on technical matters
and to consider the formulating of proposals for dealing with the problem of
oil pollution of navigable waters through international agreement.
The Governments participating in the Conference and their representatives
were:
The United States of America: by
The Honorable Joseph S. Frelinghuysen.
Judge Stephen Davis, Solicitor of the Department of
Commerce.
Dr. Arthur N. Young, Economic Adviser of the
Department of State.
Belgium:
Baron Joseph van der Elst, Secretary of the Belgian
Embassy at Washington.
British Empire:
Mr. C. Hipwood, Principal Assistant Secretary,
Mercantile Marine Department, Board of Trade.

Mr. Albert E. Laslett, Deputy Engineer Surveyor in
Chief of the Mercantile Marine Consultive Department.
Captain the Honorable A. Stopford, R. N., Naval
Attaché at Washington.
Engineer Commander A. Knothe, R. N., Assistant
Naval Attaché at Washington.
Mr. 
Archibald 
Maclean, 
Technical 
Assistant,
Representative of British Shipowners.
Canada:
Mr. W. W. Cory, Deputy Minister of the Interior.
Mr. 
Charles 
Duguid, 
Chief 
Naval 
Constructor,
Department of Marine and Fisheries.
Engineer Commander T. C. Phillips, Consulting Naval
Engineer, Royal Canadian Navy, Department of
National Defense.
Mr. Jean Désy, Counselor, Department of External
Affairs.
Denmark:
Captain Th. Borg, R. D. N. R., Director of the Port of
Copenhagen.
France:
Captain Edmond D. Willm, Naval Attache at
Washington.
Engineer Lieutenant P. Gripon, Assistant Naval Attache
at Washington.

Germany:
Dr. P. S. Lahr, Ministerial Counselor in the Reichs
Ministry of Transportation.
Captain W. Drechsel, of the Association of German
Shipowners.
Italy:
Commander Count Ettore Sommati di Mombello,
formerly Naval Attaché at Washington.
Commander 
Alberto 
Lais, 
Naval 
Attaché 
at
Washington.
Japan:
Mr. S. Sawada, Counselor of the Japanese Embassy at
Washington.
Japan:
Captain I. Yamamoto, I. J. N., Naval Attaché at
Washington.
Engineer Commander E. Shibuya, I. J. N., Naval
Inspector.
Mr. M. Tokuhisa, Expert in the Department of
Agriculture and Forestry.
Netherlands:
Jonkheer Dr. H. van Asch van Wyck, Chargé d’Affaires
of the Netherlands at Washington.
Mr. A. Kruk, Government Inspector of Shipping.

Mr. F. C. Haanebrink, Nautical Inspector, Phs. van
Ommeren’s Shipping Business, Ltd.
Norway:
Mr. Alexis H. G. O. Lundh, Commercial Counselor of
the Norwegian Legation at Washington.
Spain:
Commander Adolfo H. de Solás, Naval Attaché at
Washington.
Sweden:
Mr. Gustaf Weidel, Commercial Counselor of the
Swedish Legation at Washington.
The Conference had before it the Report on Oil Pollution of Navigable
Waters made by an American Interdepartmental Committee to the Secretary
of State of the United States dated March 13, 1926,* and it was agreed that
the estimate of the facts as to oil pollution and of the causes of oil pollution
presented in that Report corresponded in the main with the view taken by
those present at the conference.
The representative of the Netherlands stated that the oil nuisance in his
country had been reduced to negligible proportions and was no longer
troublesome. So far as it existed he considered that it arose much more from
oil-burning vessels than from oil-carrying vessels.
The representative of Canada stated that he considered that bilge water was
an important factor in causing oil pollution and recommended that any
measures directed towards preventing oil pollution should take into account
that factor.
With these qualifications, the statements as to the facts of oil pollution and
the estimates as to causes contained in the United States Report were
regarded as forming a sound basis for the work of the Conference. The

passages of the Report to which reference is made are as follows: as to facts
concerning conditions in different countries, pages 18–23 and 104–119; as
to causes, pages 23–24.
It was agreed that there has been a marked diminution of oil pollution, since
attention was first called to it, due both to the action of the Governments
and to the voluntary cooperation of the interests concerned, but that the evil
is still serious in some waters and that it can only be dealt with satisfactorily
by international action.
The principal causes of oil pollution are vessels and land installations and
terminals. As sources of pollution on land are largely limited to territorial
waters and are being dealt with, and can only be dealt with, by the
Governments concerned, this branch of the subject was not pursued by the
Conference, and attention was concentrated on the other principal cause of
pollution, vessels.
It was agreed that the only vessels which need be taken into account as
potential sources of oil pollution, for the purposes of this Conference, are
sea-going vessels carrying crude, fuel or diesel oil, in bulk as cargo, or as
fuel for boilers or engines, and that these classes of vessels should be
covered by any regulations that may be adopted.
Two classes of vessels require special mention, war vessels and small craft.
War vessels are usually dealt with as a separate class, and it is assumed that
the naval authorities of each country will take the necessary measures to
ensure that those classed as war vessels take every possible precaution to
prevent oil pollution. Small craft may find it difficult to comply fully with
the regulations that may be laid down, and special provisions may have to
be made to meet their case, but they should be required to do all that is
reasonable and practicable to avoid oil pollution, and any special provisions
should apply only to vessels of limited bunker content.
There is no hard and fast line dividing oily mixtures which are harmful
from those practically innocuous, and opinions may differ as to the precise
point at which the line should be drawn; but the Conference, after hearing
the experts, came to the conclusion that a mixture containing more than .05
of one per cent of crude, fuel or diesel oil should be regarded as constituting

a nuisance, and that for all practical purposes a mixture containing this
percentage of oil or less need not, at any rate beyond territorial limits, be
regarded as constituting a nuisance. Oily mixtures constituting a nuisance
can generally be recognized by the film visible to the naked eye in daylight
in clear weather which they produce on the surface of the sea.
The Conference is not in agreement at this time as to the extent and effects
of pollution caused by deposit of oily mixtures on the high seas at distances
greater than 50 miles from shore. One opinion is that such pollution already
exists, that ocean fisheries are thereby endangered, and that oily discharges
on the high seas tend to preserve their character for an indefinite period and
may be borne by winds and currents into coastal waters and contribute to
coastal pollution. For that reason the representatives of some Governments
considered that after a specified period of notice the discharge of oily
mixtures constituting a nuisance should be prohibited everywhere, and that
in the meantime a system of areas should be established within which no
such discharge should be allowed. The other opinion was to the effect that a
sufficient case had not been made out for prohibition everywhere and that
the establishment of an effective system of areas would provide a complete
or almost complete cure for the evils complained of.
Both parties agree that the first measure is the establishment of a system of
areas and both parties agree that such a system, if properly established and
properly worked, will go a very considerable way toward curing the evil.
The Conference therefore agreed to recommend that a system of areas
should be established on the coasts of maritime countries, and on
recognized fishing grounds, within which no oil or oily mixtures, which
constitute a nuisance, should be discharged.
Each country can determine what the width of the areas off its own coasts
should be, in the light of its own special circumstances and conditions, such
as prevailing winds, currents and the extent of its fishing grounds, and after
consultation with its neighbors where this appears necessary. The general
rule in the case of coasts bordering the open sea should be that the width of
the area should not exceed 50 nautical miles, but that in exceptional cases,
where the peculiar configuration of the coast or other special circumstances

render such a course necessary, the width might be extended to 150 nautical
miles.
Full information as to the extent of all areas, in the form of marked charts or
otherwise, should be circulated to all governments concerned, and it would
greatly facilitate the establishment and working of the system of areas under
international agreement if one government were to undertake the duty of
receiving, coordinating and circulating information upon the subject.
There are already a number of vessels equipped with apparatus for the
separation of oil from their oily mixtures, and it is contemplated that the
number of such vessels will materially increase. One obstacle to the
installation of such apparatus lies in the apprehension in the minds of those
concerned that under the laws of some countries vessels installing it might
either incur some penalty in the matter of payment of dues based upon
tonnage or might not receive any benefit from the resulting sacrifice of
cargo space. It is recommended that necessary changes in admeasurement
laws be made by the various governments to the end that such
disadvantages may be removed.
The 
Conference 
has 
reached 
an 
agreement 
on 
the 
following
recommendations to the respective governments for adoption by
international agreement:
(1) That the Governments concerned provide for a system of
prescribed areas in waters off their coasts beyond territorial limits
(if necessary, after consultation with neighboring governments)
within which vessels of the classes mentioned in recommendation
No. 4 shall not discharge crude, fuel or diesel oil or mixtures
having an oil content greater than that stated in recommendation
No. 5.
(2) That along coasts bordering the open sea, such areas shall not
extend more than 50 nautical miles from the coast, except, that if
such extent is in particular instances found insufficient because of
the peculiar configuration of the coast line or other special
conditions, the Government affected may extend its area to a

width of not exceeding 150 nautical miles, after consultation with
neighboring governments, if necessary.
(3) That due notice of the establishment of any areas shall be
given to the governments concerned in the form of marked charts
or otherwise.
(4) That the regulations adopted with respect to prescribed areas
shall be applicable to all sea-going vessels other than war vessels,
carrying crude, fuel or diesel oil, in bulk as cargo or as fuel for
boilers or engines, due consideration being given to the special
necessities of small vessels. It is assumed that the naval
authorities of each country will take the necessary measures to
ensure that vessels classed as war vessels shall take every
possible precaution to prevent oil pollution.
(5) That the discharge of oil or oily mixtures be prohibited within
such areas if the oil content exceeds .05 of one per cent, that is, if
it is sufficient to constitute a film on the surface of the sea visible
to the naked eye in daylight in clear weather.
(6) That each government agrees to use all reasonable means to
require its vessels to respect all such areas.
(7) That no penalty or disability of any kind whatever in the
matter of tonnage measurement or payment of dues be incurred
by any vessel by reason only of the fitting of any device or
apparatus for separating oil from water.
(8) That dues based on tonnage shall not be charged in respect of
any space rendered unavailable for cargo by the installation of
any device or apparatus for separating oil from water.
(9) That the term “device or apparatus for separating oil from
water” as used in recommendations Nos. 7 and 8 shall include
any tank or tanks of reasonable size, used exclusively for
receiving waste oil recovered from the device or apparatus, and
also the piping and fittings necessary for its operation.

(10) That each government should carefully observe the operation
and effect of the area system off its coasts, and exchange
information thereon with the other interested governments, so that
if, after reasonable experience, any government may consider that
such areas do not sufficiently protect its coasts, or that pollution
beyond such areas has become or threatens to become a menace,
such government may be in position to raise with the other
governments the question whether the discharge beyond the limit
of such areas of oil or oily mixtures constituting a nuisance
should be prohibited.
(11) That a central agency be established as soon as practicable
for receiving, coordinating and circulating to the governments
concerned information of interest relating to the system of areas,
the establishment of which is suggested in the foregoing
recommendations, the experience with that system, and other data
deemed advisable.
For the purpose of facilitating the conclusion of an international agreement
the annexed draft of a convention is submitted for the consideration of the
respective governments.
Done at the City of Washington this sixteenth day of June, one thousand
nine hundred and twenty-six.
JOSEPH S. FRELINGHUYSEN
STEPHEN DAVIS
ARTHUR N. YOUNG
J. VAN DER ELST
C. HIPWOOD
ALBERT E. LASLETT

A. STOPFORD
A. KNOTHE
ARCHD MACLEAN
W. W. CORY
CHARLES DUGUID
T. C. PHILLIPS
JHAN DÉSY
TH. BORG
E. WILLM
P. GRIPON
E. SOMMATI DI MOMBELLO
DR. LAHR
W. DRECHSEL
S. SAWADA
I. YAMAMOTO
R. SHIBUYA
M. TOKUHISA
H. VAN ASCH VAN WYCK
A. KRUK
HAANEBRINK

INE

RAPP Or Coy

VEN,

AL
Fo on Sor 4,

Cisne yy

"le,

The Governments of
desiring to take action by common accord to prevent pollution of navigable
waters by oil or oily mixtures discharged from vessels, have resolved to
conclude a Convention for this purpose, and have appointed as their
Plenipotentiaries: Who, having communicated to each other their respective
full powers, found to be in good and due form, have agreed as follows: I
The respective Governments may establish areas in waters adjacent to their
coasts within which discharge from the vessels specified in Article III of oil
or oily mixtures as defined in Article II shall be prohibited, in accord with
the following principles:
(a) In the case of coasts bordering the open sea, such areas shall
not extend more than 50 nautical miles from the coast, except
that, if such extent is in particular instances found insufficient
because of peculiar configuration of the coast line or other special
conditions, such areas may be extended to a width not exceeding
150 nautical miles.
(b) In case the government of any country desires to prescribe an
area any part of which may be within 150 nautical miles of the
coast of another country, that Government shall inform the
Government of such other country before the area is prescribed.
(c) Due notice of the establishment of any area or areas, and of
any change thereof, shall be given to the Governments of
maritime states, in the form of charts or otherwise, by the central
agency mentioned in Article VII.

II
The discharges which may be prohibited in any area prescribed pursuant to
Article I are (a) crude, fuel or diesel oil, or (b) any mixture containing more
than .05 of one per cent of such oil, or having a content of such oil
sufficient to form a film on the surface of the sea visible to the naked eye in
daylight in clear weather.

III
The vessels which may be affected pursuant to the provisions of Article I
are all sea-going vessels other than war vessels, carrying crude, fuel or
diesel oil, in bulk as cargo or as fuel for boilers or engines. Special
provisions may be adopted to meet the case of small vessels, of limited
bunker capacity, but such vessels shall be required to take all reasonable
precautions to prevent oil pollution.

IV
The respective Governments agree to take the necessary measures to ensure
that vessels classed as war vessels shall take every possible precaution to
prevent oil pollution.

V
Each Government will require vessels of the class specified in Article III,
flying its national flag, when within any area prescribed pursuant to Article
I, to refrain from discharging oil or oily mixtures as defined in Article II.

VI
The respective Governments agree:
(a) That no penalty or disability of any kind whatever in the
matter of tonnage measurement or payment of dues be incurred
by any vessel by reason only of the fitting of any device or
apparatus for separating oil from water.
(b) That dues based on tonnage shall not be charged in respect of
any space rendered unavailable for cargo by the installation of
any device or apparatus for separating oil from water.
(c) That the term “device or apparatus for separating oil from
water”, as used in paragraph (a) and (b) of this Article, shall
include any tank or tanks, of reasonable size, used exclusively for
receiving waste oil recovered from the device or apparatus, and
also the piping and fittings necessary for its operation.

VII
The Government of is invited to establish a central agency for the purpose
of receiving, coordinating and circulating to the Governments of maritime
states information relating to the system of areas established under the
terms of this Convention, the experience with that system, and other data
pertaining to the problem of oil pollution of navigable waters and means for
dealing with that problem.
In the event of this invitation being accepted the other contracting
Governments undertake to forward to the central agency the data specified
in paragraph (c) of Article I hereof and also ail other information which
they consider appropriate for the purposes of this Article.

VIII
The Government of the United States will invite the Governments of
maritime states other than the signatories to adhere to the present
Convention. Such adherence shall be notified to the Government of the
United States and by the latter to all the other Governments signatories to
the Convention.

IX
The Present Convention shall take effect as soon as the ratifications of five
of the Governments represented at the Washington Conference of June,
1926, shall have been notified to the Government of the United States. It
may be denounced by any Government on notification to the Government
of the United States to take effect one year from the date upon which such
notification shall have been made.
47 Not printed in the Department of State Treaty Series; but printed in the
separate pamphlet Final Act of the Preliminary Conference on Oil Pollution
of Navigable Waters (and Annex), Signed June 16, 1926 (Washington,
Government Printing Office, 1926), and also in Preliminary Conference, p.
430.
* Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C. 119 pages, price 20 cents.
[Footnote in the original.]

Sympathetic attitude of the United
States toward efforts by the League of
Nations for the suppression of slavery
[121] The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to
the Secretary of State
Geneva, 12 October, 1925. [Received October 31.]
550.48 B 1/3
[122] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
Washington, May 17, 1926—4 p.m.
550.48 B 1/32: Telegram
[123] The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
Berne, June 2, 1926—9 p.m. [Received June 3—10:09 a.m.]
550.48 B 1/45: Telegram
[124] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
Berne, June 4, 1926—3 p.m.
550.48 B 1/45: Telegram

550.48 B 1/3
[Document 121]
The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to
the Secretary of State
GENEVA, 12 October, 1925.
[Received October 31.]
C.L.123.1925.VI
SIR: I have the honour to communicate to you below the text of a resolution
adopted by the Council of the League of Nations on September 28th, 1925:
“The Council decides to communicate the draft Convention on
the Slave Trade, slavery and similar conditions, which was
recommended for approval by the Sixth Assembly on September
26th, 1925, and the report of the Sixth Committee concerning this
Convention to the Members of the League and to the following
Governments: Afghanistan, Ecuador, United States of America,
Egypt, Germany, Mexico, Russia, Sudan and Turkey, with the
request that they will:
a) forward to the Secretary-General not later than June
1st, 1926, any observations they may desire to make
regarding the provisions of this draft;
b) make every effort to adopt at once all possible
measures in conformity with the provisions of the draft
Convention in question;
c) assist one another forthwith in the abolition of the
slave trade, slavery and conditions analogous thereto,
by all practicable means, and in particular by the
conclusion of special agreements and arrangements.”

 
In pursuance of this resolution, I am sending you herewith the draft
Convention in question and the Sixth Committee’s report upon it.48 I have
the honour to draw your Government’s special attention to paragraphs b)
and c) quoted above, and I should be very glad if you would be good
enough to forward before June 1st, 1926, any observations it may desire to
make regarding the draft Convention.
I am also sending, for your information, the report submitted to the Council
on September 28th, 1925,49 on this subject by Viscount Cecil of Chelwood,
representative of the British Empire.
I have [etc.]
ERIC DRUMMOND
48 For texts of report and draft convention, see League of Nations, Official
Journal, Special Supplement No. 39: Records of the Sixth Assembly
(Geneva, 1925), p. 50.
49 For text of report, see League of Nations, Official Journal, Oct. 1925, p.
1534.

550.48 B 1/32: Telegram
[Document 122]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
WASHINGTON, May 17, 1926—4 p.m.
72. Your 98, May 6, 3 p.m.50 Communicate following reply to Drummond
in usual manner:
“The Secretary of State of the United States of America has
received with appreciation the communication of the Secretary
General of the League of Nations, dated October 12, 1925,
enclosing a draft convention on the question of slavery and
requesting that the United States furnish any observations it might
care to make on the provisions of the draft.
While the Secretary of State is not in a position at this time to
make any detailed contribution to a study of this subject, he is
pleased to inform the Secretary General that slavery and the slave
trade are prohibited under the fundamental laws of the United
States and by the laws and statutes in force in its several
possessions.
The Government of the United States is, furthermore, in accord
with its traditional policy, deeply interested in any movement
which looks toward the abolishment of all forms of involuntary
servitude.”
KELLOGG
50 Not printed.

550.48 B 1/45: Telegram
[Document 123]
The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, June 2, 1926—9 p.m.
[Received June 3—10:09 a.m.]
104. Department’s telegram number 72, May 17, 4 p.m. Decision whether
eventual slavery conference is to be strictly a League affair or an
autonomous conference including nonmember states will probably be made
by Council at June 7 meeting. I learn most informally that Drummond is in
real quandary as to interpretation to be placed on final sentence of
Department’s 72. As indicated in Winslow’s despatch number 856, May 10,
1926,51 Council’s decision as to nature of conference will probably depend
largely on whether United States would be disposed to attend autonomous
conference if invited. I understand that the League is most anxious to avoid
embarrassment of inviting United States to conference if invitation is likely
to be refused. While I realize that Department may not be able to give
definite answer to this question in advance, I believe that you should be
advised of existing situation in case you should wish me to express to
Drummond prior to Council meeting June 7 any opinion as to the probable
attitude of the United States Government if it should be invited by the
League to attend an international conference to consider draft slavery
convention.
GIBSON
51 Not printed.

550.48 B 1/45: Telegram
[Document 124]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Gibson)
BERNE, June 4, 1926—3 p.m.
75. Your 104, June 2, 9 p.m. Reference United States attendance at
autonomous conference on slavery.
While it is impossible for the Department to make definite commitment at
this time prior to the receipt of the text of the invitation, you may, if you
think it desirable, let Drummond know informally that an invitation to
attend an autonomous international conference on slavery would be given
the most sympathetic consideration by this Government, in view of its
relationship to previous international conventions on this subject.52
KELLOGG
52 An autonomous international conference on slavery was not called. The
text of an international convention for the suppression of slavery was drawn
up by the Assembly of the League of Nations and was opened for signature
on Sept. 25, 1926. See Department of State Treaty Series No. 778:
Convention between the United States and Other Powers—Slavery; also 46
Stat. (pt. 2) 2183.

Statement 
to 
certain 
foreign
Governments regarding efforts of the
United States to control the production
of and traffic in narcotic drugs52a
52a For previous correspondence, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 89
ff.
[125] The Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Officers of the United
States Accredited to the Governments Party to The Hague Convention
of January 23, 1912
Washington, October 14, 1926.
511.4 A 1/1972a

511.4 A 1/1972a
[Document 125]
The Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Officers of the United
States Accredited to the Governments Party to The Hague
Convention of January 23, 191252b
WASHINGTON, October 14, 1926.
SIR: It is desired that you bring formally and officially to the attention of the
government to which you are accredited the following observations:
In 1912 the United States participated with other nations in a
conference held at The Hague for the purpose of considering
means for the control of the traffic in narcotic drugs.52c There was
drawn up as the result of the deliberations of that conference an
international agreement looking to the “progressive suppression
of the abuse of opium, morphine, cocaine, as well as drugs
prepared and derived from these substances giving rise, or which
may give rise, to analogous abuses”.52d The alarming growth of
the abuse of such drugs within its territories made apparent the
need not only for domestic legislation to the end that the
production of, and traffic in, such drugs in the United States
might be controlled, but also for international cooperation in the
control of the traffic between nations. The convention drawn up
and adopted by that conference was ratified by the United States
on December 15, 1913. It contains the following articles:
[Here follow articles 9 to 14, inclusive, of Chapter III; see
Foreign Relations , 1912, pages 199 to 200 .]
The Congress of the United States proceeded at once to the
enactment of the legislation which would provide for control of
the production and traffic in the dangerous drugs mentioned in
The Hague Convention within territory under its jurisdiction, as

well as the participation in the international traffic in such drugs
by its citizens or those within its jurisdiction. The substance of
this domestic legislation is briefly summarized below, copies of
the law and the regulations drawn up for their enforcement being
enclosed.52e
The question of the domestic production and traffic in drugs was
dealt with by the Act of December 17, 1914,52f amended by
Sections 1006 and 1007 of the Revenue Act of 1918,52g and by
Section 703 of the Revenue Act of 1926.52h This act gives the
Government of the United States control, within territory over
which it has jurisdiction, over the importation, manufacture,
compounding, sale, dealing in, dispensing, and giving away of
opium, coca leaves, their salts, derivatives or preparations thereof.
This act, as you will note, requires that every importer,
manufacturer, producer, compounder, seller, or anyone otherwise
interested in disposing of opium or coca leaves or any compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, or preparation thereof, register with
the Collector of Internal Revenue of the District his name or style,
place of business and place or places where such business is to be
carried on. Persons not so registered may not lawfully
manufacture, produce, compound, sell, deal in, dispense,
distribute, administer, or give away any of the drugs or their
derivatives mentioned in the act. The act makes it unlawful for
persons registered to deal in or handle any such drugs except in
the original stamped packages or from the original stamped
packages; the absence of appropriate tax-paid stamps from any of
the drugs being made prima facie evidence of a violation of the
law by the person in whose possession they may be found. It is
made unlawful for any person to sell or otherwise dispose of any
of the drugs mentioned in the act except in pursuance of a written
order on a form issued for that purpose by the Commissioner of
Internal Revenue. The law provides for the keeping by druggists,
chemists, surgeons, dentists, physicians, veterinarians, et cetera,
of accurate records of all drugs dispensed, administered, or
otherwise disposed of by them (except to patients personally
attended) and requires that all such records be kept in such a way

as to be readily accessible to inspection by the officers of the
Government whose duty it is to make such inspections. The
provisions of this law are extended to the Territory of Alaska, the
Territory of Hawaii, the insular possessions, including the
Philippine Islands, and the Canal Zone.
The matters of the domestic production and traffic in drugs were
also dealt with by the Act of January 17, 1914, (38 Stat. 277)
which imposed a commodity tax upon smoking opium
manufactured in the United States of $300.00 per pound and
required the filing of a bond by each manufacturer of smoking
opium in a penal sum not less than $100,000.00. Severe penalties
were imposed by the Act for violation of the terms thereof, the
purpose being to impose prohibitive restrictions upon the
manufacture of smoking opium, and the result has been that
smoking opium is not being legally manufactured in the United
States as recognized by Section 3 of the Act of May 26, 1922,
known as the Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act, which
enacted that on and after July 1, 1913, all smoking opium or
opium prepared for smoking found within the United States shall
be presumed to have been imported after April 1, 1909.52i
Participation by American citizens and those within the
jurisdiction of the United States in the international traffic in
narcotic drugs is controlled under a second Act of January 17,
1914,52j and the Act of May 26, 1922,52k amendatory thereof,
known as the “Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act”.
Exportations of narcotic drugs are by that law restricted to
shipments only to a country which has ratified and become a
party to the International Opium Convention of 1912, and then
only if (1) such country has instituted and maintains, in
conformity with that convention, a system of permits or licenses
for the control of imports of such narcotic drugs which the
Federal Narcotics Control Board, consisting of the Secretaries of
State, the Treasury, and Commerce, deems adequate; (2) the
narcotic drug is consigned to an authorized permittee; and (3)

there is furnished to the Federal Narcotics Control Board proof
deemed adequate by it that the narcotic drug is to be applied
exclusively to medical and legitimate uses within the country to
which exported, that it will not be reexported from such country,
and that there is an actual shortage of and a demand for the
narcotic drug for medical and legitimate uses within such country.
An individual permit for each shipment is issued by the Federal
Narcotics Control Board upon proper application accompanied by
an import certificate issued by a duly authorized official of the
country of destination covering information required under (2)
and (3), as stated in the preceding sentence, fulfillment of (1)
being prerequisite to the issuance of such an import certificate.
No exportation is permitted by post. No permit is issued for the
exportation of crude opium or coca leaves as such. All exporters
must be properly qualified under the internal revenue law and all
narcotic products exported are duly sealed with United States
internal revenue stamps.
Importations are by this law restricted to crude opium and coca
leaves, and are limited to such quantities thereof as are considered
necessary by the Federal Narcotics Control Board for legitimate
and medical uses only. Individual import licenses for specified
quantities within such limits are issued by this Board to
manufacturers, properly qualified under the internal revenue law,
having apparatus or equipment in use in the manufacture of
derivatives of opium and coca leaves. The American Consul at the
port of exportation will not certify the invoice covering such
shipments until duly informed of the issuance of such a permit.
All narcotic drugs arriving in the United States without due
authorization are subject to seizure and confiscation.
In-transit shipments of smoking opium or opium prepared for
smoking are forbidden by law. Other narcotic drugs may be
shipped through the United States or a port thereof only upon
permission of the Federal Narcotics Control Board. The general
policy of this Board with respect to the issuance of permits

authorizing in-transit shipments is the same as that for exports, i.
e., a permit for an in-transit shipment will be issued only if a
permit for exportation could properly have been issued. This
policy is based on the theory that this Board should not permit the
in-transit facilities of the United States to be used for transactions
forbidden by its laws if occurring within the jurisdiction of such
laws, such theory being especially supported by the fact that the
same law is the authority for both the export and the in-transit
permits.
As late as the year 1914 morphine and other narcotic drugs could
be freely manufactured and purchased in the United States
without restriction. Government reports indicate that in 1920 the
importation of crude opium into the United States amounted to
628,896 pounds and that in the same year 230,388 pounds were
exported leaving 398,508 pounds either consumed in the country
or exported as derivatives. For the year ending June 30, 1925,
imports had been reduced to 105,014 pounds.
The Government of the United States, while gratified at the
results of the enforcement of this domestic legislation, is
constantly made aware of the fact that its efforts to control the
consumption of these dangerous drugs within territory subject to
its jurisdiction are being nullified to an alarming extent by the
activities of smugglers who appear to find little difficulty in
acquiring large quantities of these drugs for the purpose of
introducing them secretly into the United States.
Large quantities of morphine (chiefly morphine hydrochloride, of
which little is manufactured in the United States), heroin (not
manufactured in the United States after June 7, 1924), and
cocaine are landed illegally on the east coast of the United States
from ships arriving from European ports. Due to extensive
shipping and the ease with which these drugs may be concealed
customs officers experience difficulty in making seizures.
Seizures made at ports and borders during the year ended June 30,

1924, under the Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act, are as
follows:
Opium
2,285 pounds (avoirdupois)
Morphine
2,504 ounces
Heroin
313
“
Miscellaneous opium derivatives
93
“
Cocaine
761
“
Seizures made at ports and borders during the year ended June 30,
1925, under the Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act, are as
follows:
Opium
1,178 pounds (avoirdupois)
Morphine
2,425 ounces
Heroin
282
“
Miscellaneous opium derivatives
6
“
Cocaine
548
“
This Government believes that only a small part of the drugs
manufactured in the United States is diverted to illicit channels,
and that the most of the narcotic drugs illicitly consumed in this
country are smuggled drugs. The conviction has been reached that
no great improvement in this situation is possible until there is a
control, in countries other than the United States, over the
manufacture and export of narcotic drugs which will prevent their
sale to any but licensed importers in countries which maintain an
import license system or, in the case of countries which do not
have such a system, to any but reputable firms or individuals and
in quantities commensurate with the estimated legitimate medical
needs of the country.
The United States does not suggest that the method which it has
adopted to control the importation and manufacture of dangerous
drugs within its jurisdiction and their export therefrom represents
all that can be accomplished in the way of legislation, but it does
feel that considerable success has attended this legislation by
enabling it to follow the raw material that goes into its factories

and to know exactly what comes out of the factories and into
whose hands the product of the factory goes. The fact that large
quantities of the products of factories in other countries constantly
reach its ports in the hands of smugglers brings the conviction
that the quantity of such illicit drugs might be much reduced if a
stricter control over the operation of those factories could be
exercised. As a step in this direction a control which would
provide an accurate public record of manufacture and sales,
showing exactly to whom sales are made, would be very helpful.
In communicating the above views of this Government to the government
to which you are accredited you will state that a similar communication is
being made to other countries party to The Hague Opium Convention of
1912. You will say that it is the hope of this Government that in its efforts to
control the manufacture and sale of narcotic drugs within its territories the
country to which you are accredited will take into consideration the
situation herein described and comment thereon offering any suggestions
that may occur to it arising out of its experience in dealing with a similar
situation, if such exists, within its own jurisdiction. You may state that this
Government is prepared to cooperate with it in efforts to accomplish the
ends aimed at by the provision of The Hague Convention above quoted and
express this Government’s hope that the government to which you are
accredited will find it possible to lend its aid to that end.
I am [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
52b This circular instruction was sent to the following missions: Albania,
Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Great
Britain, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liberia, Luxemburg, Mexico, The Netherlands, Norway, Panama, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Rumania, Salvador, Serbia (Yugoslavia), Siam, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
52c See Foreign Relations , 1912, pp. 182 ff.
52d Ibid. , p. 196.

52e Enclosures not printed.
52f 38 Stat. 785.
52g Approved Feb. 24, 1919; 40 Stat. 1057, 1130, 1132.
52h Approved Feb. 26, 1926; 44 Stat. (pt. 2) 9, 96.
52i See 38 Stat. 275 and 42 Stat. 596, both amending the Act of Feb. 9, 1909
(35 Stat. 614).
52j 38 Stat. 275.
52k 42 Stat. 596.

Efforts by the United States to prevent
the injection of political questions into
the 
proceedings 
of 
the 
Bolívar
Congress at Panama
[126] The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
Panama, April 2, 1925. [Received April 14.]
819.415C/–
[127] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
Washington, April 24, 1926—2 p.m.
819.415C/–: Telegram
[128] The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
Panama, April 28, 1925—3 p.m. [Received 3:30 p.m.]
819.415C/1: Telegram
[129] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
Washington, May 11, 1925—6 p.m.
819.415C/1: Telegram

[130] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
Washington, May 29, 1926—3 p.m.
819.415C/46d: Telegram
[131] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
Washington, June 3, 1926—10 a.m.
819.415C/54a: Telegram
[132] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
Washington, June 22, 1926—6 p.m.
819.415C/72: Telegram
[133] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
Washington, June 24, 1926—2 p.m.
819.415C/74a: Telegram
[134] The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
Panama, June 24, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 11:30 p.m.]
819.415C/73: Telegram
[135] The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
Tegucigalpa, June 25, 1926—11 a.m. [Received 2:30 p.m.]
819.415C/75: Telegram

[136] The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
Panama [,undated]. [Received June 25, 1926—10 p.m.]
819.415C/77: Telegram
[137] The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
Panama, June 25, 1926—7 p.m. [Received 10:38 p.m.]
819.415C/76: Telegram

819.415C/–
[Document 126]
The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
PANAMA, April 2, 1925.
[Received April 14.]
No. 678
SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy with translation of a note
just received from the Minister for Foreign Affairs53 inviting the United
States Government to be represented by delegates at a Congress which will
be held in this city on June 18, 1926, in celebration of the first centennial of
the Bolívar Congress of 1826.
I have [etc.]
J. G. SOUTH
53 Not printed; see Republica de Panama, Congreso Pan-Americano
commemorativo del de Bolívar 1826–1926 (Panama, Imprenta Nacional,
1927), p. 17.

819.415C/–: Telegram
[Document 127]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
WASHINGTON, April 24, 1926—2 p.m.
33. Your despatch No. 678, April 2, 1925. Department assumes congress to
which invitation refers will be of a purely ceremonial and commemorative
nature and that no discussion of international matters is contemplated.
Discreetly verify and report by cable.
KELLOGG

819.415C/1: Telegram
[Document 128]
The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
PANAMA, April 28, 1925—3 p.m.
[Received 3:30 p.m.]
50. Department’s telegram 33, April 24, 2 p.m. Minister for Foreign Affairs
assures me that Congress is purely ceremonial. Official program has been
transmitted to Pan American Union.
SOUTH

819.415C/1: Telegram
[Document 129]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
WASHINGTON, May 11, 1925—6 p.m.
35. Your despatch 678, April 2, and telegram 50, April 28, 3 p.m.
You may inform Minister for Foreign Affairs that Government of United
States accepts with thanks invitation courteously extended.
GREW

819.415C/46d: Telegram
[Document 130]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
WASHINGTON, May 29, 1926—3 p.m.
37. Delegates appointed by President to Bolivian [Bolívar] Centenary
Congress are you, as Chairman; Dr. Charles W. Hackett, Associate
Professor of Latin American history, University of Texas; and William
Jennings Price, your predecessor.
KELLOGG

819.415C/54a: Telegram
[Document 131]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 3, 1926—10 a.m.
40. Refer to Department’s telegram dated May 29, 3 p.m. and previous
correspondence.
 
Inasmuch as it is the understanding of the Department that you have been
assured by the Panaman Foreign Minister that the Bolívar Congress is
purely ceremonial and commemorative, and that the topics in the program
accompanying your despatch No. 727 of May 22, 1925, represent merely
possible themes for previously prepared monographs of academic and
historical interest which express the personal views of the delegates and not
those of their Governments, the Department does not deem it expedient or
essential to give you any specific instructions as chairman of the American
delegation. However, should any efforts be made, despite the assurances of
the Government of Panama, to inject into the proceedings of the Congress
general discussions of matters of a political or controversial nature, you will
refrain from participating therein, and from voting on any nonroutine
resolutions unless the Department has previously instructed you. If
necessary, you will state that you will be glad to transmit to the Government
of the United States for its consideration any matters of interest to the
Congress.
The Department is sending you by next pouch a memorandum dealing with
the genesis and history of the Congress of 1826.54
KELLOGG

24 Not printed.

819.415C/72: Telegram
[Document 132]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Honduras (Summerlin)
WASHINGTON, June 22, 1926—6 p.m.
21. American Legation Panama reports that at the Bolívar Congress the
delegate of Honduras, Trejo Castillo, made remarks unfriendly to the
United States when each delegation was responding last Friday night55 to
the President’s address of welcome. He introduced a resolution on Saturday
urging the United States to free Porto Rico. This resolution was referred to
the Executive Committee which decided not to report it.
Please take this matter up immediately with the Honduran Government and
ask for a definite answer whether Castillo was acting under instructions. If
he was not please ask that his action be publicly disavowed and that
appropriate steps be taken to prevent a repetition thereof by him.
KELLOGG
55 June 18.

819.415C/74a: Telegram
[Document 133]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
WASHINGTON, June 24, 1926—2 p.m.
52. Associated Press despatch from Panama dated June 22, states that a
resolution recommending common action by Pan American states against
any aggressor state has been unanimously adopted by the Bolívar Congress.
Please report fully. In this connection refer to Department’s telegram 33,
April 24, 2 p.m. 1925, your 50, April 28, 3 p.m. 1925, Department’s 320,
June 17, 1925, your 854, October 31, 1925,56 and further correspondence
regarding assurance of Panaman Government that the Congress is purely
ceremonial.
GREW
56 Last two telegrams not printed.

819.415C/73: Telegram
[Document 134]
The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
PANAMA, June 24, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 11:30 p.m.]
50. The Bolívar Congress this morning adopted by an overwhelming
majority, a resolution recognizing the desirability of an American League of
Nations, recommending that a conference be called to draw up a treaty
constituting such a league, and charging Panama with the duty of taking
preliminary steps toward convening.
[Paraphrase.] Of course the American delegates refrained from voting. I
intended to explain the position of the delegation as governed by the
Department’s instructions, but later considered that course inadvisable. Last
night, in executive committee, all heads of official delegations being
present, I made a statement setting forth the position of the delegation in
objecting to the submission to the Congress of another resolution of a
political character. I learned that my statement had created the impression
that our delegation was trying to stifle free discussion at the Congress, so I
was reluctant to take any further steps which might strengthen that
impression. Sentiment for the resolution was so enthusiastic that anything
like opposition from our delegation would have given rise to a most
unfavorable impression, and all the more so, because during the debate very
friendly statements towards the United States had been expressed by the
supporters of the resolution. [End paraphrase.]
SOUTH

819.415C/75: Telegram
[Document 135]
The Minister in Honduras (Summerlin) to the Secretary of State
TEGUCIGALPA, June 25, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received 2:30 p.m.]
43. The Foreign Office telegraphed to the Chargé d’Affaires of Honduras at
Panama June 22, prior to the receipt of your telegram No. 21, June 22, 6
p.m., requesting a report regarding Trejo’s reported actions.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs has expressed regrets. He states that Trejo
was not acting under instructions, that disavowal will be published this
afternoon and that Trejo has ceased to be the [delegate of Honduras].
SUMMERLIN

819.415C/77: Telegram
[Document 136]
The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
PANAMA [,undated].
[Received June 25, 1926—10 p.m.]
51. Department’s June 24, 2 p.m. Resolution referred to reads as follows:
“Whereas the nations of the New World are united by eternal
bonds of democracy and by the same conception of justice and
liberty; and,
Whereas the logic of the principles which they have maintained
and still maintain and of the interests which affect them, should
determine a close unity in action to better insure the greatest
efficiency of the former and the free development of the latter;
Be it resolved: To recommend to the nations of the New World
that they adopt as their policy in their international relations, the
principle that every act carried out against one of them, violating
the universally recognized precepts of international law, shall
constitute an offense for all and, therefore, provoke among them a
uniform and common reaction.”
The proponents of the measure stated in debate that the “common reaction”
referred to would be confined to moral sympathy and expressions in the
press until such time as the American nations were ready to make treaties
providing for more active mutual assistance. The motion was introduced
and passed at a single session. The American delegation of course refrained
from voting; but as the motion was passed by acclamation, without
opposition, the impression was perhaps created that the action was
unanimous. As there was no opportunity to obtain the Department’s
instructions, and as the expression of what was admittedly merely partially
wish [sic] did not appear sufficiently important to justify telegraphing, the

matter was reported only by mail. In view of passage yesterday of
resolution advocating Pan American League of Nations, however, the
delegation considered it advisable to state clearly its position with regard to
this and other resolutions of a political character. This morning therefore I
read and had placed in the record the following statement:
As the Government of the United States had understood that the
Bolívar Centenary Congress would be a gathering exclusively of
a ceremonial and commemorative nature, it had not expected that
the Congress would seek to adopt conclusions or make
recommendations of a political character. The delegates of the
United States have therefore no instructions which would
authorize them to vote on such conclusions or recommendations.
Without implying, therefore, any expression one way or the other,
either of their own views or of the views of their; Government,
the delegation has refrained from discussing or [voting] upon
some of the resolutions which have been before the Congress. In
view of the importance of these resolutions, however, the
delegates of the United States will take pleasure in reporting them
to their Government for its information.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SOUTH

819.415C/76: Telegram
[Document 137]
The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
PANAMA, June 25, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received 10:38 p.m.]
52. The Bolívar Congress adjourned this afternoon. At the final session the
Congress debated a resolution offered by Gutierrez Navas of Nicaragua
recommending that the Sixth Pan American Congress consider the transfer
of the seat of the Pan American Union to Panama. Gutierrez withdrew his
motion after Ricardo Alfaro57 speaking on behalf of the President of
Panama opposed it in very strong and able speech on the ground that its
adoption would be an unfriendly act toward the United States.
While the delegation considered it inadvisable for obvious reasons openly
to oppose the resolution it discreetly assured itself before the session of
Alfaro’s assistance and of the votes of several other delegations against the
resolution.
SOUTH
57 Delegate of the Pan American Union; Panaman Minister to the United
States.

Tacna-Arica arbitration: termination
of the plebiscite58
58
Continued from Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 304–431 .
On the subject matter of this section, reference may be made to the
following publications: The Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-Arica
Arbitration, Press Releases, Arica, August 1925–July 1926.
Peru, Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, Documentos relatives al
plebiscite de Tacna y Arica [, 1926–27], 6 vols. ([, Lima], Lit. Tip.
“Almirante Grau”) and El Arbitrage de Tacna y Arica: Adas de la Comisión
Plebiscitaria (texto español), 2 vols. (Lima, Imprenta Torres Aguirre, 1928).
Chile, Memoria del Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, Junio de 1923 a
Diciembre de 1926 (Santiago, Balcells & Co. [, 1927]), pp. 43 ff.
Bolivia, Anexos a la Memoria que presenta el Ministro de Relaciones
Exteriores y Culto al H. Congreso de 1927 (La Paz, Imp. Edelman & Co. [,
1927]), pp. 35 ff.
Agustín Edwards, Memoria presentada al Supremo Gobierno por el
Miembro-Representante de Chile en la Comisión Plebiscitaria (Arbitrage
de Tacna y Arica), etc. (Santiago, Soc. Imp. “Universo,” 1926).
[138] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, January 4, 1926—3 p.m.
723.2515/1760: Telegram

[139] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, January 6, 1926—noon. [Received 2:37 p.m.]
723.2515/1807: Telegram
[140] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, January 7, 1926—9 p.m.
723.2515/1807: Telegram
[141] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, January 8, 1926—3 p.m. [Received January 9—1:25 a.m.]
723.2515/1818: Telegram
[142] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, January 8, 1926—6 p.m. [Received January 9—9:30 p.m.]
723.2515/1817: Telegram
[143] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, January 9, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/1818: Telegram
[144] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, January 9, 1926—5 p.m. [Received January 12—10:28 a.m.]
723.2515/1830: Telegram

[145] The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
Montevideo, January 10, 1926—4 p.m. [Received January 12—11:55 a.m.]
723.2515/1836: Telegram
[146] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, January 11, 1926—3 p.m.
723.2515/1817: Telegram
[147] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
Washington, January 11, 1926—7 p.m.
723.2515PC/338a: Telegram
[148] The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
Montevideo, January 13, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 6:30 p.m.]
723.2515/1849: Telegram
[149] The Secretary of State to the President of the Plebiscitary
Commission (Pershing)
Washington, January 15, 1926—[9 p.m.?]
723.2515/1756: Telegram
[150] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, January 18, 1926—6 p.m. [Received January 19—12:35 a.m.]
723.2515PC/347: Telegram

[151] The Secretary of State to the President of the Plebiscitary
Commission (Lassiter)
Washington, January 28, 1926.
723.2515/1872: Telegram
[152] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, February 1, 1926—1 p.m. [Received February 2—12:01 a.m.]
723.2515/1886: Telegram
[153] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, February 3, 1926—noon.
723.2515/1896: Telegram
[154] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, February 4, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/1886: Telegram
[155] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, February 10, 1926—11 p.m. [Received February 13—10:10 a.m.]
723.2515/1928: Telegram
[156] The Secretary of State to the President of the Plebiscitary
Commission (Lassiter)
Washington, February 11, 1926—[3 p.m.?]

723.2515/1929a: Telegram
[157] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, February 15, 1926—8 p.m. [Received February 16—8:30 p.m.]
723.2515/1934: Telegram
[158] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, February 16, 1926—10 a.m. [Received 11:20 p.m.]
723.2515/1935: Telegram
[159] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, February 16, 1926—5 p.m.
723.2515/1936b: Telegram
[160] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, February 16, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/1928: Telegram
[161] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, February 16, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/1936a: Telegram
[162] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, February 18, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 11:40 p.m.]

723.2515/1944: Telegram
[163] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, February 18, 1926—3 p.m. [Received February 20—6:10 p.m.]
723.2515/1947: Telegram
[164] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, February 19, 1926—midnight. [Received February 20—9:07
a.m.]
723.2515/1948: Telegram
[165] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, February 20, 1926—3 p.m. [Received February 21—12:25 p.m.]
723.2515/1952: Telegram
[166] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, February 20, 1926—7 p.m. [Received February 21—12:40 a.m.]
723.2515/1953: Telegram
[167] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, February 23, 1926—1 p.m.
723.2515/1953: Telegram
[168] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, February 23, 1926—1 p.m.

723.2515/1947: Telegram
[169] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, February 24, 1926—6 p.m. [Received February 25—4 p.m.]
723.2515/1966: Telegram
[170] The Secretary of State to the President of the Plebiscitary
Commission (Lassiter)
Washington, February 25, 1926.
723.2515/1967a: Telegram
[171] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, February 25, 1926—6 p.m. [Received February 26—3:28 p.m.]
723.2515/1971: Telegram
[172] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, February 26, 1926—11 a.m.
723.2515/1966: Telegram
[173] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, February 26, 1926—11 p.m. [Received February 27—9:15 a.m.]
723.2515/1972: Telegram
[174] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, February 27, 1926—5 p.m.

723.2515/1971: Telegram
[175] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, March 2, 1926—2 p.m.
723.2515/1972: Telegram
[176] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, March 2, 1926—9 p.m. [Received March 3—10:37 a.m.]
723.2515/1974: Telegram
[177] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru
(Poindexter)
Washington, March 4, 1926—3 p.m.
723.2515/1974: Telegram
[178] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, March 9, 1926—11 a.m. [Received March 10—9:10 a.m.]
723.2515/1994: Telegram
[179] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, March 10, 1926—5 p.m. [Received 11:05 p.m.]
723.2515/2003: Telegram
[180] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von
Tresckow)

Washington, March 10, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/1994: Telegram
[181] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, March 11, 1926—2 p.m. [Received 7:45 p.m.]
723.2515/2005: Telegram
[182] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile
(Collier)
Washington, March 11, 1926—7 p.m.
723.2515/2003: Telegram
[183] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, March 12, 1926—11 a.m.
723.2515/2005: Telegram
[184] The Chargé in Peru (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State
Lima, March 12, 1926—9 p.m. [Received March 13—9:30 a.m.]
723.2515/2012: Telegram
[185] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, March 15, 1926—6 p.m. [Received March 16—2 p.m.]
723.2515/2021: Telegram
[186] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

Santiago, March 16, 1926—midnight. [Received March 17—10:25 a.m.]
723.2515/2022: Telegram
[187] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, March 18, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/2028: Telegram
[188] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Peru (Wadsworth)
Washington, March 18, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/2012: Telegram
[189] The Chargé in Peru (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State
Lima, March 19, 1926—1 p.m. [Received 4:18 p.m.]
723.2515/2034: Telegram
[190] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, March 19, 1926—7 p.m. [Received March 20—11:45 a.m.]
723.2515/2037: Telegram
[191] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, March 20, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2035: Telegram
[192] The Chargé in Peru (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Lima, March 21, 1926—9 a.m. [Received 8:00 p.m.]
723.2515/2041: Telegram
[193] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, March 21, 1926—6 p.m. [Received March 22—10:50 a.m.]
723.2515/2042: Telegram
[194] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, March 22, 1926—3 p.m. [Received March 23—9:15 a.m.]
723.2515/2045: Telegram
[195] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, March 22, 1926—5 p.m.
723.2515/2047: Telegram
[196] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, March 22, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2042: Telegram
[197] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, March 23, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2045: Telegram
[198] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State

Lima, March 24, 1926—9 p.m. [Received March 25—12:07 a.m.]
723.2515/2052: Telegram
[199] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, March 25, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 9:10 p.m.]
723.2515/2054: Telegram
[200] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, March 25, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2052: Telegram
[201] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, March 25, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2052: Telegram
[202] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, March 26, 1926—2 a.m. [Received 9 a.m.]
723.2515/2056: Telegram
[203] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, March 26, 1926—10 a.m.
723.2515/2054: Telegram
[204] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

Santiago, March 26, 1926—noon. [Received 7:53 p.m.]
723.2515/2060: Telegram
[205] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, March 26, 1926—11 p.m. [Received March 27—9:55 a.m.]
723.2515/2063: Telegram
[206] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, March 27, 1926—8 a.m. [Received 11:55 a.m.]
723.2515/2065: Telegram
[207] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, March 27, 1926—10 a.m.
723.2515/2060: Telegram
[208] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, March 27, 1926—10 a.m.
723.2515/2060: Telegram
[209] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, March 27, 1926—noon. [Received 3:23 p.m.]
723.2515/2067: Telegram
[210] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State

Arica, March 27, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 6:45 p.m.]
723.2515/2072: Telegram
[211] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, March 27, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/2065: Telegram
[212] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, March 27, 1926—5 p.m.
723.2515/2063: Telegram
[213] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, March 27, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2067: Telegram
[214] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, March 27, 1926—6 p.m. [Received March 28—12:10 a.m.]
723.2515/2070: Telegram
[215] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, March 27, 1926—8 p.m. [Received March 28—12:10 a.m.]
723.2515/2073: Telegram
[216] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

Santiago, March 28, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 6:30 p.m.]
723.2515/2069: Telegram
[217] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, March 29, 1926—1 p.m.
723.2515/2076: Telegram
[218] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, March 29, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/2076: Telegram
[219] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, March 29, 1926—7 p.m.
723.2515/2076: Telegram
[220] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, March 30, 1926—6 p.m. [Received 9:05 p.m.]
723.2515/2081: Telegram
[221] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, March 31, 1926—1 p.m.
723.2515/2081: Telegram
[222] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

Washington, April 1, 1926—10 a.m.
723.2515/2084a: Telegram
[223] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, April 1, 1926—6 p.m. [Received April 2—8:43 a.m.]
723.2515/2088: Telegram
[224] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, April 1, 1926—7 p.m.
723.2515/2088a: Telegram
[225] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, April 1, 1926—midnight. [Received April 2—8:43 a.m.]
723.2515/2087: Telegram
[226] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, April 2, 1926—5 p.m.
723.2515/2088c supp.: Telegram
[227] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, April 3, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 7:18 p.m.]
723.2515/2094: Telegram
[228] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State

Lima, April 4, 1926—5 p.m. [Received April 5—9:33 a.m.]
723.2515/2095: Telegram
[229] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, April 6, 1926—11 a.m. [Received 4:30 p.m.]
723.2515/2100: Telegram
[230] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, April 6, 1926—7 p.m.
723.2515/2103c: Telegram
[231] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, April 10, 1926—11 a.m.
723.2515/2118: Telegram
[232] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, April 10, 1926—2 p.m.
723.2515/2118: Telegram
[233] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, April 11, 1926—1 p.m.
723.2515/2120: Telegram
[234] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

Santiago, April 11, 1926—1 p.m. [Received April 12—6:18 a.m.]
723.2515/2124: Telegram
[235] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, April 11, 1926—5 p.m. [Received April 12—8:17 a.m.]
723.2515/2123: Telegram
[236] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, April 12, 1926—2 p.m.
723.2515/2125b: Telegram
[237] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, April 12, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2125b supp.: Telegram
[238] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, April 12, 1926—noon (?). [Received April 13—4:27 a.m.]
723.2515/2127: Telegram
[239] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, April 13, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2126: Telegram
[240] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State

Arica, April 13, 1926—7 p.m. [Received April 14—12:55 a.m.]
723.2515/2130: Telegram
[241] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, April 14, 1926—11 a.m. [Received 3:30 p.m.]
723.2515/2135: Telegram
[242] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, April 15, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2130: Telegram
[243] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, April 15, 1926—7 p.m.
723.2515/2135: Telegram
[244] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, April 15, 1926—8 p.m.
723.2515/2143a: Telegram
[245] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, April 15, 1926—8 p.m.
723.2515/2138b: Telegram
[246] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

Santiago, April 16, 1926—noon. [Received 2:25 p.m.]
723.2515/2145: Telegram
[247] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, April 17, 1926—3 p.m.
723.2515/2150a: Telegram
[248] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, April 17, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 9:30 p.m.]
723.2515/2150: Telegram
[249] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, April 18, 1926—10 a.m. [Received 6 p.m.]
723.2515/2151: Telegram
[250] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, April 18, 1926—1 p.m.
723.2515/2150: Telegram
[251] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, April 18, 1926—5 p.m. [Received April 22—1 a.m.]
723.2515/2153: Telegram
[252] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

Santiago, April 18, 1926—midnight. [Received April 19—12:10 p.m.]
723.2515/2154: Telegram
[253] The President of Bolivia (Siles) to President Coolidge
La Paz, April 19, 1926. [Received April 21.]
723.2515/2183: Telegram
[254] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, April 19, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/2164a: Telegram
[255] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, April 20, 1926—5 p.m.
723.2515/2160: Telegram
[256] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, April 20, 1926—7 p.m. [Received April 21—10:25 a.m.]
723.2515/2168: Telegram
[257] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, April 21, 1926—7 p.m.
723.2515/2160 supp.: Telegram
[258] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

Washington, April 21, 1926—8 p.m.
723.2515/2165a: Telegram
[259] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, April 21, 1926—6 p.m. [Received April 22—1 a.m.]
723.2515/2175: Telegram
[260] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, April 22, 1926—2 p.m.
723.2515/2175: Telegram
[261] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, April 23, 1926—11 a.m. [Received 1:45 p.m.]
723.2515/2187: Telegram
[262] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, April 23, 1926—5 p.m. [Received 7:50 p.m.]
723.2515/2190: Telegram
[263] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, April 24, 1926—3 p.m.
723.2515/2187: Telegram
[264] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State

Arica, April 24, 1926—4 p.m. [Received April 28—10 p.m.]
723.2515/2218: Telegram
[265] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, April 25, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 11 p.m.]
723.2515/2203: Telegram
[266] President Coolidge to the President of Bolivia (Siles)
Washington, April 26, 1926.
723.2515/2183: Telegram
[267] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, April 26, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/2183: Telegram
[268] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, April 27, 1926—11 a.m. [Received 5:45 p.m.]
723.2515/2212: Telegram
[269] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, April 27, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 8:15 p.m.]
723.2515/2213: Telegram
[270] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

Washington, April 27, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2210a: Telegram
[271] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, April 30, 1926—10 a.m. [Received 2:20 p.m.]
723.2515/2228: Telegram
[272] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs (White)
[Washington,] May 1, 1926.
723.2515/2240½
[273] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, May 5, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2249a: Telegram
[274] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, May 6, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/2254: Telegram
[275] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, May 7, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 10:30 p.m.]
723.2515/2260: Telegram
[276] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State

Lima, May 7, 1926—6 p.m. [Received May 8—12:20 a.m.]
723.2515/2261: Telegram
[277] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, May 7, 1926—6 p.m. [Received May 8—2:45 p.m.]
723.2515/2263: Telegram
[278] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, May 9, 1926—11 a.m. [Received May 10—4:25 a.m.]
723.2515/2268: Telegram
[279] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, May 9, 1926—5 p.m. [Received May 10—3:07 a.m.]
723.2515/2269: Telegram
[280] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, May 11, 1926—3 p.m.
723.2515/2263: Telegram
[281] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, May 11, 1926—6 p.m. [Received 11 p.m.]
723.2515/2276: Telegram
[282] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)

Washington, May 12, 1926—2 p.m.
723.2515/2276: Telegram
[283] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, May 12, 1926—6 p.m. [Received May 13—1:55 p.m.]
723.2515/2283: Telegram
[284] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, May 12, 1926—midnight. [Received May 13—9:57 a.m.]
723.2515/2281: Telegram
[285] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, May 13, 1926—6 p.m. [Received May 14–3 p.m.]
723.2515/2294: Telegram
[286] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, May 14, 1926—9 a.m. [Received 3 p.m.]
723.2515/2293: Telegram
[287] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, May 14, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/2283: Telegram
[288] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

Washington, May 15, 1926—noon.
723.2515/2251: Telegram
[289] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, May 15, 1926—noon.
723.2515/2293: Telegram
[290] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, May 15, 1926—7 p.m. [Received May 16—10:20 a.m.]
723.2515/2299: Telegram
[291] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, May 16, 1926—2 p.m.
723.2515/2293: Telegram
[292] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, May 17, 1926—2 p.m. [Received 8:00 p.m.]
723.2515/2308: Telegram
[293] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, May 17, 1926—8 p.m.
723.2515/2283 supp.: Telegram
[294] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

Washington, May 18, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2293 supp.: Telegram
[295] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, May 21, 1926—5 p.m.
723.2515/2332a: Telegram
[296] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, May 22, 1926—2 p.m.
723.2515/2339a: Telegram
[297] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, May 26, 1926—10 p.m.
723.2515/2354b: Telegram
[298] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, May 26, 1926—10 p.m. [Received May 27—6:38 a.m.]
723.2515/2351: Telegram
[299] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, May 26, 1926—11 p.m.
723.2515/2354c: Telegram
[300] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

Washington, May 27, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2351: Telegram
[301] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, May 28, 1926—11 a.m. [Received 11 p.m.]
723.2515/2369: Telegram
[302] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, May 29, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/2380a: Telegram
[303] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, May 30, 1926—5 p.m. [Received May 31—2:42 a.m.]
723.2515/2380: Telegram
[304] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, June 1, 1926—noon.
723.2515/2382: Telegram
[305] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, June 1, 1926—1 p.m.
723.2515/2380: Telegram
[306] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State

Arica, June 1, 1926—5 p.m. [Received 10:50 p.m.]
723.2515/2384: Telegram
[307] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, June 2, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/2389a: Telegram
[308] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, June 2, 1926—8 p.m. [Received June 3—6:51 a.m.]
723.2515/2389: Telegram
[309] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, June 3, 1926—5 p.m.
723.2515/2401a: Telegram
[310] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, June 3, 1926—7 p.m.
723.2515/2392: Telegram
[311] Minutes of Meeting of the Plenipotentiaries, Under the Extension
of Good Offices of the Secretary of State, June 4, 1926
June 4, 1926
723.2515/2432½
[312] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

Washington, June 4, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2406a: Telegram
[313] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, June 4, 1926—8 p.m. [Received June 5—12:11 a.m.]
723.2515/2406: Telegram
[314] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, June 5, 1926.
723.2515/2406: Telegram
[315] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, June 6, 1926—noon. [Received 8:09 p.m.]
723.2515/2408: Telegram
[316] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, June 7, 1926—11 a.m.
723.2515/2408: Telegram
[317] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, June 7, 1926—11 p.m. [Received June 8—7:08 a.m.]
723.2515/2414: Telegram
[318] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

Washington, June 8, 1926—11 a.m.
723.2515/2412: Telegram
[319] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, June 8, 1926—1 p.m. [Received 3:10 p.m.]
723.2515/2415: Telegram
[320] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, June 5, 1926—7 p.m.
723.2515/2412 supp.: Telegram
[321] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, June 8, 1926—11 p.m.
723.2515/2415: Telegram
[322] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
Washington, June 9, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2415: Telegram
[323] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, June 9, 1926—8 p.m. [Received 10:40 p.m.]
723.2515/2428: Telegram
[324] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

Washington, June 10, 1926—10 a.m.
723.2515/2428: Telegram
[325] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, June 11, 1926—9 a.m.
723.2515/2428: Telegram
[326] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, June 11, 1926—2 p.m. [Received 3:40 p.m.]
723.2515/2434: Telegram
[327] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, June 11, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2434: Telegram
[328] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, June 11, 1926—7 p.m. [Received June 12—12:10 a.m.]
723.2515/2436: Telegram
[329] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, June 12, 1926—11 a.m. [Received 1:55 p.m.]
723.2515/2437: Telegram
[330] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)

Washington, June 12, 1926—1 p.m.
723.2515/2436: Telegram
[331] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, June 12, 1926—midnight. [Received June 13—5:32 a.m.]
723.2515/2438: Telegram
[332] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, June 13, 1926—11 a.m.
723.2515/2437: Telegram
[333] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
Washington, June 13, 1926—8 p.m.
723.2515/2438: Telegram
[334] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
Arica, June 14, 1926—8 p.m. [Received June 15—8:45 a.m.]
723.2515/2447: Telegram
[335] The Chilean Plenipotentiary (Cruchaga) to the Secretary of State
Washington , June 18, 1926.
723.2515/3617

723.2515/1760: Telegram
[Document 138]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, January 4, 1926—3 p.m.
1. While Department’s views on settlement outside plebiscite remain as
stated in my No. 63, October 31, 2 p.m.,59 it is becoming more and more
apparent that effective settlement by means of plebiscite is well nigh
impossible to attain. Position is more difficult as it seems that neither party
desires the plebiscite. It appears that Peru would prefer to have moral
victory over Chile, maintaining the issue which is an asset in internal
politics rather than to have matter settled through plebiscite. Military party
in Chile also welcomes prolongation of issue as it furnishes excuse for
keeping up military establishment.
The Government of Chile, however, appears to desire settlement of matter
by compromise which will save prestige of both nations and will at same
time settle once for all whole question of Pacific by including Bolivia.
Department has not as yet had any indication of views of President Leguía
and influential members of Peruvian Congress on settlement outside
plebiscite. It is evident of course that at present stage while General
Pershing60 is forced to take serious issue with the Chileans, that the
Peruvians are content to do nothing until further developments. It seems
likely, however, that after rules and regulations for registration are
promulgated, time may come when General Pershing or his temporary
successor will have to take serious issue with Peruvians to make them send
in their voters in order not to delay the proceedings, and to put to practical
test question whether conditions in provinces are such that plebiscite can be
held. Dr. Dodds,61 who has just returned from Arica, expresses opinion, in
which I incline to concur, that at that stage of proceedings Peru may decline
to carry out plebiscite. It is evident that should she maintain that attitude,

plebiscite would have to be held without her cooperation; when that
becomes evident it is possible that there may be disposition in Peru to make
settlement outside plebiscite.
I want you, for foregoing reasons, to follow matter very closely with
President Leguía and others, and to report as soon as you have any
intimation of their probable attitude. Of course, you will appreciate
necessity of keeping Arbitrator’s position clear in matter.
As references which follow to statements in cables from Ambassador
Collier in Chile and my reply will show, it is possible that some of Latin
American diplomats in Lima may broach subject to Government of Peru,
perhaps after consultation with you. Should any such steps be taken, they
should not be discouraged. You will guide yourself by my telegram to
Collier, December 22, 1 p.m., which is summarized hereafter.
On December 15 Collier reported62 that the Bolivian Chargé d’Affaires had
discussed the situation with him at length, and had expressed the view that
President Figueroa of Chile would be willing to make settlement with
Bolivia and Peru. Chargé thought that it would be more difficult to obtain
consent of Peru, but he believes that sufficient pressure may be brought to
obtain it, and he suggested possibility that some of the South American
nations suggest to Chile and Peru that they request President of the United
States to settle matter by diplomacy. Chargé thought that Brazil or Uruguay
might be in position to ascertain President Figueroa’s views on matter, and
that their Ministers in Peru should be instructed to urge Peruvian
Government to consent to make settlement.
The Uruguayan Minister to Chile also spoke to Collier and stated belief that
partition of the territory was only way to settle question, and that if the
Government of the United States did not wish to suggest this to the parties
to the controversy and would not deem it offensive for Uruguay to suggest
to both Chile and Peru that they agree upon some such settlement and to ask
Arbitrator to accept it instead of holding plebiscite, the Minister said he
believed that Uruguayan Government would be willing to take the step. He
was emphatic on point that there would be no interference with the United
States, as both he and his country fully approve course we have taken.

On December 17 Collier reported62 that Argentine Ambassador had stated
as his personal view that the Government of the United States having
consented to solve question, no other Power should interfere in any way,
but that he was convinced that plebiscite could never be entirely satisfactory
settlement. He referred to enlarged jurisdiction given British Crown in
settlement of Argentine-Chilean boundary,64 and urged desirability of
sounding out Chile and Peru to see if they would not advise the President of
the United States that they appreciated fact that a more comprehensive
settlement should be made than was thought of when question was
submitted for arbitration, and that they felt that equitable as well as legal
principles should be taken into consideration. The Ambassador expressed
view that his Government would be willing to instruct Argentine Minister in
Peru to sound out Peruvian Government and if it showed reluctance, he
stated that he would favor identic representations by all Latin-American
Ministers at Lima. He believed that President Leguía would not hold out
against such expression of sentiment. He said that he had discussed matter
with the Brazilian Ambassador to Chile, and that latter had stated that this
suggestion was one of few ways in which matter could be settled.
On December 22, 1 p.m., I replied to Collier by telegram, summarized as
follows:
There is no question about desirability of settlement by
agreement, if that be possible. There is no reason why we should
object to Governments of Argentina and Uruguay or any other
government making suggestions to either Chile or Peru, or both,
regarding desirability of settlement believed to be fair, and
advisability of having Chile and Peru ask good offices of this
Government to effect a settlement. In other words, if interested
Governments can bring about request from Chile and Peru to ask
our good offices, we would be very glad to offer them and to try
to bring the parties to an agreement. The Government of the
United States would not stand in way of any processes favorable
to an adjustment as long as it is not compromised; that is, the
integrity of the arbitration and the impartiality of Arbitrator must
be maintained. Correct attitude is to maintain this impartiality and
to be ready to use our good offices with both the parties on

invitation emanating from them, not being committed by any
understanding that we would bring pressure on either one, but that
we would be willing to use our good offices to bring about
settlement fair and agreeable to both.
We should avoid creating impression that if one of the parties is
willing to adopt a certain course of action, we would bring
pressure on the other to induce acquiescence. Anything affording
an opportunity to assert an understanding that we were to try to
bring about particular sort of settlement would only embarrass
effective use of good offices if these be asked. I would not
communicate formally with Argentine Ambassador or with
Uruguayan Minister, as they might construe such action as asking
them to intervene, but if opportunity should offer, you may say
that the foregoing expresses the views of this Government.
KELLOGG
59 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 409, footnote 73.
60 Gen. John J. Pershing, president of the Plebiscitary Commission.
61 Harold W. Dodds, technical adviser with the American delegation.
62 Telegram not printed.
62 Telegram not printed.
64 Boundary agreement between the Governments of Chile and Argentina,
Santiago, Apr. 17, 1896; British and Foreign State Papers, vol. LXXXVIII, p.
553.

723.2515/1807: Telegram
[Document 139]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, January 6, 1926—noon.
[Received 2:37 p.m.]
8. I have just received from our Legation at Montevideo a copy of the
Minister’s despatch No. 118 to you, of December 31, 1925,65 which you
will probably receive about January 18. In it Mr. Grant-Smith says that
Uruguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs has received from their Legation
here at Santiago reports of conversations with me in regard to possibility of
his ascertaining whether Chile might be willing to extend powers of the
Arbitrator and whether the Governments of Uruguay, Argentina, and,
possibly, Brazil might feel disposed to offer advice in this direction to the
Governments of Chile and Peru. Mr. Grant-Smith says that Uruguayan
Minister for Foreign Affairs feels he can take no step in matter because
neither Uruguayan Minister at Washington nor American Minister at
Montevideo have at any time received instructions or been informed from
you in regard to the matter. Mr. Grant-Smith also says that Uruguayan
Minister for Foreign Affairs said he would talk over matter with Argentine
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is in Montevideo today.
I now believe that it would be a wise act for you to instruct our
representatives in Argentina and Uruguay and possibly to discuss the matter
with the representatives of those two countries in Washington. My only
conversations with my Argentine and Uruguayan colleagues have been fully
and correctly reported.
COLLIER
65 Not printed.

723.2515/1807: Telegram
[Document 140]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, January 7, 1926—9 p.m.
4. Embassy’s No. 8, January 6, noon, last sentence. It is not clear to
Department whether you have had an opportunity to make statement to
Argentine Ambassador and Uruguayan Minister authorized in Department’s
No. 85, December 22, 1925, 1 p.m.66 Please inform Department definitely
on this point stating exactly what you said to them so that I may be in better
position to consider what instructions should be sent our representatives in
Argentina and Uruguay.
KELLOGG
66 Not printed; see summary in telegram No. 1, Jan. 4, to the Ambassador in
Peru, p. 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 138].

723.2515/1818: Telegram
[Document 141]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, January 8, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received January 9—1:25 a.m.]
9. [Paraphrase.] Department’s No. 4, January 7, 9 p.m. On receiving
Department’s No. 85, December 22, 6 [1] p.m.,67 I informally stated to
Argentine Ambassador that, although the United States could not suggest to
Chile and to Peru any method of settlement except the plebiscite and could
not even ask or suggest to any other nation that it make suggestions of that
nature to Chile and to Peru, the United States does not question the right,
nor would it regard the action as an impropriety, were his Government, of
its own accord, to suggest to Chile and to Peru that they ask the Arbitrator
to amplify his powers in way he had suggested to me, as I reported in my
No. 144, of December 17.68
I told the Ambassador that any suggestion by Argentine Government could
not affect impartiality of Arbitrator, however, or integrity of the plebiscite;
that Arbitrator would not make any suggestion whatever to the litigants and
that plebiscite would have to proceed without interruption unless both
nations should request another mode of procedure. I stated that nothing
should be done implying criticism of the award, and he concurred.
I made exactly the same statement, informally, in its entirety, a day or so
later, to the Uruguayan Minister, adding as my personal opinion, that I
thought suggestion made by Argentine Ambassador better than that of
Uruguayan Minister (already reported to Department). The Minister said
that Argentine Ambassador had told him of the latter’s suggestion to me.
On December 26 the Uruguayan Minister sent a long despatch to his
Government about his separate conversations with the Argentine
Ambassador and with me. I did not learn of this action until yesterday when
I called on him and he read me the complete text of his despatch. The

Minister made it quite clear to his Government that the United States would
make no suggestion whatever to the parties litigant, but would offer no
objection to course that Argentine Ambassador had suggested.
Uruguayan Minister practically stated to his Government that Argentine
plan was preferable to his own. Mr. Grant-Smith evidently misunderstood
the Uruguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs and has reported to Department
that the Uruguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs had been informed by
Uruguayan Minister here that I had been instructed to sound out Chilean
Foreign Office in the matter. The Uruguayan Minister understands exactly
the contrary, however, and has reported in that wise to his Government. Not
in any way have I ever mentioned to Chilean Government possibility of
anything but plebiscitary solution since my report to Department on
October 28, 1925, following Department’s instruction of October 26,
1925.69
I think that our Embassy in Argentina and our Legation in Montevideo
should now be instructed; if Department desires, Embassy here could repeat
to them my No. 144 of December 17, and Department’s No. 85 of
December 22, or such portions as Department would authorize, or they
could be mailed Saturday evening, arriving Buenos Aires and Montevideo
next Tuesday.
When the Uruguayan Minister read me his despatch yesterday, I learned
incidentally, that he reported in it that a short time before my first talk with
him, President Figueroa had informally asked him and Argentine
Ambassador if their Governments would not intervene in the matter. I have
not yet ascertained whether he suggested any specific plan, but I believe
that that suggestion and suggestion of Argentine Ambassador to me are
being considered together by Uruguayan Foreign Office. [End paraphrase.]
El Diario Ilustrado has published editorial commenting on United Press
despatch reported in my number 7 of January 5th70 and strongly favors
diplomatic settlement but adds that neither Chile nor Peru will dare to take
initiative and that the United States, as the impartial nation, ought to take it.
Today same paper commenting on recent incident in Tacna71 as indicative
of impossibility of repressing popular feeling and guaranteeing orderly

plebiscite, again calls on United States as impartial nation friendly to both
litigants to advise them to settle diplomatically.
[Paraphrase.] From the foregoing it looks as if the Argentine suggestion
might meet with favorable reception here should Argentine Government be
disposed to make it.
I have just been told by Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs that Chilean
Government has instructed Intendente of Tacna to make thorough
investigation of recent incident and to have guilty punished and order
maintained at all cost. Minister also says that Mathieu,72 who is now ill in
hospital at Ancon, will be unable to be in Santiago before February 1.
Minister also said that Edwards74 was returning to Arica in entire sympathy
with views of the new administration. From another source, however, I am
reliably informed that close relations between Edwards and Mathieu have
not existed for a long time. [End paraphrase.]
COLLIER
67 Not printed; see summary in telegram No. 1, Jan. 4, to the Ambassador in
Peru, p. 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 138].
68 Not printed.
69 Neither printed.
70 Not printed; the press despatch which was from Washington stated,
without attribution to any official source, that the Arbitrator would be
favorably disposed if both Chile and Peru should inform him that the best
method of reaching a settlement would be through diplomatic negotiations
instead of a plebiscite.
71 See telegram from the consul at Arica, Jan. 8, infra.
72 Beltran Mathieu, formerly Chilean Ambassador in the United States, who
was en route to Chile to become Minister for Foreign Affairs.
74 Agustín Edwards, Chilean member of the Plebiscitary Commission.

723.2515/1817: Telegram
[Document 142]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase—Extract]
ARICA, January 8, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received January 9—9:30 p.m.75 ]
From Pershing: On January 6 the Peruvians began to repatriate voters who
had been expelled from Tacna, and some thirty were sent up in the morning
train from Arica. Several of my staff were eyewitnesses of events attending
arrival of Peruvians at Tacna; following is summary of their account:
Peruvians arrived 10:25 a.m., and crowd estimated at about two hundred
fifty had gathered about platform and station, rough elements
predominating. Crowd greeted arrival of train with threatening outcries,
such as: “Kill them.” When train had stopped the Peruvians began to
descend, carrying hand baggage. Despite no provocative action on their part
toward Chileans, the crowd immediately assaulted them. Twelve policemen
who at outset made some effort to restrain mob became ineffective almost
immediately; thereafter, their action appeared half-hearted. Peruvians,
assailants, and police surged through the station and out into the street
where the mob increased to four or five hundred and the police to about
twenty-five, but no real attempt was made to check mob. As crowd moved
up street Peruvians were brutally attacked for a distance of about four
blocks, being knocked down, stoned, kicked, and beaten with clubs and
fists. The principal attackers seemed to be organized into some half dozen
groups consisting of 6 to 10 men each. Several soldiers and two men
wearing uniforms of commissioned officers in the Chilean Army were
observed among the onlookers, the spectacle affording them an occasion for
much laughter. No arrests were made during the attacks, nor were efforts to
make arrests apparent in cases which flagrantly demanded such action. The
exact number of Peruvians injured and extent of injuries has not yet been
reported. Actions of Peruvians at the railway station and in the street were
confined to instinctive and ineffectual efforts at defense. The majority of the

Peruvians finally reached shelter in the house of General Pizarro, of the
Peruvian delegation.
The Chilean press has alleged that General Pizarro fired a shot into the mob
from the balcony of his house. He positively denies the allegation and I do
not give it credence.
On the evening of the same day, Dr. Valverde, the legal adviser of the
Peruvian delegation, another member of the delegation, and Captain
Rotaldi, Peruvian naval officer, who were proceeding to Tacna from Arica
by motor car found the way barred by rocks near Tacna. When they started
to walk to the station they were attacked by a group apparently lying in wait
for them, and Valverde and Rotaldi were brutally beaten and cut. The same
night there was demonstration against the house into which Valverde and
Rothaldi had been taken to be cared for.
On the morning of January 7, several Peruvians who arrived from Tacna by
regular train were met at station by threatening crowd which attempted to
close in on Peruvians but latter were protected by police and troops.
The situation at Tacna is unsettled and threatening.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The importance of the incidents described and the incendiary activities of
local press can not be overestimated. Action, prompt and vigorous, must be
taken.
Unless Edwards, on his arrival, shall promptly and publicly admit
responsibility, punish the guilty, make proper public apologies, and give
adequate and public guarantees for long period, it is my firm opinion that it
will be wrong to take responsibility of encouraging Peruvians to persevere
in their endeavors to return to their homes and to take part in plebiscite.
Only by an immediate and public declaration of changed policy,
accompanied by the prompt, severe, and public punishment of the guilty
element and by public and adequate guarantees of good government, can
the situation be saved.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I feel compelled to place this matter before Edwards immediately upon his
return to Arica which is expected on January 10. Pershing.
VON TRESCKOW
75 Telegram in three sections.

723.2515/1818: Telegram
[Document 143]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, January 9, 1926—4 p.m.
5. Yesterday, acting on your suggestions, I called in separately the Argentine
Ambassador and the Uruguayan Minister and informed them of the talks
you had had in Santiago with the Bolivian Chargé and the Uruguayan
Minister, as you reported to the Department on December 15,76 and your
talk with Argentine Ambassador to Chile, as you reported on December
17;76 I then informed them of the attitude of this Government as set forth in
Department’s telegram No. 85 to you, of December 22, 1 p.m.77
Today I have telegraphed our Ambassador in Argentina,76 with instructions
to repeat to Brazil and Uruguay, my instructions to you and to Ambassador
Poindexter about United States intervention, also the substance of your
conversations with the Uruguayan Minister and the Argentine Ambassador,
which you reported on December 15 and December 17, and the substance
of my telegram No. 85 to you. I have told them that they are not to
approach the Governments to which they are accredited but are to be ready
to explain attitude of this Government if they are approached.
In my conversations with the Argentine Ambassador and the Uruguayan
Minister they expressed themselves doubtful that time had arrived when
Peru would listen to any suggestions from any country about a settlement. I
think they will report to their Governments, however, entire willingness of
this Government for them to make suggestions as I cabled you.
Department has received your telegram No. 9, of January 8, 3 p.m. I am
pleased to learn that you reported accurately to the Argentine and
Uruguayan representatives. The information that has come to Department
from Tacna and Arica about clashes between Chileans and Peruvians is not

encouraging for success of the plebiscite. I shall probably have Mr. Cox78
return to Washington. The President will appoint for General Pershing’s
place someone who has not been at Tacna and Arica and has not been in any
way heretofore connected with the plebiscite. The new appointee will
probably be on the ground before Mathieu arrives in view of delay caused
by latter’s illness.
 
I shall give full consideration with the President to suggestions you have
made about advisability of this Government’s offering its good offices for a
diplomatic settlement.
KELLOGG
76 Telegram not printed.
76 Telegram not printed.
77 Not printed; see summary in telegram No. 1, Jan. 4, to the Ambassador in
Peru, p. 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 138].
76 Telegram not printed.
78 Raymond E. Cox, Foreign Service officer, detailed for duty with the
Plebiscitary Commission, July 11, 1925.

723.2515/1830: Telegram
[Document 144]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LIMA, January 9, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received January 12—10:28 a.m.79 ]
1. Department’s No. 1, January 4, 3 p.m. I shall be glad to follow out
instructions if suggestions such as you describe are made to me by the
representatives of Argentina, Bolivia, and Brazil, or other countries. I have
talked recently with the representatives of the countries named, however,
and all have expressed views and sentiments which are quite the contrary of
those reported from Santiago as coming from representatives of these
countries there. Bolivian representative here has advised me that
satisfactory agreement had been reached between him and President Leguía
that should Peru win plebiscite, she would give Bolivia a port in Province
of Arica. President Leguía confirmed this in conversation with me, stating
that he was quite willing to sign such an agreement in writing should it be
desired, and subsequently made same statement in public speech.
Both Argentine Minister and Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires have recently
expressed opinion to me that plebiscite should be held as provided in award
and under conditions stipulated by General Pershing in the orders and
findings lately made by Plebiscitary Commission and approved by General
Pershing. Both Minister and Chargé, however, recognize difficulty of
enforcing these conditions as long as policing of plebiscite and execution of
orders of Commission remain under Chile’s control, thus leaving
Commission subject to will and desires of one of parties to the controversy.
Many observers here have commented on fact that Chilean delegate on
Commission has made public and formal announcement that Chile would
not comply with Commission’s orders except when they comported with
Chilean approval of Commission’s jurisdiction; and also on ex-President
Alessandri’s public declarations that Chile would never surrender the

provinces. They have also commented on statement made by Barros Jarpa,
when Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs, that Chile looked on plebiscite
as a disguised cession of the provinces, and the same observers comment
generally on anomalous position in which such declarations leave General
Pershing and the Plebiscitary Commission, together with Chile’s failure to
comply with either letter or spirit of word [work?] of Commission already
effected and the violent attacks which have been made on General Pershing
and other Americans on the Commission by a Chilean official. On the facts
of Chile’s conduct affecting the plebiscite, representatives of Latin
American countries and other disinterested observers here are disposed to
accept opinions of General Pershing and the other members of American
delegation instead of Chilean charges of partiality and prejudice, though all
seem to recognize difficulties of situation created by this attitude of Chile’s
and by power left in her hands to block proceedings.
In regard to your suggestion that General Pershing’s successor might be
compelled to direct Peru to send in her voters in order to test practically the
question of whether conditions in the provinces are such that plebiscite can
actually be held, news has arrived here from Arica, since receipt of
Department’s telegram, of mob attacks on group of Peruvian plebiscitary
workers and voters already arrived in the provinces. Detailed reports of the
affair can doubtless be obtained from the Commission. It is possibly true
that Peru might assert that, as long as that condition exists and also in
consideration of the comparatively helpless situation of the Peruvians in the
provinces, no further tests are required.
In regard to statement in Department’s telegram that neither party desires a
plebiscite, I am assured, after complete information from highest
Government sources as well as from other sources, that Peru is very
desirous that plebiscite should be held if freedom of movement of Peruvian
citizens in the provinces, their freedom to carry on legitimate plebiscitary
work and propaganda, their freedom to express their opinions, and their
safety when voting should be guaranteed along lines to some extent already
indicated by General Pershing. It is also probably true that Peru would
refuse to proceed without the guarantees, just stated, actually being put into
effect; and, while I have carefully withheld expressing myself on any phase
of the subject here, my opinion is that such action on Peru’s part would

meet with approval of Argentine, Brazilian, and other Latin American
representatives here.
Peru is confident that she can win the plebiscite if given fair chance at polls
(this outcome would be conclusive political victory for Leguía regime), and
believes that if holding of plebiscite is rendered impossible by Chile, either
through official acts of Chilean Government or through turbulence of
Chileans in the provinces, the President of the Plebiscitary Commission will
be obliged to call off plebiscite and place onus for this act squarely on
Chile, an outcome which would also be great political success for President
Leguía, as it would be popularly accepted here as great moral victory for
Peru. Feeling is running so high in Peru that were the Government to accept
a compromise no matter how favorable, through diplomatic pressure or
otherwise, it would almost inevitably be overthrown, and I do not believe
that the President will take that risk.
On other hand, while I have heard statement made as coming from Chile,
since recent developments in Plebiscitary Commission, that Chile through
influence of Army and Navy does not desire plebiscite to be held, I feel sure
that Chile does desire it to take place if it can be held under her control and
under existing conditions to which General Pershing has already declared
his objections. Peru is beginning to send her voters into the provinces,
apparently confident that a way will be found to support General Pershing
and to enforce the orders of the Plebiscitary Commission and that intent of
orders already made will be observed. I have referred above to reception in
Arica of one group 5 other and larger groups are in preparation for early
passage and President Leguía has given orders for preparation of
cantonments to receive them.
In accordance with instructions in Department’s telegram under reference, I
shall report promptly any information that may come to me of views of
Peruvian Government or officers in regard to a possible settlement outside
the plebiscite. I note your statement that so far the Department has no
information regarding views of President Leguía and influential members of
Peruvian Congress on this point; I beg to refer to previous communications
from this Embassy on it, specifically to my No. 75, October 27, 1925, 11
a.m.,80 wherein I reported, after having made careful inquiry, that such a

suggestion would come as a distinct shock to Peru and that the Peruvian
Government would not consider any proposition to divide the provinces. At
a later date I referred to the remarks made to me in the Embassy by Mr.
Mariategui, President of the Chamber of Deputies and one of the most
influential members of Congress, to the effect that Peru would not consider
any offer, no matter how favorable, from Chile on this subject and that the
Peruvian Government would insist that the whole matter be settled by the
United States. Still later I informed the Department that, in an interview
with President Leguía, he had expressed the hope that the plebiscitary
formula would be fulfilled to the letter; and that the leading Peruvian
newspaper, El Comercio, had denied an assertion appearing in New York
World that identity of the Arbitrator could be kept distinct from that of
Chief Executive of the United States and had made assertion that as
President of the United States had accepted task of arbitration the prestige
and good work of the United States is gravely involved.
No matter what the facts may be, the activity of Latin American countries
looking toward a further arbitration [or?] diplomatic settlement is regarded
here as Chilean intrigue. Any connection of the American representatives in
those several countries with such a movement would be prejudicial to
American prestige here. The question is asked what use would there be of a
further arbitration when Chile refuses, as it is alleged, to comply with the
award already made? The suggestion is then added that there is no more
reason to expect that Chile would comply with another award if it were
unfavorable to her, or not in accordance with her wishes, than there is to
expect a compliance with the one already rendered.
In regard to a diplomatic settlement, Mr. Mariategui and others point out
that futile efforts toward a settlement of that nature have been undertaken
from time to time during the last 40 years, and that in view of the recent
declarations made by Chilean spokesmen it is plainly less reasonable to
hope for a favorable result from further efforts to that end now than it was
heretofore. I believe that these expressions fairly represent all public
opinion of any weight here.
I am satisfied in my own mind, however, that if those Latin American
countries who may indicate an active interest in settlement of question

could induce Chile through their good offices to consent to a neutralization
of the provinces during plebiscite period, and could in this way succeed in
bringing about an arrangement by which plebiscite could in every respect
be held actually under control of the representatives of the three countries
composing the Plebiscitary Commission as provided for in award, Peru
would go through with it very willingly and would abide by the result in
good faith. The assertion could not well be made that a plebiscite under
those conditions would be unfair to Chile or that Chile, if willing to consent
to a fair plebiscite as implied in Treaty of Ancon81 and protocol of
Washington,82 could either reasonably object to an arrangement of that sort
or could refuse to abide by the result. Question has been asked here what
would be done should Chile refuse to accept result of plebiscite if it were
adverse. I do not believe that this question is of much moment here at
present, and in my interview with President Leguía the middle of last
December he pointed out that it might well be left for future determination.
The suggestion has also been made that if military party in Chile desires
continuance of issue over the provinces (as stated in Department’s
telegram), it would use its influence against settlement by any other means
should it be successful in preventing holding of a fair plebiscite.
I realize fully difficulties of situation with which Department has to deal,
and I shall cooperate fully with Department in any aspect of representations
which may arise here; but if I may be permitted the suggestion, I am of
opinion that easiest and at same time best solution of these difficulties
would be firm and strong support of General Pershing in the spirit, intent,
and letter of conclusions he has reached and by a clear declaration of the
Arbitrator stating it.
POINDEXTER
79 Telegram in five sections.
80 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 404.
81 Foreign Relations , 1883, p. 731.
82 Ibid., 1922, vol. I, p. 505.

723.2515/1836: Telegram
[Document 145]
The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
MONTEVIDEO, January 10, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received January 12—11:55 a.m.]
2. Interview by Argentine Minister for Foreign Affairs now visiting
Montevideo appears in La Mañana this morning. Referring to press
telegram from Washington of possible request for the participation of
Argentine and Brazil in efforts to bring about settlement of Tacna-Arica
arbitration, Dr. Gallardo83 stated that in such case the influence of his
Government would be thrown on the side of the execution of the arbitral
award or of broadening, the powers of the Arbitrator. He would deeply
deplore a failure to reach a solution as a serious blow to the practice of
arbitration.
Translation by pouch; repeated by mail to Buenos Aires and Rio de Janeiro.
GRANT-SMITH
83 Dr. Angel Gallardo, Argentine Minister for Foreign Affairs.

723.2515/1817: Telegram
[Document 146]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, January 11, 1926—3 p.m.
For Pershing: Department exceedingly disquieted over report of recent
disturbances at Tacna, Deplorable as incident is, nevertheless it can not, in
my opinion, properly be made basis for delivery at this stage of anything in
nature of an ultimatum to effect that unless Chile adopts certain punitive
and preventive measures the plebiscite must be abandoned. Obvious course
is to place matter before Edwards with view to impressing upon him and,
through him, Chilean Government the fact that responsibility for
maintaining order in Tacna-Arica rests squarely upon Chile as power
charged with administration of the territory.
Both Chile and Peru filed briefs here Saturday night. Chile abandons appeal
as far as schedule of dates in resolution of December 9, 1925,84 is
concerned, but Arbitrator is requested to deal with conditions and
assumptions embodied in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the resolution and, in
consequence, to pass upon powers of the Plebiscitary Commission. Other
resolutions, although not specifically appealed from, may be incidentally
involved and Arbitrator will possibly undertake in the Opinion (which it is
hoped will be delivered at end of this week or beginning of next) to clarify
situation by carefully delimiting status and powers of the Plebiscitary
Commission as distinguished from those of Chile as the administrative
authority carrying responsibility for maintaining order and governing
provinces during period of the plebiscite. Some controversial points, such
as question of when plebiscitary period begins may be cleared up by
forthcoming Opinion. You will, I feel sure, appreciate vital importance of
doing all that is possible to avoid precipitation of any new crisis in
meantime.

KELLOGG
84 For text of resolution, see telegram, Jan. 15, to president of Plebiscitary
Commission, p. 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 149].

723.2515PC/338a: Telegram
[Document 147]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Panama (South)
WASHINGTON, January 11, 1926—7 p.m.
4. For General Lassiter.85
(1) The President has asked me to notify you that he formally
appoints you as Chairman of the Plebiscitary Commission under
the Tacna-Arica Arbitration to take the place of General Pershing
who must resign, at least temporarily, on account of health and
desires you to sail on the Cleveland as soon as possible. The
Cleveland will have instructions from the Navy. You can, of
course, take an aide with you.
(2) I should much prefer to have had a personal conversation with
you and explained the situation in Tacna and Arica but this is
impossible on account of time. You should, therefore, as soon as
you can after your arrival read all the cable and other
correspondence between General Pershing and myself during his
administration of the plebiscite. I shall ask him to furnish it to
you. The President thought it best to select some one who had not
heretofore had any connection with the Tacna and Arica
plebiscite. The situation there, not only between Chile and Peru
but now between Chile on the one hand and General Pershing and
his American advisers on the other, is very strained and bitter. I
cannot here comment on the history of the plebiscite or the cause
of these disagreements and the bitterness. They render a
satisfactory plebiscite exceedingly difficult but it is the duty of the
President and he desires to do everything in his power within his
legal rights to hold a plebiscite. If it fails, the blame must rest on
one or both of the countries involved.

(3) The President, as Arbitrator, realizing that all of the acts of the
Plebiscitary Commission are subject to review by him on appeal,
has desisted from making any suggestions or giving directions to
General Pershing. I have, however, as you will see, from time to
time made suggestions to him in an advisory capacity. My object
has been to keep the Arbitrator’s record clear, to do everything
possible to hold a plebiscite, and to prevent a break so that if the
time came when a plebiscite could not be held, the responsibility
would not be on the Arbitrator but would be on the party making
the plebiscite impossible. I feel very earnestly that this course
should be pursued. You should, as I know you will, take the
greatest pains, to be strictly impartial between the two countries
in their conflicting views. On the one hand, I have made it
perfectly plain to Peru that the President has no power under the
Treaty of Ancon and the convention by which the question was
submitted to the President to take over the administrative control
of Tacna and Arica. That remains in Chile. On the other hand, I
have advised General Pershing that Chile has no right to use her
administrative control to interfere with or frustrate a fair
plebiscite. While it may eventually be impossible to satisfy both
or either of the countries fully, an impartial and careful adherence
to the terms of the Award is absolutely essential. I think the
greatest caution should be taken to avoid getting into a position
where it can be claimed that the Arbitrator or his representatives
on the Commission is fighting the battles of either party. Very
bitter charges have been made by Chile against the advisers of
General Pershing as to their conduct of investigation and
complaints have been made to us that they have not shown tact
and discretion in such work. I am, of course, unable to judge at
this distance accurately between the conflicting charges of these
countries, but without in any way impairing a reasonably fair and
honest plebiscite, I think every effort should be made to maintain
a frank and friendly attitude towards both parties. You, of course,
will be better able to judge on the ground after you have talked
with General Pershing and with all of the advisers but I should
expect you to inform yourself and exercise your own judgment.

Mathieu, who has been Chilean Ambassador in Washington for seven years,
is now to be the Minister of Foreign Affairs in the new Government of
President Figueroa. He is a high-minded, courageous and a perfectly fair
man. He has done very much to induce the Chilean Government to comply
with Pershing’s demands as to protection to the plebiscite in Tacna and
Arica and I am sure will exercise his authority to the fullest extent he can to
carry out the plebiscite. He is now, I am informed, in the Ancon hospital but
expects to stop at Arica and have a conference with General Pershing and I
hope you can be there and talk with him as I believe he will be of very great
assistance, The danger in this plebiscite is that the bitter feeling between the
Chileans and Peruvians may break out into open conflicts when the voters
come to register and go to the ballot. While public feeling in Chile may be
such as to render it impossible for Mathieu to accomplish what he desires, I
feel that he should be given a chance as far as it is consistent with your
duties as Chairman of the Plebiscitary Commission, to bring about and
maintain conditions insuring a reasonably fair election. Granting that ideal
conditions can probably not be obtained, it may still be possible to hold a
plebiscite which would do substantial justice to the parties, and we are
bound to exhaust every expedient to that end.
Another thing we should constantly bear in mind is that this question has
been a long standing political controversy and the risk of the blame being
thrown on the United States is very great. I have great confidence in your
ability and fairness to handle this matter. Formal appointment will be
telegraphed to you at Arica.86
KELLOGG
85 Maj. Gen. William Lassiter, commanding the American forces in the
Panama Canal Zone.
86 General Lassiter was formally commissioned on Jan. 27.

723.2515/1849: Telegram
[Document 148]
The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
MONTEVIDEO, January 13, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received 6:30 p.m.]
5. Interview given to correspondent of the Buenos Aires Critica by the
Uruguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs which appears in La Mariana this
morning follows the same line as that by the Argentine Minister for Foreign
Affairs reported in my telegram number 2, January 10, 4 p.m. Blanco87
speaks of remote contingency of Uruguay being asked to aid which would
take form of support of and enlargement of powers of arbitration; a policy
of watchful waiting and complete reserve will be followed by his
Government. Editorial comment merely points out accord in views of
Uruguay and Argentine Governments.
GRANT-SMITH
87 Dr. Juan Carlos Blanco, Uruguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs.

723.2515/1756: Telegram
[Document 149]
The Secretary of State to the President of the Plebiscitary
Commission (Pershing)
WASHINGTON, January 15, 1926—[9 p.m.?]
The following is the Arbitrator’s opinion and decision:
“In the matter of the arbitration between the Republic of Chile
and the Republic of Peru, with respect to the unfulfilled
provisions of the Treaty of Peace of October 20, 1883, under the
Protocol and Supplementary Act signed at Washington July 20,
1922.88
Opinion and Decision of the Arbitrator upon the appeal from the
decision of the Plebiscitary Commission made on the ninth day of
December 1925.
1. On December 9, 1925 the Plebiscitary Commission
adopted a resolution to the following effect:
(a) The Commission declined to accept a
schedule of dates proposed by the Chilean
member for the adoption of registration and
election regulations, for the commencement
of the functioning of registration boards, for
the early disposition of appeals from rulings
of the registration boards, and for the taking
of the plebiscitary vote.
(b) The Committee appointed by the
Commission to prepare drafts of registration
and election regulations was directed to report
as soon as practicable with a view to the

adoption and enactment of such regulations
on or before January 15, 1926.
(c) The registration and election boards were
directed to begin their functions on February
15, 1926 or as soon thereafter as practicable
and to continue to function for a period of one
month.
(d) Proceedings to review rulings by the
registration boards were required to be
expedited so that appeals from such rulings
should be decided within three weeks
following the close of registration.
(e) The date of the plebiscitary vote was fixed
at April 15, 1926 or as soon thereafter as the
Commission should deem practicable.
(f) It was provided:
Section 6. “That the foregoing schedule of
dates is based upon the assumption that both
parties 
to 
the 
plebiscite 
will 
proceed
expeditiously and in good faith to give full
effect to the resolutions and regulations
heretofore adopted or which may hereafter be
adopted by the Commission, to the end that a
fair and orderly plebiscite may be held, it
being understood that the schedule is subject
to change from time to time if, in the
judgment of the Commission, any such
change shall appear to be necessary or
advisable.”
(g) It was further provided:

Section 7. “That the Commission hereby
respectfully calls upon His Excellency the
Chilean member formally to advise the
Commission clearly and specifically whether
or not the Chilean Government is prepared
henceforth to cooperate effectively with the
Commission and especially to instruct its
officials and representatives in Tacna-Arica,
effective as of the date of the Chilean
member’s reply hereto, thereafter to cooperate
adequately in carrying out the regulations and
resolutions heretofore adopted or which may
hereafter be adopted by the Commission,
always having the right of appeal to the
Arbitrator in accordance with the provisions
of his Opinion and Award and the rules of
procedure of the Commission.”
(h) The President of the Commission was
instructed to transmit an authenticated copy
of the resolution to the Chilean member who
was in turn instructed to bring the resolution
to the attention of the proper Chilean
authorities.
2. On December 16, 1925 the Plebiscitary Commission
by resolution certified to the Arbitrator89 under the
appropriate provisions of the Opinion and Award of
March 4, 192590 that portion of “the dissenting opinion
and request for certifications on appeal” of the Chilean
member “which sets forth a dissent and appeal from the
action of the Commission on December 9, 1925 in
substituting for a resolution to fix the date of the
plebiscite introduced by the Chilean member, a
resolution on the same subject introduced by the
President of the Commission, and in adopting the latter”
as presenting “a question of general importance in

relation to the holding or result of the plebiscite”. Under
the same resolution of December 16, 1925, the
Plebiscitary Commission transmitted to the Arbitrator
all other portions of the said dissenting opinion for such
consideration as the Arbitrator might deem proper on
his own motion.
3. On December 22, 1925 the Arbitrator made an order
allowing the appeal so certified and reserving for
further consideration the question of entertaining an
appeal with respect to other matters than those
embraced in the resolution of December 9, 1925, and as
to these matters the Arbitrator directed the party seeking
appeal to present in writing on or before January 15,
1926 a statement showing with suitable precision, the
action, or resolution of the Plebiscitary Commission of
which complaint is made. The order further provided
that the Commission’s authority should not be regarded
as suspended pending the appeal and that the
Commission should proceed with the performance of its
duties under the Opinion and Award of March 4, 1925.
Pursuant to the said order of the Arbitrator, the parties
on January 9, 1926, filed briefs accompanied by the
pertinent documents required for consideration of the
appeal and of the other matters referred to in the
dissenting opinion and in the resolution of December
16, 1925.
4. The Agent for the Republic of Chile, on January 9,
1926, 
filed 
on 
behalf 
of 
his 
Government 
a
communication addressed to the Arbitrator, which,
among other things, declares that the appeal of Chile
from the resolution of December 9, 1925 “is
respectfully withdrawn in so far as such resolution fixes
the time for the submission and adoption of rules and
regulations governing the plebiscite and also the times
for registration of voters, appeals and casting of the

ballots”. This communication proceeds to state: “as to
other portions of the resolution, however, which make
the fixing of such times dependent or conditional upon
Chile’s giving full effect to certain resolutions and
regulations heretofore adopted or which may hereafter
be adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission, Chile
continues her appeal and submits herewith, in addition
to the documents set forth in Your Excellency’s order of
December 22, 1925, a memorandum pointing out the
provisions in the said resolution of December 9, 1925 to
which Chile particularly objects as especially affecting
the operation of the last mentioned resolution. The
Agent for Chile further declares that her appeal upon
the resolution of December 9, 1925, is prosecuted in
this sense “in order that the resolution may be amended
or modified by eliminating therefrom the objectionable
assumptions and conditions.” From the memorandum
referred to by the Agent for Chile and accompanying
his communication, it appears that the “objectionable
assumptions and conditions” thus drawn into question
are found in the provisions of Sections 6 and 7 of said
resolution hereinabove quoted.
5. The Arbitrator on due consideration is of opinion that
permission to withdraw the appeal, in so far as the
schedule of dates fixed by the resolution of December
9, 1925, is concerned, should be granted.
When the order allowing the appeal was made on
December 22, 1925, the only specific decision of the
Plebiscitary Commission certified for review was
apparently the rejection of one schedule of dates and the
adoption of another. On examining the two provisions
of the resolution to which Chile objects on this appeal,
the Arbitrator is of the opinion that Section 6 should not
be taken as setting forth conditions modifying or
limiting the action of the Plebiscitary Commission in

fixing the schedule of dates but rather as intended to
express the desire and request that both parties should
give their earnest cooperation to the end that a fair and
orderly plebiscite may be held in accordance with the
terms of the Opinion and Award. Section 7 would seem
to be a similar appeal addressed particularly to the
Chilean Government as the party charged with the
responsibility of administration in the plebiscitary area.
These requests do not appear to the Arbitrator to furnish
grounds for objection or to constitute specific action of
the Commission requiring review. The Commission
under the terms of the Opinion and Award has authority
to change the dates fixed by the resolution in question
and the reference to this authority in the resolution, and
the manifest desire that the exercise of this authority
should not be required, does not in the opinion of the
Arbitrator present ground of appeal.
6. The Arbitrator is not disposed however, to take a
technical view of the situation, and desires, in a
considerate and helpful spirit, to assist, so far as he can,
in eliminating the differences which have arisen
between the parties, acting of course within the limits of
the powers which the parties themselves have conferred
upon him.
The holding of the plebiscite is but the execution of the agreement
of the parties as found in the Treaty of Ancon. In the submission
to the Arbitrator, it was explicitly agreed that the Arbitrator was
empowered “to determine the conditions” of the plebiscite. The
agreement for a plebiscite manifestly would not be satisfied by
the holding of a plebiscite as a mere matter of form and the
purpose in empowering the Arbitrator to determine the conditions
of the plebiscite was to the end that there should be proper
safeguards for the holding of a fair plebiscite. Hence the
Arbitrator concluded, as the Award states, that the conditions of
the plebiscite should be such as would “work substantial justice

between the parties in the present circumstances.” As it was
plainly impossible that all the requisite conditions should be fixed
in detail by the Award, it was necessary that a suitable agency
should be constituted. The Arbitrator stated in the Award that it
was obvious “that the holding of the plebiscite should be
appropriately supervised by competent and impartial authority.” It
was for this purpose, and as one of the conditions determined by
the Arbitrator under the submission, that the Plebiscitary
Commission was established. The construction of its powers and
duties should be determined in the light of the end to be achieved,
that is, the holding of a fair plebiscite in accordance with the
agreement of the parties.
It was provided in the Award that the Plebiscitary Commission
should have “in general complete control over the plebiscite.” The
specification of the particular powers of the Commission in
relation to registration and the casting and counting of the vote
was not intended by the Arbitrator to detract from, this “complete
control” and this control, for which the Award provides, embraces
all authority necessary for the determination of the prerequisites
of a fair plebiscite. The action of the Commission in determining
these prerequisites, and in making its requirements accordingly, is
at all times subject to review by the Arbitrator upon proper
appeal. But the determinations and requirements of the
Commission taken in the exercise of the full authority thus
conferred by the Award constitute conditions of the plebiscite
with the same force and effect as if prescribed by the Arbitrator
directly under the submission, and these conditions are binding
upon both parties. From the very moment of its organization, the
conditions for the holding of a fair plebiscite in Tacna and Arica
became the primary concern of the Plebiscitary Commission. It
was and is the duty of the Plebiscitary Commission, in order that
appropriate requirements for a fair plebiscite might be made, to
take note of the actual situation in the plebiscitary territory and to
form its own judgment with respect to appropriate measures.

This authority of the Plebiscitary Commission does not derogate
from the administrative powers of Chile conferred by the Treaty
of Ancon over the plebiscitary territory. As the Arbitrator pointed
out in the Award, it was not deemed to be necessary to discuss
any question of sovereignty over this territory. It was sufficient to
take the express words of the Treaty under which the territory was
to be in Chile’s possession and subject to Chilean laws and
authority pending the plebiscite. But this retention of possession
and administrative authority were subject to the provision for the
taking of the plebiscite and it was stated in the Award that the
exercise by Chile of legislative, executive and judicial power
should not go to the extent of frustrating the provision for a
plebiscite. As both parties had agreed to a plebiscite, both parties
were bound to take proper action that it should be fairly held. The
agreement of Chile and Peru that the Arbitrator should establish
the conditions of the plebiscite carried with it the undertaking to
abide by these conditions and these conditions prescribed by the
Award include, as has been said, the requirements made by the
Plebiscitary Commission under the authority conferred by the
Award. The execution of these requirements is but the exercise by
both parties of their jurisdiction respectively in accordance with
their agreement. The carrying out of these requirements of the
Commission in the plebiscitary area is not in derogation of the
administrative authority of Chile but is the use of that authority in
accordance with the terms of the Treaty and the Award. This does
not involve the assumption either by the Arbitrator or by the
Commission of any authority other than that of determining the
conditions upon which a fair plebiscite may be held, and if these
conditions are not observed by either party the responsibility must
rest upon the party or parties to which the failure may be
attributed.
CONCLUSION
The Arbitrator accordingly decides upon the present appeal:

1. That the appeal from that portion of the resolution of
December 9, 1925 which fixes the time for the
submission and adoption of rules and regulations
governing the plebiscite, and also the times for
registration of voters, for the institution and conclusion
of proceedings to review the rulings of the registration
boards, and for the taking of the plebiscitary vote,
having been withdrawn, be and the same is hereby
dismissed of record.
2. That Sections 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the resolution of
December 9, 1925 be and they are hereby construed as
an order of the Commission fixing “the date for the
plebiscite and the time and places of registration and
voting”, subject to the power of the Commission to
change the same as provided in the Opinion and Award,
but not conditioned by or dependent upon any of the
other provisions or recitals contained in said resolution.
Calvin Coolidge
Arbitrator.
By the Arbitrator
Frank B. Kellogg
Secretary of State.
January 15, 1926.”
KELLOGG
88 For text of treaty of Oct. 20, 1883, see Foreign Relations , 1883, p. 731;
for texts of the protocol and supplementary act of July 20, 1922, see ibid.,
1922, vol. I, p. 505.
89 See undated telegram from the president of the Plebiscitary Commission,
Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 428.
90 Ibid. , 305.

723.2515PC/347: Telegram
[Document 150]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
ARICA, January 18, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received January 19—12:35 a.m.]
From Pershing.
1. With reference to my contemplated absence from Arica and
from duty in connection with the Plebiscitary Commission,
Tacna-Arica Arbitration on account of illness and further
reference to Arbitrator’s ruling that no one can be designated as
commissioner ad interim, I hereby tender my resignation as
commissioner in order that an American member may be
appointed in my place.
2. I consider it important that the president of the Commission be
here in the territory or near at hand at all times and therefore
recommend that my resignation be accepted to take effect upon
my departure from Arica and that General Lassiter be appointed
to take effect at the same time.
3. General Lassiter is expected to arrive on the 21st and I shall
leave as soon thereafter as practicable and shall notify you the
exact date when determined.91
VON TRESCKOW
91 General Pershing left Arica Jan. 27, 1926.

723.2515/1872: Telegram
[Document 151]
The Secretary of State to the President of the Plebiscitary
Commission (Lassiter)
WASHINGTON, January 28, 1926.
The following is the Arbitrator’s order:
“In the matter of the arbitration between the Republic of Chile
and the Republic of Peru, with respect to the unfulfilled
provisions of the Treaty of Peace of October 20, 1883, under the
Protocol and Supplementary Act signed at Washington, July 20,
1922.92
Order of the Arbitrator.
Whereas, the Plebiscitary Commission, by Resolution dated
December 16, 1925,93 certified and transmitted to the Arbitrator,
for such consideration as he might deem proper on his own
motion, certain portions of the ‘dissenting opinions and request
for certification on appeal’ dated December 11, 1925 and filed by
the Chilean Member with the Plebiscitary Commission on
December 14, 1925; and
Whereas, the Arbitrator, by his Order of December 22, 1925,
reserved for further consideration the question of entertaining an
appeal with respect to such matters and directed that in relation
thereto the party seeking such appeal should present to the
Arbitrator in writing on or before the 15th day of January 1926 a
statement showing with suitable precision the action or resolution
of the Plebiscitary Commission of which the said party
complains; and

Whereas, the Republic of Chile, on the 15th day of January, 1926,
presented to the Arbitrator in writing a memorandum and
statement relating to the preliminary recitals of the Resolution of
the Plebiscitary Commission adopted on December 9, 1925; and
Whereas, it is the opinion of the Arbitrator that the matters so
referred to, other than those dealt with in the Opinion and
Decision of the Arbitrator made on the 15th day of January 1926,
do not call for further action by the Arbitrator.
Now, therefore, the Arbitrator decides:
That as to those portions of the ‘dissenting opinion and request
for certification on appeal’ transmitted to him for such
consideration as he may deem proper on his own motion, no
appeal is entertained; and orders that in so far as an appeal other
than that disposed of by the Arbitrator’s Opinion and Decision of
January 15, 1926 may be regarded as pending, the same be and is
hereby dismissed. Signed Calvin Coolidge, Arbitrator. By the
Arbitrator Frank B. Kellogg, Secretary of State. January 28,
1926.”
KELLOGG
92 For text of treaty, see Foreign Relations , 1883, p. 731; for texts of
protocol and supplementary act, see ibid., 1922, vol. I, p. 505.
93 For text of resolution, see undated telegram from the president of
Plebiscitary Commission, ibid., 1925, vol. I, p. 428.

723.2515/1886: Telegram
[Document 152]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, February 1, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received February 2—12:01 a.m.]
From Lassiter. At the meeting on January 30 of the Plebiscitary
Commission, Mr. Edwards made five motions for reconsideration and
amendment of six articles of registration code and election regulations.
Peruvian member moved reconsideration and amendment of one article. All
motions were defeated. I am not certain whether appeals will be made
within five days, but if they are, it is very important that their consideration
be expedited and resulting delay in carrying out schedule adopted by
Commission be reduced to minimum.
The new Chilean Foreign Minister, Mr. Mathieu, was here yesterday and
presumably is now fully informed on situation. I had a long conversation
with him and explained, as I have to Edwards, that all my efforts are being
directed toward expediting carrying out of plebiscite, but that at same time I
am keeping careful watch on situation to determine whether conditions
exist to make possible reasonably fair plebiscite. I told Mathieu that much
information is coming to me indicative of constant threat of intimidation
hanging over Peruvians, and that many alleged overt acts of interference
and intimidation are being brought to my attention. I told him that some of
my own American representatives, moreover, are being subjected to a
constant surveillance and are meeting interference while endeavoring to
obtain information for me of what is going on in the plebiscitary area. For
example, Peruvians are prevented from talking freely to them, sometimes
from speaking at all; that there is evidence of an organized campaign by
civilian societies to browbeat Peruvians; and that in my opinion if plebiscite
is to be brought to successful conclusion, it is indispensable that authorities
of province be impressed with necessity for drastic measures to prevent

intimidation or unjust interference, and also to suppress unlawful activities
of civil societies.
 
Mr. Mathieu did not dissent from my point of view; indeed, he gave me to
understand that he agreed with it. Situation is most unstable; and even if we
are able to keep both sides in the contest, task of carrying through
registration and election would involve long and elaborate series of
challenges and appeals, acrimonious discussions, brawls, and possibly
serious disorders.
I feel that I must know in advance how to act if further prosecution of task
appears impossible, either on account of one party’s dropping out, or
because I myself reach conclusion that reasonably fair plebiscite is
impossible; I should be glad to have advice coming from Department’s
broader outlook on procedure to be followed should either eventuality arise.
My relations with both parties seem to be very cordial, and I hope to keep
them that way. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/1896: Telegram
[Document 153]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 3, 1926—noon.
7. For some time I have felt concern over nature of public addresses of
President Leguía and utterances by him which have appeared in the press. I
feel that it is duty of those in power in both Chile and Peru to use their
influence in all ways that are proper to bring about settlement of the
differences existing between the two countries, and that they should set
example to people of those countries by deprecating any warlike or
unaccommodating attitude, when we are endeavoring so hard to carry out a
plebiscite. The holding of a plebiscite is clearly rendered more difficult if
not impossible, if public feeling is deliberately aroused by the leaders of the
two countries. There have been many comments on President Leguía’s
speeches and our dealings with Chile have been rendered more difficult
thereby. I do not wish to exceed my province by saying anything that would
be discourteous to President Leguía, for whom I have the highest regard,
but if opportunity offers you might personally suggest these considerations
if it can be done without offense.
On January 15 the Peruvian Ambassador called on me to give an account of
incidents which took place at Tacna early in January. Mr. Velarde said that
this situation is bringing about a serious condition; the Peruvian population
is much exercised and feeling is so high that popular rising is likely. He
added that Peru desires a plebiscite and is quite determined to carry out
terms of award; that no matter how great their good will the situation may
get entirely out of hand, and Peru would in that event be unable to
participate unless guarantees were given.
In substance, my reply was that General Pershing was fully informed and
had demanded of Chilean Commissioner that the offenders be tried and

punished and that these assaults should cease. In regard to neutralization, I
did not understand what was meant, but that if Mr. Velarde meant that the
United States take over the government of the provinces, that would be
impossible under the Treaty of Ancon, the terms of the submission and the
award; administrative, judicial, and legislative control of the provinces is in
Chile’s hands; and neither the Arbitrator nor this Government has any right
or power to take over that administration. In award it was provided that
Chile and Peru should enact appropriate legislation for apprehension, trial,
and punishment of whoever is guilty of intimidation, bribery, fraud, or other
offense in connection with registration for the plebiscite or with the voting,
or of interference with the Plebiscitary Commission. The limit of action was
to investigate and, after the facts had been verified, to bring these facts to
attention of Chilean authorities and to demand that guilty be punished and
that measures be taken to have these practices stopped. It was impossible to
do more than this.
The Ambassador called attention to Chile’s failure in past to punish those
guilty of crimes, and said that no faith could be placed in Chilean
guarantees, and that some formal guarantees of neutralization were
expected. I asked Mr. Velarde to state specifically what he thought the
United States could do, and again pointed out to him our inability to take
over government of provinces. He reflected a moment; then said that he
supposed that was all that could be done for the present but that he was
bringing matter to my attention so that were events to develop later which
would make holding of plebiscite impossible and thereby render Peru’s
abstention necessary, I would be fully informed on antecedents of the
matter and would know that Peru’s action was correct.
I regard it as important that there should be no misunderstanding in Peru
over powers and duties of the Arbitrator and of the Government of the
United States. Not only does this Government possess no right or power to
intervene with armed forces, but it will not do so. I feel very strongly that
question between Peru and Chile is matter to be settled through plebiscite
by means of ordered procedure and not through use of force by this
Government; and any statements by those in authority which would create
any sentiment whatever to contrary are greatly to be deprecated.

Ketoce

723.2515/1886: Telegram
[Document 154]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 4, 1926—4 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your February 1, 1 p.m.
(1) I hope that appeal will not be taken. In interest of expediting plebiscite
you may be able to dissuade parties from doing so. If appeal should be
taken, however, endeavor to have parties agree to summary disposition,
without hearing, or the submission of written evidence. Arbitrator is not
forced to grant hearings; he would prefer to have parties agree in advance to
submission on cable record. He will, in any event, be ready to dispose of
any and all appeals which may be taken to him.
(2) I am not unmindful of your feeling and that of others that fair plebiscite
may prove impossible. I think that we must assume at this stage of the
proceedings, however, that a plebiscite can be held and should be held, and
cannot be abandoned on record as it now stands or on information we now
possess. I do not think we should now contemplate an abandonment no
matter how difficult and unpromising the conditions may appear. On what
may happen in the future, I think we shall have to reach our decisions in
light of concrete conditions as they arise, after regulations are in force, and
registration and election are attempted. At this stage or under present
conditions, a finding that plebiscite is impossible would raise questions of
fact which could not be finally determined satisfactorily to both parties, and
would only serve to embitter and perpetuate existing controversy, besides
making it possible for one or both of the parties to place blame on the
Arbitrator.
Award contemplates that election might be held which Commission and
Arbitrator might hold invalid on ground that plebiscite vote as announced

had been affected by intimidation, bribery, or fraud to such an extent that
result reached did not represent will of people of Tacna and Arica having
the right to vote; in such event, the Plebiscitary Commission and the
Arbitrator may set election aside and decree new plebiscite within three
months (pp. 46–49 of award). Award contains no provision which looks to
abandonment of the proceedings because in opinion of Plebiscitary
Commission, or of a majority of it, conditions will not permit fair plebiscite,
and will not justify it in holding one. Award looks to holding of a plebiscite
and determination afterwards of question whether proceedings are vitiated
by fraud, intimidation, or bribery to extent that will of people of Tacna and
Arica is defeated.
Only contingency which could justify failure now to hold plebiscite is
encountering of obstacles which would render physically impossible
functioning of the election machinery—should Chilean Government, for
instance, practically exclude activities of Plebiscitary Commission. I give
this as an instance.
I do not think we are justified in abandoning plebiscite on conditions as
now reported in various past investigations. In regard to future, I am clear
that plebiscite should not be abandoned despite adverse circumstances or
any general preliminary opinion at which you may arrive to the effect that
fair plebiscite cannot be held, thus placing you and the Arbitrator in the
position of being obliged to justify an abandonment of the plebiscite on any
disputed issues of fact.
Should the Commissioner either of Chile or Peru be withdrawn by his
respective Government, you have complete authority to appoint another and
to continue with the plebiscite (award, pp. 43, 44). I think that, in spite of
the discouraging conditions, the thing for you to do is to give Chile and
Peru to understand that you are going ahead to hold an election and that if
that election is vitiated by intimidation or fraud or bribery by either party
you will vote to have election set aside, and a new one authorized. It might
happen that the circumstances in which plebiscite was held or frustration of
a proper plebiscite might justify Arbitrator in not ordering a new plebiscite
and in deciding that plebiscite as contemplated by the treaties had been
rendered impossible. If the parties to the plebiscite are given this

understanding I doubt that they will try to jockey you into position of
abandoning present plebiscite when you or Arbitrator might be blamed for
failure. To put it differently, I feel that if Chile and Peru understand that
result of their failure to cooperate and to protect election may result in
having plebiscite set aside (an action which would be in nature of a judicial
decision against country violating the election) they will hesitate.
(3) I am pleased that your relations with both parties are cordial and I hope
they will remain so, for your personal relation at this juncture is supremely
important. I feel that your position will be almost impregnable through
maintaining scrupulously impartial and judicial attitude towards both
parties.
(4) It is probable that the investigations which have been pursued in the past
few months were necessary in order to permit intelligent formation of rules
and regulations. As you know, these investigations and manner of making
them have been subject of bitter criticism by one of parties. I am not
disposed to justify this criticism, but I suggest whether you will not be able
(in addition to keeping generally informed about what is going on) to place
upon the power charged with the administration of the territory the
responsibility of maintaining order and to impress upon it the consequences
of any failure.
KELLOGG

723.2515/1928: Telegram
[Document 155]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, February 10, 1926—11 p.m.
[Received February 13—10:10 a.m.94 ]
From Lassiter.
(1) Department’s February 4, 4 p.m. The Peruvian Commissioner called on
me yesterday and in substance stated that his Government wanted statement
from him on whether conditions here would permit a fair plebiscite; that
Peru would have to spend large amount of money to get its thirty-five
hundred or four thousand voters into the territory; that conditions for
obtaining protection or for establishing conditions consistent with fair
plebiscite looked hopeless; and that there was only brief time remaining
before plebiscite was supposed to begin.
In reply I said that it had been my view that we must push forward, start the
registration, and do all that is possible to carry out the plebiscite. He asked
if it were necessary to sacrifice a number of Peruvians in order to have
evidence on conditions. He then proposed a long postponement to see
whether conditions could be improved and stated, in reply to question from
me, that if postponement were not accorded Peru would probably withdraw
from plebiscite. I said that I could not see what could be gained by a
postponement, for the situation would only become still more embittered,
and I assured him that question he raised was one to which I was giving
deep consideration, but on which I did not yet have an opinion to express,
and that in meantime I was endeavoring to expedite carrying out of the
plebiscite.
(2) I do not think that Señor Freyre will embarrass me by presenting and
pressing motion looking either toward long postponement or toward

abandonment of plebiscite without giving me reasonable notice; but were
he to present such a motion and to press for a vote, I should be in most
difficult position. For that reason it seems essential that I should have
Department’s views at earliest possible moment that is consistent with
adequate consideration and after full consultation with General Pershing.
(3) In telegram of February 4 Department appears to indicate that in
contingency of Peruvian motion to abandon plebiscite on ground that
conditions did not permit fair plebiscite, I should vote against it; and after
appeal had been taken to Arbitrator and rejected and Peruvians had
withdrawn, that I should appoint some one to replace Peruvian
Commissioner and go ahead. Should this happen, subsequent proceedings
would consist chiefly in recording Chilean vote, and from my previous
committal I would then be expected to vote in favor of certifying to
Arbitrator that result be accepted. I could not do this, and, moreover, I do
not believe any acceptable person could be found here who would be
willing, under these conditions, to act as Peruvian Commissioner.
(4) It is quite plain to anyone on ground that under existing conditions what
we would call reasonably fair plebiscite is entirely out of question. This
situation results from fact that one party to controversy is in complete
control of territory; that deepest animosities are intense; that nationalistic
sentiment is deeply stirred; and that local authorities are not only not
making any serious effort to maintain law and order so far as plebiscitary
matters are touched, or matters affecting citizens of the other party in
accordance with treaty obligations, but are instead hand in glove with the
lawless elements in whom reliance is placed to win plebiscite, and who in
turn rely confidently upon these same authorities to protect them from any
punishment for acts of violence and intimidation which they commit. It
follows that that party to the controversy not in control of the territory is
constantly under threat of intimidation, besides having its partisans
constantly subjected to persecution and to interference of various kinds,
many of which are violent in nature.
(5) My deep personal conviction is that these conditions can not be changed
by anyone, and that the sooner we stop proceedings and eliminate
constantly increasing bitterness and the mounting expense of further

prosecution of the plebiscite, the better it will be for the relations between
Chile and Peru, for the suffering Peruvians here, and for our own prestige.
(6) I am aware how bitterly this conclusion will disappoint the Department
and the Arbitrator, and how much they hope that Mr. Mathieu’s advent to
the Chilean Ministry for Foreign Affairs will bring about such an
improvement of conditions as will make possible a fair plebiscite, and I
shall cheerfully subordinate my opinion to Department’s as far as I can
without impairing my usefulness to the Department and the Arbitrator. For
this reason I suggest the following final effort to save plebiscite and to
meet, as far as can be met, the views of the Department.
I appreciate that what I am about to recommend, though less vigorous than
is required, in my own opinion, still does not conform to views expressed in
Department’s telegram of February 4; but I feel that I should be shirking my
duty to the Arbitrator did I not frankly and fully submit my
recommendation together with my reasons for making it.
 
(7) As immediate action is necessary in this case, it is my opinion that I
should 
have 
personal 
and 
informal 
conversation 
with 
Chilean
Commissioner (either Mr. Edwards or his successor) at once, go over entire
situation with him in spirit of frankness and candor, and say to him that
unless an immediate and radical change of conditions in the province is
brought about and maintained, I shall be obliged to present in the
Plebiscitary Commission and to press for immediate passage a resolution
declaring in substance that Chilean authorities in Tacna-Arica have
frustrated the free, fair, and orderly plebiscite which was contemplated by
the award. If the Department approves my proposal it could at same time
communicate in the same sense with Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs. I
repeat that I do not believe that even with best of intentions will Mr.
Mathieu be able to cope with the political situation and to reverse currents
now running; but to give him the opportunity to do so under stimulus of
kindly and wholly confidential communication which I suggest, seems to
me to be the last untried expedient for carrying out plebiscite under the
award. My advisers are in accord with this plan.

In support of my proposal I wish to add the following:
(a) Issue should be faced now rather than later. It was my original view that
we should press ahead to a conclusion or until situation became wholly
impossible, but I see plainly now that that would mean assumption of very
great responsibility without corresponding increase in chances of successful
outcome. Many people in this territory already have suffered greatly from
the efforts to carry out the plebiscite. If it is persisted in under conditions
obtaining at present and the Peruvians do not withdraw, there will be
bloodshed, suffering, and probability of ending in midst of serious
disorders. If Peruvians withdraw for reason that they can not obtain
adequate protection, then plebiscite would be farce and I could not put my
name to it; hence no good purpose is fulfilled by going blindly ahead,
hoping something will turn up, and steadily adding to bitterness between
the two parties, thus risking either a wreck or a justified Peruvian
withdrawal.
(b) In regard to legal difficulty in stopping proceedings now, provided that
conditions are not radically changed, rather than to wait until plebiscite has
been held and then declaring it void, the opinion of my legal advisers is that
Plebiscitary Commission and Arbitrator have the power to decide that Chile
has frustrated the plebiscite without waiting for actual election, and in
support of this view they submit following considerations:
1. There is, it is true, no express term in award providing for
abandonment of proceedings because in opinion of Plebiscitary
Commission or of Arbitrator conditions will not permit fair
plebiscite to be held. Arbitrator could not readily foresee or make
express provision against deliberate failure to maintain order and
to accord Peruvians in plebiscitary territory equal protection of
the law. While the Treaty of Ancon provided for a plebiscite, it
did not expressly require Chile not so to govern the territory as to
frustrate a plebiscite; Arbitrator, however, found no difficulty in
holding that there was implied condition to that effect. Likewise,
when the litigant parties submitted their difficulties to Arbitrator
“without appear” there was implied agreement to abide by his

award and not to frustrate it. The Arbitrator has expressly held
that:95
“The 
determinations 
and 
requirements 
of 
the
Commission taken in the exercise of the full authority
thus conferred by the award constitute conditions of the
plebiscite with the same force and effect as if prescribed
by the Arbitrator directly under the submission, and
these conditions are binding upon both sides. From the
very moment of its organization, the conditions for the
holding of a fair plebiscite in Tacna and Arica became
the primary concern of the Plebiscitary Commission,”
and “The agreement of Chile and Peru that the
Arbitrator should establish the conditions of the
plebiscite carried with it the undertaking to abide by
these conditions, and these conditions prescribed by the
award include, as has been said, the requirements made
by the Plebiscitary Commission [under the] authority
conferred by that [the] award … and if these
circumstances [conditions] are not observed by either
party the responsibility must rest upon the party or
parties to which the failure may be attributed.”
2. The prerequisites resolution, for which there was believed to be
authority, was passed by the Commission in order to give effect to
the implied duty of the party governing the territory to govern it
in such a way as to admit of a fair plebiscite. That resolution has
been only partially complied with and the hoped-for change in
conditions has not been effected. The next logical step is notice
that plebiscite will be abandoned unless conditions are changed,
and actual abandonment if there is failure to respond. Legal
justification for this course rests on same basis as prerequisites
resolution. Contention could hardly be made that Commission is
compelled to proceed to election if one of conditions expressly
prescribed by Arbitrator, e. g., enactment of legislation in aid of
plebiscite, were disregarded by one of parties to it, but there is no
legal or logical difference between disregard of express

conditions and a disregard of implied condition to maintain law
and order in the plebiscitary territory and not to frustrate a fair
plebiscite.
3. Arbitrator has held that Plebiscitary Commission’s complete
control over plebiscite is not limited by enumeration of particular
powers. Reasoning analogously, Arbitrator’s power to enforce
implied condition that award should not be frustrated is not
limited by specific provision for setting aside election tainted by
bribery, intimidation, and fraud.
4. To concede that physical obstruction of Commission would
justify decision that plebiscite could not be held, is fatal to
contention that similar decision could not properly be rendered in
clear case when physical obstruction in question is somewhat
more remote, consisting in such intimidation of voters as to make
obvious in advance the impossibility of holding fair election.
5. To concede that Arbitrator, upon setting aside a particular
plebiscite as void, has power to decide that further plebiscite is
impossible because actual conditions prevent just expression of
will of electors, is to admit, a fortiori, that analogous power exists
before plebiscite. It is submitted that existence of this power
before a plebiscite is supported by plainest implication, whereas
its existence after plebiscite, while it is also implied, is not so
clear, as language of the award, directed specifically to
consequence of a just plebiscite having been thwarted by
improper conditions, provides expressly for only one remedy;
namely, to proceed again to plebiscite within three months.
(Award p. 49.)
6. The law does not compel doing a useless thing, particularly at
cost of blood and treasure.
(c) The party in control of the plebiscitary territory, instead of complying
with the implied condition to abide by award and not to frustrate a fair
plebiscite, has throughout acted and continues daily to act in bad faith and
in flagrant disregard of the award.

(d) After the Tacna outrages of January 6, General Pershing wrote a
personal letter to Edwards requesting prompt, adequate, and public
punishment of guilty. In reply Edwards promised everything in general
terms and the matter was referred, on his motion, to a Special Tribunal
created by Chile under award. This Special Tribunal has now whitewashed
the proceedings with a verdict which admits that Chief of Police had two
hours’ notice of arrival of Peruvians and of probable attacks on them, and
that he had 47 policemen and secret agents at and about station, but finds
that police did their full duty to quell mob (which, according to judge’s
figures, contained at start only about six persons to one policeman); that
police were too busy protecting Peruvians to make arrests, and there is
insufficient evidence to convict anyone. Large part of Special Tribunal’s
opinion is devoted to case against Peruvian General Pizarro which is judged
not proven, apparently on theory that this forbearance offsets failure to
convict members of the mob. So the principal Tacna outrage of January 6 is
to go unpunished, while Edwards maintains in the Commission that
Tribunal’s decision must not even be discussed.
The Tribunal found four workmen guilty of attack on Captain Rotaldi and
his companions on evening of January 6, and sentenced three of them to 4
years’ imprisonment in the south, which means banishment to Santiago. It
remains to be seen whether they ever serve their sentences.
(e) Of minor importance as compared with Tacna affair are other attacks on
Peruvians of daily occurrence. I have just referred to Special Tribunal two
incidents which took place in Arica on February 2, one involving serious
injuries to several Peruvians. At cost of 2 days’ delay the judge returned the
papers because three unimportant documents were not translated into
Spanish. In his Tacna decision he maintains that a 6 days’ delay (caused by
Edwards’ absence) contributed to failure to obtain convictions.
(f) Investigation of alleged deportation of Ramos, a Peruvian, has gone far
enough to convince any reasonable man acquainted with situation here that
Ramos was deported in January to Iquique. One of the Chilean secret
service agents who assisted in the deportation now asserts that Ramos, who
refused to leave, was helped away in order to escape Peruvian persecution.
Ramos, brought here from Iquique under subpoena, denies this statement,

and says he was forced to leave by Chilean agents. It is quite unbelievable
that this sort of thing can go on apart from knowledge and approval of
higher authorities. Our consul at Iquique informs me that at present no
Peruvians are permitted to leave there for the north. This measure is not a
matter of written instructions but is enforced by rigid police surveillance at
the pier.
(g) No decision to abandon plebiscite either before or after an election can
ever be based on anything but “a disputed issue of fact”; and, with due
respect, I submit that we are in much better position to join issue on facts
now than we will be if we are induced to proceed to registration and
election, when, even if we escape disaster and Peruvian reproach, it will be
said that we have condoned everything up to day of election and that we
can not prove sufficient fraud and intimidation were used on election day to
invalidate the result. It will be impossible ever to show adequately the
situation here by record evidence while far greater part of native witnesses
are living in abject terror and foreigners here are under pressure to
safeguard personal and business interests. As far as I know, no American
who has served with Plebiscitary Commission thinks that under present
conditions a fair plebiscite can be held.
(h) I believe that should Department be called upon to consider problem of
Peru’s withdrawal and its justification, it should be borne in mind that up to
the present Peru has been kept in this arbitration, first, by Arbitrator’s
assurances in his ruling and observations of April 9, 1925,96 to effect that
the powers of the Commission as provided in the award are ample to
guarantee full assurances of personal protection to every qualified voter, as
well as the assurance that his vote may be freely cast and that it will be
freely counted, and by fact that the President has chosen a Commissioner
who in his character and personality embodies every guarantee; and,
second, by repeated personal assurances, which I understand have been
given the Peruvians by General Pershing and his advisers, that fair
conditions would be established before proceeding to registration and
election. It was believed that these assurances accorded with views of
Department and of Arbitrator. To tell the Peruvians at this juncture that they
must go through with the election regardless of conditions and trust to
having election held void because of conditions which are perfectly patent

now, instead of telling the Chileans that they must change these conditions,
will, I am firmly convinced, put the American delegation in a humiliating
and an impossible position.
(i) If and when necessity of saying that there can be no plebiscite becomes
unavoidable, I recommend that statement be made in such a way as to cause
minimum of bitterness and of prejudice to our subsequent relations to the
parties to the plebiscite, while at same time we fulfill our judicial duty and
follow out logic of the award. I do not think that any elaborate fixing of
responsibility should be attempted, but that Plebiscitary Commission should
say in effect that as party holding the plebiscitary territory has failed to
establish and maintain conditions which would permit of a fair plebiscite,
the Commission is convinced that reasonably fair plebiscite can not be held,
and reports in this sense to the Arbitrator. If a resolution of that sort by the
Commission were approved by Arbitrator it would effectively dispose of
question of plebiscite and leave way open for further good offices in other
directions in connection with further efforts to arrive at solution.
(j) In meantime everything that American delegation can do to expedite
plebiscite is being done, but exasperating delays continually arise as
agreements between the two litigant parties have to be reached every step of
the way. About 20 of Canal Zone registration officers will arrive soon, and
60 more are to sail on February 12.
(8) I had another interview with Peruvian Commissioner after the above
was drafted, and I pointed out what an unfortunate impression would be
created if they were now to default or were to show intention of prolonging
proceedings unduly; I expressed the opinion that the thing to do now was to
get qualified voters into the plebiscitary territory as quickly as possible and
to push forward all necessary procedures for registration. The
Commissioner said that his Government could see no possibility of
obtaining protection for its nationals; that practically none of guarantees
asked for has been granted; that plebiscite voters in Peru were terrified by
the stories which had been received there on conditions in the provinces,
and that Peruvian Government was very loath to take part in a game where
opposing player held all the cards. I replied that matters having gone as far
as they have, issue should now be joined and conclusion reached, even if it

meant blood, sacrifices, suffering, and much expenditure of money. I said
that I could not commit myself in any way whatever except to say that in
the end I would not certify to the result as acceptable unless I believed the
plebiscite to have been conducted with reasonable fairness, under the
circumstances, to both Chile and Peru. The Commissioner said he would
communicate with his Government. I took this step, I may say, in
connection with part (7) of this telegram, and it does not imply any
modification in further steps that program calls for. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW
94 Telegram in four sections.
95 Quoted passage not paraphrased. For exact text, see the Arbitrators
opinion and decision in telegram to Arica, Jan. 15, p. 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc.
149].
96 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 355.

723.2515/1929a: Telegram
[Document 156]
The Secretary of State to the President of the Plebiscitary
Commission (Lassiter)
WASHINGTON, February 11, 1926—[3 p.m.?]
The following is copy of Arbitrator’s order allowing the recent appeals and
determining the time and manner in which and the record upon which the
appeals shall be submitted:
“In the matter of the arbitration between the Republic of Chile
and the Republic of Peru, with respect to the unfulfilled
provisions of the Treaty of Peace of October 20, 1883, under the
Protocol and Supplementary Act signed at Washington July 20,
1922.
Order Allowing Appeals from Certain Decisions of the
Plebiscitary Commission made on the 30th day of January 1926.
Whereas—
(a) On the 27th day of January 1926 the Plebiscitary
Commission 
adopted 
registration 
and 
election
regulations governing the plebiscite.
(b) On the 30th day of January 1926 the Plebiscitary
Commission rejected a Resolution introduced by the
Chilean Member requesting certain modifications of
Article 5 of said regulations and also rejected a
Resolution introduced by the Chilean Member
repealing Article 159 (renumbered as Article 123) of
said regulations and proposing a new Article in lieu
thereof.

(c) On the 30th day of January 1926 the Plebiscitary
Commission rejected a Resolution introduced by the
Peruvian Member requesting certain modifications of
Article 5 of said regulations.
(d) On the 4th day of February 1926 the Chilean and
Peruvian Members each filed a dissenting opinion and
request for certification on appeal setting forth a dissent
and appeal from the action of the Commission adverse
to their proposals respectively.
(e) On the 8th day of February 1926 the Plebiscitary
Commission certified to the Arbitrator both of said
dissenting opinions, together with the documents
accompanying 
them 
respectively, 
as 
presenting
questions which involve the interpretation of the award
and which are of general importance in respect to the
holding or result of the plebiscite.
Now, therefore it is ordered:
1. That the said appeals be and they are hereby
entertained and allowed.
2. That said appeals shall be determined upon the
documents referred to in Section 2 of the Resolution of
the Plebiscitary Commission certifying the same, to wit:
(a) Articles 5 and 159 (the latter renumbered
as Article 123) of the registration and election
regulations adopted by the Plebiscitary
Commission on January 27, 1926.
(b) The Resolutions introduced by the Chilean
and Peruvian Members on January 30, 1926,
including the preambles thereof respectively.

(c) The Chilean Member’s note No. 128 dated
February 4, 1926.97
(d) The Peruvian Member’s note dated
February 4, 1926.97
and upon such other document or documents as may be
transmitted by cable to the Arbitrator by either or both
of the appellants on or before the 14th day of February
1926 in accordance with the provisions of Section 3 of
the Resolution of the Plebiscitary Commission
certifying said appeals.
3. That until the further order of determination of the
Arbitrator, the Plebiscitary Commission shall proceed
with the performance of its duties under the Opinion
and Award dated March 4, 1925, and that this Order
shall not be construed as suspending its authority.
Calvin Coolidge
Arbitrator.
By the Arbitrator
Frank B. Kellogg
Secretary of State.
February 11, 1926.”
KELLOGG
97 Not printed.
97 Not printed.

723.2515/1934: Telegram
[Document 157]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LIMA, February 15, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received February 16—8:30 p.m.]
9. Department’s No. 7, February 3, noon. I shall seek a favorable
opportunity to convey your views to President Leguía. It is my impression
that his speeches have been much misrepresented. In certain instances I
positively know this to be true; and much of the attention directed to his
utterances has emanated from Chilean sources.
I know that the Peruvian Government has made preparations of a military
nature; at same time reports are constantly being received in Lima of
extensive naval and military preparations being made by Chile, and these
reports naturally tend to aggravate the situation.
While Peru has been pleased by General Pershing’s conduct and also that of
General Lassiter, insofar as there has been opportunity to judge it, and while
Peruvian Government recognizes that under arbitral award the ordinary
government is to remain under Chile’s control, it is recognized also that by
the award and subsequent decisions of Arbitrator on matters which have
arisen under the award, the ordinary government of the provinces does not
extend to the plebiscite either in regard to actual taking of the vote or the
preparation for it. The expectation was that the orders of Plebiscitary
Commission on questions arising in the several phases of the plebiscitary
process would be regarded as entirely distinct from jurisdiction of Chilean
authorities over the ordinary government, and that Commission would
decide these questions and administer the decisions under the power and
authority of the Arbitrator. Submission of plebiscitary questions to decision
and control of the Chilean tribunals and authorities has created feeling of
humiliation in Peru which at times tends to express itself. I believe that

view held here is that under the award there are two contemporaneous
authorities in the provinces entirely independent the one of the other,
namely, the Plebiscitary Commission with authority over plebiscitary affairs
and the Chileans with authority over ordinary governmental affairs; and
considerable resentment is felt when attacks by Chileans upon Peruvians
who are engaged in plebiscitary work are submitted for redress to Chilean
tribunals, and when actual establishment of the so-called guarantees ordered
by the Commission is confided to Chilean officials. The animosity which
Peruvians in the provinces have encountered accentuates this feeling and as
result there is feeling of uncertainty in regard to possibility of carrying out
award under these conditions.
POINDEXTER

723.2515/1935: Telegram
[Document 158]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, February 16, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received 11:20 p.m.]
From Lassiter.
(1) Yesterday the Commission finally voted to promulgate the
registration and election regulations, and they are promulgated as
of that date. There is disagreement about certain instructions on
registration blanks, but it will probably be settled soon. The
greater part of the necessary printing will be begun at La Paz
immediately; and we hope that it will be completed by end of the
month, and that all election paraphernalia will also be on hand.
(2) Mr. Edwards departed yesterday and his legal adviser, Mr.
Samuel Claro, has assumed duties of Chilean Commissioner. I
had a long talk with both gentlemen in which both strongly
protested that conditions are going to be such as to permit a fair
plebiscite.
(3) The Peruvian Commissioner called on me yesterday and
showed me a cable message received from his Government,
substance of which was that it appeared Peru was now being
hurried into the plebiscite with undue rapidity, that suitable
postponement should be granted, and that if it were not granted
then Peruvian Government would have to consider what action to
take. I told Mr. Freyre that I had made careful analysis of
situation and that after a full study of the matter I was prepared to
agree to postponement until March 15. I explained that full month
would thus be given for registration which would certainly be

ample time for preparation and for registration of all personnel.
We went over matter thoroughly and Mr. Freyre said he would
report to Peruvian Government. He intimated his fear that Peru
might withdraw. I am informed that Peru has not been at all active
in making preparations and is not very energetic in pushing
ahead. It must be recognized, however, that conditions make work
uncertain and that no chance should be given for reasonably
asserting that there is undue haste.
(4) I talked with Mr. Edwards on matter of postponement but he
declined to concur and at meeting of the Commission he refrained
from voting on resolution for postponement until March 15; the
motion was carried, however.
(5) The two questions we now face are what action Peru will take
and whether Chilean authorities will really bring about conditions
more favorable to fair plebiscite. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/1936b: Telegram
[Document 159]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 16, 1926—5 p.m.
10. I have come to the conclusion that time has arrived to present directly to
Governments of Chile and Peru the opportunity to adjust Tacna-Arica
controversy outside terms of award. The former president of the
Plebiscitary Commission, General Pershing, the present president, General
Lassiter, and their advisers have stated definitely that in their opinion actual
conditions are such that celebration of a fair plebiscite is impossible. They
place blame squarely upon Chile, and I am convinced that in absence of
some agreement for a settlement along different lines it may become
necessary for Plebiscitary Commission eventually to make finding that fair
plebiscite is impossible or else that plebiscite has failed through fault of
Chile; result would be that this dispute of long standing will remain still
unsettled for indefinite period. General Pershing has reported a very
significant conversation he had with Edwards before leaving Arica. He says
that Edwards stated specifically that Chile was ready to make adjustment on
general basis of neutralization of entire territory. As for Peru I am led to
believe that now for first time that Government may also be ready to
discuss a settlement on this or some other reasonable basis. It becomes my
duty, under these circumstances, to place situation fully before both Chile
and Peru and to ascertain, if that be possible, what, if anything, they are
disposed to do. To that end you will immediately seek a personal and
confidential interview with Minister for Foreign Affairs, explain to him
fully seriousness of situation, and invite expression of his views. Naturally,
Chile and Peru must decide for themselves whether they shall insist on
going ahead under present conditions, with immediate risk to Chile of
having plebiscite abandoned or held void by Plebiscitary Commission on a
finding which will fix responsibility upon her for failure. Should Minister
for Foreign Affairs prove receptive to this suggestion, you will endeavor to

elicit some indication in regard to extent of distance Chilean Government
would be disposed to go in direction of settling at earliest possible moment
some matters in principle. For example, should Chilean Government
express informally willingness to proceed on basis of neutralization, that
expression would mark definite progress and would be point of departure
for future discussion. Details, of course, could be left for later
consideration. You should make it quite plain to him that this Government
has no interest beyond affording to both Chile and Peru every opportunity
to clear up dispute with least possible embarrassment to either.
In order that there may be record made of proposal, you will read to
Minister for Foreign Affairs and will leave with him following
memorandum:98
“I am instructed by the Secretary of State to inquire whether the
Government of Chile would be disposed to avail itself of the good
offices of the United States in an endeavor to arrive at a friendly
adjustment of the existing differences with Peru concerning the
provinces of Tacna and Arica, it being understood that pending
the consideration of any adjustment other than by the celebration
of a plebiscite the authority of the Plebiscitary Commission and
the general arrangement made by it for the holding of a plebiscite
under the terms of the award shall be maintained unimpaired.”
The above, except for the text of the memorandum quoted, is for your
information, and I leave to your discretion how much of the foregoing you
will impart to Minister for Foreign Affairs as well as manner of its
presentation. I think that you should be careful not to give impression that
Chile is going to be given opportunity to shift blame for failure of plebiscite
to this Government, by abandonment of plebiscite in advance of the note.
I am telegraphing today text of memorandum mutatis mutandis, identic with
one quoted above to you, to Ambassador Poindexter. He will have personal
interview with Peruvian Minister for Foreign Affairs and with President
Leguía if possible and will leave text of memorandum with them.
KELLOGG

28 Text of memorandum not paraphrased.

723.2515/1928: Telegram
[Document 160]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 16, 1926—6 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your February 10, 11 p.m.
(1) Department agrees with you and your advisers that although award
contains no express provision for finding and declaring that fair plebiscite
can not be held, power to find and declare is necessarily implied. It was not
possible to provide expressly in award for such a contingency, as Arbitrator
was bound to assume that both parties to the plebiscite would proceed in
good faith and would do all that might be required to carry out both letter
and spirit of the arrangement. The failure of either or of both of the parties,
particularly that of Chile as administrator of the territory, to cooperate in
establishing and maintaining conditions consistent with a fair plebiscite,
manifestly entails abandonment provided such failure to cooperate can be
adequately and convincingly established.
It has never been thought that this proceeding should be pushed relentlessly
to its logical and legal conclusion against a properly supported conviction
that actual celebration of plebiscite would be a vain and useless act,
especially if it appeared with reasonable certainty that there might be
serious disorder and possible bloodshed without any reasonable expectation
of realizing actual settlement of controversy.
(2) From beginning, possibility that situation might develop in such a
manner as to afford opportunity and to enforce duty of making definite
effort to bring about settlement outside terms of award has been kept in
mind. The policy has been to maintain consistently the technical position
under award and to seize opportunity if and when it came.

For the last few weeks I have patiently explored various avenues of
approach to parties involved and I am now in possession of a body of
reliable information concerning their respective attitudes. Taking all
evidence which has been assembled into consideration, together with
recommendations of General Pershing, of yourself, and of your advisers, I
have reached conclusion that time has arrived to make direct representation
to both parties on this subject. I do not feel that this step could have been
taken earlier and I am equally of opinion that it should not be longer
delayed.
(3) Procedure to be followed is exceedingly important. For the moment we
are standing in favorable position which should not be disturbed by any
measure which might tend to alter attitude of the two parties which I am led
to believe may be receptive. For some time Chile has intimated willingness
to entertain suggestions for settlement. Peru has evidently adopted policy of
pushing on toward an ultimate plebiscite, partly through confidence of
winning it on face of returns, partly through the feeling that in any event
developments were providing her at least a moral victory. Two factors have
recently appeared that shake this confidence and that will possibly act to
reverse this policy. The regulation allowing railroad employees to vote and
practical difficulties in way of sending her voters to provinces and in voting
them are, as you have reported, causing Peru to pause and to consider
question of withdrawal from plebiscite. From all information available I am
convinced, for first time, that Peru might welcome opportunity to discuss
matter of adjustment on new lines.
(4) New complications are to be avoided. Chances of adjustment would, in
my opinion, be diminished instead of enhanced through any action by
which Peru might be induced to burn her bridges and to withdraw from
plebiscite. For this reason you should for the present make no commitment
to either party on question of abandonment of plebiscite. Procedure,
outlined in part (7) of your telegram under acknowledgment, of delivering
something in nature of an ultimatum to Chilean Commissioner seems to me
to involve heavy risk which we need not at present assume. Peru should not
be advised either directly or indirectly that you are ready to call off
plebiscite and put blame on Chile, and to my mind there is much danger of
word being conveyed to Peruvian representatives if you talk with Chilean

Commission as you have proposed. I am sure that best interests of all
concerned will be promoted if at this juncture you continue to maintain
correct attitude of withholding judgment and of proceeding with plebiscite
in accordance with terms of award and not permitting any intimation to
escape of what action you will ultimately be disposed to take.
(5) Program which is being pursued and which I outline below for your
information is as follows:
(a) Decision on pending cross appeals will not be rendered until
further notice.
(b) Simultaneously with this message to you I am sending
instructions to Ambassadors Collier and Poindexter to discuss
present situation confidentially and personally with Foreign
Ministers of Chile and Peru respectively, and to leave with them
an identic memorandum.99
(6) Foregoing has approval of both General Pershing and Mr. Hughes.1
KELLOGG
99 See telegram No. 10, Feb. 16, to the Ambassador in Chile, p. 298 [Pg. 298
includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159].
1 Charles Evans Hughes, Secretary of State, March 5, 1921–March 5, 1925;
Mr. Hughes advised and consulted with Secretary Kellogg throughout the
period of the plebiscite.

723.2515/1936a: Telegram
[Document 161]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 16, 1926—6 p.m.
12. I have come to conclusion that time has arrived to present directly to
Governments of Chile and Peru the opportunity to adjust Tacna-Arica
controversy outside terms of the award. I feel I should not be doing my full
duty if I did not exhaust every reasonable expedient for reaching an
amicable adjustment of this long-standing dispute. I have followed every
detail of plebiscite not only with greatest care but with much anxiety. I am
convinced that even if holding of plebiscite be possible, it is highly doubtful
whether by it controversy would ever really be settled and bitterness
between these two countries allayed.
It is unnecessary for me to say to you that General Pershing did everything
within his legal rights to make plebiscite succeed or to emphasize now the
difficulties, for you are familiar with them. As you know, I have hitherto
taken position that the Arbitrator was holding plebiscite under terms of
Treaty of Ancon and of the agreement of submission, and that it was not his
purpose to give either party opportunity to say that he was going outside
award to reach a settlement, thereby abandoning his duty, but it seems to me
that in interests of both Chile and Peru and in interest of harmony and of a
settlement of this question, time has come when I should ask both
Governments if they are willing to accept the good offices of the
Government of the United States.
If you are met with a receptive attitude I should be pleased to receive any
intimations about basis of adjustment which Government of Peru would be
willing to discuss. It has occurred to me that perhaps the neutralization of
the entire territory might prove acceptable as basis for discussion, as this
solution would not result in turning territory in dispute over to either

country. As far as I am concerned, I am willing to suggest to Chile and Peru
either the division of the territory, or neutralization, or any other basis
which gives promise of any possibility of success.
I think that you should make it clear to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
to President Leguía that this step is not a move by Arbitrator to abandon
plebiscite or to shirk any duty resting upon him within his proper legal
powers under both agreement of submission and award.
In view of the above I desire you at earliest possible moment to seek
interview with Minister for Foreign Affairs and President of Peru, discuss
matter with them and leave with them following memorandum:2
“I am instructed by the Secretary of State to inquire whether the
Government of Peru would be disposed to avail itself of the good
offices of the United States in an endeavor to arrive at a friendly
adjustment of the existing differences with Chile concerning the
provinces of Tacna and Arica, it being understood that pending
the consideration of any adjustment other than by the celebration
of a plebiscite the authority of the Plebiscitary Commission and
the general arrangement made by it for the holding of a plebiscite
under the terms of the Award shall be maintained unimpaired.”
Similar instructions are being forwarded to Ambassador Collier who will
leave with Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs identic memorandum,
mutatis mutandis.
It is of great importance that I should have an answer as promptly as
possible, as I do not wish in any way to delay or prejudice the proceedings
of the plebiscite.
KELLOGG
2 Quoted memorandum not paraphrased.

723.2515/1944: Telegram
[Document 162]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, February 18, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 11:40 p.m.]
20. Department’s No. 10, February 16, 5 p.m. Yesterday afternoon I called
on the Minister for Foreign Affairs, read him the memorandum and left it
with him, and impressed him thoroughly with the seriousness of the
situation. Minister was somewhat surprised and keenly regrets conclusion
you have reached, as he accepted his position here hoping to obtain
plebiscite satisfactory to the United States.
Since early in January public opinion has gained impression that
retirements of Pershing and Edwards had produced harmony; and the
insistence of press and of Government that order be maintained was being
reasonably well complied with, although there were many who feared that
new clashes might occur if enough Peruvians should return to the province
to make Chilean element doubtful of success.
Lately the general feeling among Chileans has been that earlier suggestions
of a diplomatic settlement had been abandoned and that a plebiscite would
surely be held; the newspapers, particularly those which belong to Edwards,
have been constantly urging the Chileans in the plebiscitary territory to do
nothing to justify delay and above all to avoid any sort of conduct which
would permit Arbitrator to declare plebiscite impracticable. Confidence
exists generally that Chile will win in honest plebiscite, though
overwhelming majority once predicted is not now expected. The sentiment
which three months ago was strongly in favor of a diplomatic settlement
has changed greatly, and any move now by Chilean Government to accept
settlement except through plebiscite will encounter some bitter opposition.
It is probable, however, that the President, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,

and certain business and political elements who have influence would be
willing to accept and possibly to favor by means of a diplomatic settlement
either the independence of the province with neutralization, or partition, or
cession in return for a proper compensation; but they will need a little time
for sounding out and preparing public opinion and to shape events.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
… It is my personal belief that a diplomatic settlement can be brought about
that will not offend national feeling, but care must be exercised in regard to
manner in which it is presented and to form it takes. I think a delay in
deciding appeals taken about two weeks ago would facilitate diplomatic
settlement.
COLLIER

723.2515/1947: Telegram
[Document 163]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
LIMA, February 18, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received February 20—6:10 p.m.3 ]
10. Your 12, February 16, 6 p.m., slightly garbled in transmission, being
corrected. On yesterday by appointment I accompanied Mr. George Duval,
head of the New York commercial house of Wessel, Duval and Company
having establishments in Peru and Chile and which has been in business on
this coast for 100 years, to see President Leguía on a visit of courtesy. Mr.
Duval and President Leguía exchanged quite an extended friendly and more
or less intimate conversation. President Leguía asked Mr. Duval how he
found business in Peru. Mr. Duval replied that business at this time in Peru
was slack. At this point I stated that Mr. Duval had informed me that he was
of the opinion that business in Peru would be greatly improved if the Tacna-
Arica question were settled. President Leguía seemed quite interested; and
Mr. Duval at some length confirmed my statement, pointing out the
abundance of capital now accumulated in the United States, the increasing
interest in South American trade and the encouraging agricultural riches of
Peru, but that he had found in talking with New York capitalists hesitation
in making investments in Chile or Peru at the present time on account of the
uncertainty as to the stability of government aroused by the bitterness of the
controversy over Tacna and Arica, and Duval stated that if this question
could be settled by some kind of a peaceable compromise a great impetus
would be given to American investment in the two countries. The President
immediately responded that that would not be acceptable; that the Tacna-
Arica question was a matter of sentiment with Peru. He added that as the
Peruvians looked upon the provinces as captive Peruvian provinces and as
Chile had not complied in good faith with the terms of the Treaty of Ancón,
the bitterness of feeling in Peru over the question could be ended only by
the restoration of the provinces to Peru. Duval at this point asked the

President how such a disposition would put a stop to the bitter feeling in
Chile. The President stated that he did not know but that if the provinces
should be restored to Peru good feeling and friendly relations could at once
be reestablished between Peru and Chile insofar as Peru was concerned.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
POINDEXTER
3 Telegram in two sections.

723.2515/1948: Telegram
[Document 164]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, February 19, 1926—midnight.
[Received February 20—9:07 a.m.]
22. The Minister for Foreign Affairs called at the Embassy this evening and
left a memorandum for me of which the following is a translation:
“With reference to the memorandum dated the 17th instant which
the Ambassador of the United States of America has presented to
the Ministry of Foreign Relations for the purpose of inquiring if
the Government of Chile would be disposed to accept the good
offices of the Government of the United States in order to seek a
friendly solution of the difficulties which separate Chile and Peru,
the Government of Chile declares that, in accordance with articles
2, 3 and 6 of the conventions of The Hague for the peaceful
settlement of international disputes,6 it would accept the good
offices which the Government of the United States spontaneously
offers, with the understanding that the proceedings or steps taken
in the exercise of such good offices will not impede, as we [sic]
set forth in the memorandum which Your Excellency was good
enough to deliver to me, the plebiscitary proceedings provided for
in the arbitral award, and that any solution which may be reached
must be submitted to the respective constitutional bodies for their
approval”.
Spanish text will be mailed and should reach you March 15.
COLLIER
6 Foreign Relations , 1907, pt. 2, p. 1181.

723.2515/1952: Telegram
[Document 165]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, February 20, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received February 21—12:25 p.m.7 ]
23. After the Minister for Foreign Affairs had handed me his memorandum
last night, he entered into conversation and made several statements which,
he said, were not at all to be thought as limiting, or qualifying, or even as
interpreting his formal memorandum accepting our good offices. He said
that as I had given him some idea of feeling of American Government on
serious situation growing out of difficulties placed in way of honest
plebiscite, he felt he ought to give me views of Chilean Government, as
well as his own, especially some idea of what he thought to be limit of
concession which the Government could get Chilean Congress to approve.
The Minister said that the tender of good offices came at time when
plebiscitary situation was thought by all Chileans who had exact knowledge
of it to be most favorable to Chile; that Chile had given the irrevocable
guarantees that had been demanded and had reduced her military and police
force in the province to comply with wishes of the Commission, and was at
present time maintaining as reasonable degree of order as it was possible to
expect in human affairs; that Chile’s demand for adoption of electoral law
had at last been complied with; that qualifications for voters had been
determined; and that Chile would win by majority of not less than one or
two thousand. He thought that when the American Government exercises its
good offices, it should take these facts into consideration.
I believe sincerity of Minister’s statement about Chilean confidence. When
Mathieu was in Washington he doubted that Chile would be successful, but
since his visit to Arica he is convinced Chile will win. This confidence is
general but not universal. …

Mr. Mathieu also said that treaty of 1904 between Bolivia and Chile8
created certain obligations for Chile towards Bolivia as well as rights with
reference to port of Arica and Arica-La Paz railroad; and that inasmuch as
large majority of population and practically all business and industry of
Arica were Chilean, the Government believed that Chilean Congress would
not consent to surrendering Department of Arica at this time, but would be
willing to give entire Department of Tacna to Peru. He said that the
Government believed that the most important thing for Chile, however, was
to obtain Bolivian friendship; and that at once after acquiring definite title
to Arica, it would negotiate with Bolivia to give that country a port, but that
compensation would be expected for it, and intimated that commercial
concessions would be satisfactory.
I explained to Mathieu that I had no instructions from you to ask him any
questions and that he must not infer from any I asked either that you wished
the information or that it indicated any idea or plan you were entertaining;
then I inquired if he thought that it would be wise to attempt to adjust the
entire Pacific question now, including Bolivian aspirations. Mathieu replied
that that would complicate matters. He said that your tender of our good
offices spoke only of the difficulties between Peru and Chile, and he
thought that limiting the matter in this way would be better, leaving
Bolivian question for subsequent negotiations between that country and
Chile.
I inquired if Chile were willing to give Bolivia a strip 5 kilometers wide
both sides the railway, Peru in turn to do the same. Mathieu said he thought
it might be arranged that way, but he did not appear to have given the
question very careful study. He said more than once in his conversation that
Chile would accept almost any arrangement which did not take the
Department of Arica away from her.
It is my impression that Chile wants to use Arica for trading purposes, and
earnestly wishes an arrangement with Bolivia; but that she will be apt to
exact a heavy price for it or impose conditions Bolivia will not be disposed
to accept. If question is postponed and is left to direct negotiations, these
will be protracted and may possibly not terminate successfully, an outcome
that would be disturbing to South American harmony and that would create

a new delicate situation. If Peru and Chile can nevertheless be induced to
agree to a partition of the territory, as Mathieu suggested, this arrangement
will be in accord with racial majorities in each of the two departments, and
may save each nation from mortification of complete defeat. That outcome
would be great step forward and we could then afford to leave Bolivian
question to the future, especially if great difficulty be met in getting Chile
entirely agreeable with Bolivia as well as Peru at present time.
I assume that Chile will yield more than Mathieu set forth in his
conversation yesterday with me. It is even possible that Chile might be
persuaded to settle Bolivian question now or even to consent to
independence and neutralization of entire territory as Edwards has
suggested. It is reported that ex-President Alessandri would support this
way of solution if plebiscite cannot be held; but Mathieu foresees certain
difficulties and much opposition in Congress.
If Chile really believes that Plebiscitary Commission is going to declare
plebiscite impracticable, placing responsibility for this result on Chile, she
will naturally yield a great deal, but care must be taken that no formal or
written statement be made to Chile to the effect that Commission is likely to
take action of this sort, if we wish Chile to accept any other proposition that
we may want to make at the time; for it would be interpreted as a threat and,
no matter what the peril Chile would run, the Government probably would
reject any new proposition and would defiantly challenge indictment
Commission would make.
When I presented your memorandum to Mathieu I spoke to him personally
in strong manner about the conditions in the province. He was much
impressed and I believe that my statements influenced Government’s
decision to accept our good offices, but last night he told me that he would
not have dared tell the Government that I had made any such statement
formally, as effect would have been to arouse anger and to cause rejection
of your offer.
Mathieu also yesterday made some reference to the economic
interdependence of Tacna and Arica; he also referred to Chile’s having
erected some public works which served needs of the respective
departments, possibly, in some instances, both departments. He was of

opinion that Chile’s expenditures for these purposes ought to be given
consideration by the President when he exercises his good offices; he also
hinted that Chile might invite consideration of old loans made to Peruvian
governments, and to certain debts, all of them dating, it seems to me, from
period of the War of the Pacific or to efforts made by Chileans to maintain
Peruvian governments in power after Chilean occupation of Lima.
Mathieu did not, however, lay much stress on points in last paragraph. He
again told me yesterday that he was continually meeting with stiff
opposition from within the Cabinet.
COLLIER
7 Telegram in four sections.
8 Foreign Relations , 1905, p. 104.

723.2515/1953: Telegram
[Document 166]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, February 20, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received February 21—12:40 a.m.]
From Lassiter.
(1). Your February 16, 6 p.m. I hope very much that the
Department’s offer of its good offices may prove fruitful. No
action I have so far taken prejudices negotiations proposed.
(2). In meantime it is most important for me to know immediately
what the Department’s policy involves. Is it desired that I should
push ahead actively with the plebiscite? To start registration on
March 15 will require intensive effort by all concerned for every
minute of time from now till then. Great deal depends on
combined work of all three parties. The Department’s
interposition may cause slackening in duties and I do not wish to
press for action unless it is policy of the Department to do so. If
we are really to go on with plebiscite I must take strong stand on
the adoption of measures necessary to render conditions under
which it takes place fair to both parties, such as the facilitating of
entry of Peruvians from both Chile and Peru and protection [in
the] territory, as otherwise we should be committing ourselves to
a farce. On other hand, if I take that stand then friction will
develop. If the Department has reasonable hope of successful
negotiations, I think that it would be better to defer registration,
avoid friction of every kind, and avoid getting registration boards
scattered all over the country. If this opinion meets Department’s
views, I suggest that you inform me officially that action on the
pending appeal will not be taken until about 1st of March.

It is absolutely necessary, however, for me to make decision at once on line
of action to be taken; and I request that I be informed without delay whether
I should do everything possible and reasonable to have registration start on
March 15 or whether a postponement to 1st of April would be more
appropriate. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/1953: Telegram
[Document 167]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 23, 1926—1 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your February 20, 7 p.m. In answer to inquiry made your
paragraph (2), I see no course for you but to push actively ahead with
plebiscite. Pending the negotiations referred to in my memorandum to
Governments of Chile and Peru, the authority of the Plebiscitary
Commission and the general arrangement it has made for the holding of the
plebiscite must be maintained unimpaired. For that reason you should not
defer registration, in my opinion, but should proceed with all dispatch and
in accordance with program. I have received a favorable response from
Chile in reply to my memorandum, but no answer has yet come from Peru,
apparently because presentation of memorandum has been delayed.
The Arbitrator is now prepared to hand down his decision in the cross
appeals. Will a delay of a few days embarrass or delay you in any way? As
printing is going on, I had assumed it would not. Please reply immediately.
KELLOGG

723.2515/1947: Telegram
[Document 168]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 23, 1926—1 p.m.
14. Your number 10, February 18, received somewhat garbled. Failure to
deliver immediately to Minister for Foreign Affairs and to President Leguía
memorandum quoted in my No. 12 of February 16, 6 p.m., is both
disappointing and embarrassing. Delivery was requested at earliest possible
moment. As stated in my memorandum arrangements for holding a
plebiscite are to be maintained unimpaired during the negotiations
suggested, and of course General Lassiter will continue actively to proceed
with his program without regard to the negotiations. Registration and other
plebiscitary activities will not be postponed on this account.
Your telegram contains certain suggestions which are very disquieting, as
they indicate misconceptions which I had supposed were no longer
possible. The first is that the Plebiscitary Commission has concurrent
jurisdiction with Chilean authorities in the government of Tacna and Arica;
this is absolutely erroneous. The Treaty of Ancon and the award give the
Commission no administrative control whatever over the provinces.
Administrative control remains in Chile, and on Chile rests exclusive
responsibility for all measures having to do with policing the territory,
maintenance of order, protection of Plebiscitary Commission, and
establishment of local conditions for executing the plebiscitary regulations.
All that the Plebiscitary Commission can do is to demand that Chile take
action necessary to these ends.
 
In the second place, I had thought it had already been made quite clear in
my communications and in my conversations with Ambassador Velarde,

which were cabled to you, that the Government of the United States not
only has no authority to bring pressure by force directly or indirectly upon
either Chile or Peru but also does not entertain the slightest intention of
doing so. The Plebiscitary Commission can not be supported and will not be
supported by any form of forcible intervention from the United States.
Under no circumstances would the leverage of a naval visit or other
manifestation of force be contemplated.
In the third place, in the event of a settlement this Government will not join
in guarantees of any kind, political or economic.
I had hoped to have Peru’s reply before now. If you have not already
presented memorandum, please do so at once, and cable reply at earliest
possible moment.
KELLOGG

723.2515/1966: Telegram
[Document 169]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, February 24, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received February 25—4 p.m.]
From Lassiter.
(1) There is increasing evidence since I cabled you yesterday8a
that the Peruvians will assert they are not ready to begin
registration on March 15. I am doing all I can to remove
obstructions, and I am sure that necessary mechanism for
registration can be ready, but if Peruvians [omission in text] or
that their voters in Chile are prevented from returning to
provinces they will demand postponement.
(2) In regard to Peruvians who are now in Chile, I am sending an
officer to Iquique to advertise his presence as a representative of
the Plebiscitary Commission to receive the statements of those
who assert right to return. The Chilean Commissioner agrees fully
with this action, and says that instructions will be given the
Chilean authorities to facilitate return, though outcome is, of
course, more or less doubtful. Would it be possible for American
Consuls at Antofagasta, Valparaiso, and Santiago to announce in
like manner that they will receive statements from applicants who
desire to return to plebiscitary territory? If you think plan feasible
and will inform me at once and will give the Consuls notice, I
will ask the Chilean Commissioner to make arrangements with
his Government. If done at all, it must be without delay. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

8a Telegram not printed.

723.2515/1967a: Telegram
[Document 170]
The Secretary of State to the President of the Plebiscitary
Commission (Lassiter)
WASHINGTON, February 25, 1926.
The following is the decision of the Arbitrator upon the appeals made on
January 30:
“In the matter of the arbitration between the Republic of Chile
and the Republic of Peru, with respect to the unfulfilled
provisions of the Treaty of Peace of October 20, 1883, under the
Protocol and Supplementary Act signed at Washington July 20,
1922.
Decision of the Arbitrator upon the Appeals from Certain
Decisions of the Plebiscitary Commission made on the 30th day
of January, 1926.
1. On the 11th day of February, 1926, the Arbitrator made an
Order allowing appeals from certain decisions of the Plebiscitary
Commission made on the 30th day of January, 1926, and
determining the time and manner in which, and the record upon
which, the said appeals should be submitted. These appeals which
were taken both by Chile and by Peru challenged the
interpretation and application by the Plebiscitary Commission of
that provision of the Award which declares that ‘no person shall
acquire a vote through residence in said territory … if during any
part of such required period of residence he … has been a
government official or civil employee in the political, judicial or
fiscal service of either country, or has received compensation as
such’. The interpretation and application of this provision was
embodied in Article 5 of the registration and election regulations

adopted by the Plebiscitary Commission on January 27, 1926,
which reads as follows:
‘ARTICLE FIVE
Scope of the phrase “Government, official or civil employee in
the political, judicial or fiscal service” of Chile or Peru.
(A)The several registration and election boards will treat the
following government officials or civil employees as falling
within the scope of the phrase quoted at the beginning of the
present article, to wit:
1. The Presidents, Vice Presidents, Ministers, cabinet officers and
other executive officials of the two republics. 2. The Chilean
intendent [e]s. 3. The Chilean Governors. 4. The Chilean
subdelegates. 5. The Peruvian prefects and subprefects. 6. The
maritime governors. 7. The captains of ports. 8. District
inspectors. 9. The judges and the members of all courts. 10. The
fiscals. 11. Recording officers charged with the keeping of court
records and registers of all kinds; of the public record of births,
baptisms, deaths, marriages, incorporations, partnerships and
other like statistics and facts; and of records relating to the title to,
and liens on real estate. 12. Notaries public. 13. Public
prosecutors and lawyers whose public duty it is to prosecute or
defend civil or criminal actions in the courts or to give legal
advice; and persons serving permanently or for fixed periods of
time as receivers or trustees of estates or interests in litigation and
under the control or supervision of the courts; excluding,
however, lawyers who are voluntarily retained in each cause and
who serve private interests for compensation paid by the latter.
14. Officials and employees of the customs, the internal revenue
and the tax collecting services. 15. Officials and employees of the
treasury and of the financial departments of the two governments.
16. Officials and employees of the quarantine, the hygiene, and
the public health services. 17. Civilian (or other) officials or
employees who, as a regular duty or employment act, as surgeons,
physicians or dentists to the army and the navy and the military

and naval services; also surgical and medical officials and
employees on duty at the army and navy hospitals. 18. Civilian
(or other) officials, artificers and employees on duty at the
arsenals, public docks, public factories and repair shops engaged
in constructing, providing, maintaining or storing arms or
ammunition or both for the army and navy, or ships for use by the
army, the navy, the lighthouse service, the customs, the internal
revenue, the quarantine or other similar services. 19. Civilian (or
other) navigating and executive officers on public ships, other
than those engaged in a purely commercial service. 20. Mayors
and other executive officials of the cities and municipal
corporations of either nation or of any other political subdivisions
of the Chilean or Peruvian Governments. 21. Legislators and
aldermen. 22. Officials, superintendents and teachers in the public
schools. 23. Officials, superintendents and inspectors of the
public markets. 24. Secretaries, stenographers, clerks, assistants,
and employees of every nature and find who cooperate or
collaborate or assist in the work entrusted to the officials,
superintendents, or others mentioned above. 25. Officials and
employees whose duty falls within the scope of the present
paragraph or includes some of the duties of the army, navy,
carbineers, secret or other police, the secret service or the
gendarmerie, even though such duty falls also within the scope of
paragraph (B) of this article.
(B) The several registration and election boards will treat the
following government officials or civil employees (provided they
do not discharge, in part, the duties of the government officials or
civil employees mentioned in the preceding paragraph) as not
included within the scope of the phrase quoted at the beginning of
the present article, to wit:
1. Officials and employees of the Arica La Paz Railway. 2.
Officials and employees of enterprises of a private nature, despite
their receiving subsidies from the public treasury. 3. Secretaries,
stenographers, clerks, assistants, and employees of every nature
and kind, who cooperate or collaborate or assist in the work

entrusted to the officials, superintendents, or others, previously in
the paragraph mentioned.
(C) The several registration and election boards will treat all
government officials and civil employees whose status is not
fixed by the two preceding paragraphs of the present article as
being within the scope of the phrase quoted at the beginning of
the present article. The true status of such officials and employees
will be determined as promptly as practicable by the appeals
board, in the event of appeals being taken.’
2. Chile appealed from the finding and decision of the
Plebiscitary Commission with respect to the classes of
government officials and civil employees enumerated in items
numbered 11, 12, 13, 16, 20, 21, 22 and 23 of paragraph A of said
Article 5; and also from the refusal of the Plebiscitary
Commission to include officials and employees of the telegraph
and postal service among the classes enumerated in paragraph B
of said Article 5. Chile further appealed from the refusal of the
Plebiscitary Commission to reconsider and modify Article 159
(subsequently renumbered as Article 123) of the regulations, but
on February 13, 1926 withdrew the appeal as to that Article.
3. Peru appealed from the finding and decision of the Plebiscitary
Commission with respect to the classes enumerated in items 1, 2
and 3 of paragraph B of said Article 5.
(4) The Arbitrator has received and duly considered all of the
documents referred to in the Resolution of the Plebiscitary
Commission certifying the said appeals and also such other
documents as have been transmitted to him pursuant to the Order
of February 11, 1926.
Now, therefore, the Arbitrator decides:
1. That the appeal of Chile in so far as it concerns said
Article 159 (renumbered as Article 123), having been
withdrawn, be and it is hereby dismissed of record.

2. That the finding and decision of the Plebiscitary
Commission as to all other matters involved in the
pending appeal by Chile, that is to say with respect to
the classes of government officials and civil employees
enumerated in items numbered 11, 12, 13, 16, 20, 21,
22 and 23 of paragraph A and with respect to the
officials and employees of the telegraph and postal
service which the Plebiscitary Commission refused to
include among the classes enumerated in paragraph B
of said Article 5 of the registration and election
regulations adopted on January 27, 1926, be and the
same are hereby affirmed.
3. That the finding and decision of the Plebiscitary
Commission as to all matters involved in the appeal by
Peru, that is to say with respect to the classes of
government officials and civil employees enumerated in
items 1, 2 and 3 of paragraph B of said Article 5 of the
regulations be and the same are hereby affirmed.
CALVIN COOLIDGE,
Arbitrator.
By the Arbitrator
Frank B. Kellogg
Secretary of State.
February 25, 1926.”
KELLOGG

723.2515/1971: Telegram
[Document 171]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, February 25, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received February 26—3:28 p.m.]
From Lassiter.
(1) On being notified of the Department’s offer of its good offices
to Governments of Chile and Peru, I assumed that Department
saw reasonable chance of escape by that route from this
impossible situation. I at once asked what attitude to take here to
further your negotiations, as you desired me to press ahead with
the preparations for registration. I have done so, but the days go
by; I hear nothing further from you, and in meantime we are
becoming more and more committed to a dangerous situation.
Conditions are no more favorable here to a fair plebiscite than
they have been … Edwards told me frankly that between
frustrated plebiscite and plebiscite in which Chile would be
declared loser, she preferred the former alternative.
(2) My definite opinion was that we should stop proceedings
before becoming further committed; but the Department has
insisted on our going ahead, and we have drifted into a position
where we are about to commit ourselves definitely by
proclaiming commencement of registrations on March 15. What,
exactly, will happen cannot be foreseen fully; … If break has to
come, Chileans will retain their grip on affairs, and may be in
position to assert that, as precedent conditions had been accepted
and plebiscite had been commenced, there was no adequate proof
that conditions had materially changed.

(3) My recent cables have been for purpose of informing
Department of local situation, as I thought information might
affect your negotiations. I see no evidence that either Peruvian or
Chilean Commissioner is aware of those negotiations. Purpose of
present cable is to furnish Arbitrator and Department with my
estimate of general situation confronting me.
(4) My recommendations are as follows:
(a) If Peru has accepted Department’s good offices,
cable me at once to suspend further proceedings here
and to withdraw American personnel as quickly as
conditions permit.
(b) If Peru has not replied to Department’s offer, or has
replied in negative, ask her reasons for declining. If her
reason is simply that she prefers plebiscite, we are then
warranted in going ahead. If her reply is that she prefers
plebiscite but insists that conditions be made such as to
give reasonable promise of fair one, then cable me to
suspend operations and have a vote of the Plebiscitary
Commission. I would then introduce resolution stating
that conditions were not such as to warrant expectation
of fair plebiscite, and that there were no indications that
the necessary conditions would be established, and
asking instructions from Arbitrator.
(5) May I have an immediate preliminary reply on the above
recommendations? I have assumed that avoidance of delay and
strong stand on pressing forward with work here would favor
your negotiations, but if that is not so, then I should like to know
as soon as possible for what policy to prepare myself. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/1966: Telegram
[Document 172]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 26, 1926—11 a.m.
For Lassiter. Your February 24, 6 p.m.
(1) Question of further postponement of registration must be decided by
Plebiscitary Commission in light of conditions appearing at time issue
arises. It seems to me that you are maintaining the safe and correct attitude
by assuming that present program can and will be carried out, and by taking
care that responsibility for any deviation from program must be shouldered
by one or both of the parties themselves.
Yesterday I received an unfavorable response from Peru9 to my suggestion
for settlement through good offices of this Government, but it is still
possible that I may receive further word from Peru on matter in next one or
two days, when I shall advise you. It did not appear wise to withhold
decision on cross appeals from the regulations, and decision went forward
last night.
(2) I regret that consular officers of this Government can not be authorized
to act for Plebiscitary Commission. The official organization of this
Government should not in any way be drawn into participation in the
plebiscitary functions, as this procedure would only afford additional
pretext for trying to make United States accept responsibility for carrying
out plebiscite and for enforcing decisions of the Commission. I suggest for
your serious consideration, moreover, question whether Commission itself
has jurisdiction to operate in this way outside plebiscitary area.
KELLOGG

2 Telegram not printed.

723.2515/1972: Telegram
[Document 173]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, February 26, 1926—11 p.m.
[Received February 27—9:15 a.m.]
16. Received the following at 8:10 this evening from the President in
writing:
“Memorandum by the President of Peru. The Government of Peru
is thankful to the Government of the United States for the new
offer of its good offices in an endeavor to arrive at a friendly
adjustment with Chile, concerning the Provinces of Tacna and
Arica, but cannot help thinking that no safer means of
accomplishing such a purpose could, at the present time, be found
than by faithfully carrying out the plebiscite under the guarantees
provided for in the award, and which, although not yet accorded
to it, the American Plebiscitary Commission has repeatedly asked
for from Chile.
The Government of Peru would, however, be pleased to attempt
any adjustment other than by the celebration of a plebiscite,
provided that the United States be party to it and as such sign the
agreement that might be arrived at, as otherwise the Government
of Peru feel positive, from past and present experience, that Chile
would not comply with its terms and would find a way of causing
war, once more, with Peru. Lima, 26th February, 1926.”
POINDEXTER

723.2515/1971: Telegram
[Document 174]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 27, 1926—5 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your telegram February 25, 6 p.m., received late yesterday
afternoon. This morning I have received final reply from Peru reading as
follows: [Here follows the text of the memorandum quoted in telegram No.
16, February 26, from the Ambassador in Peru, supra.]
Mr. Velarde, Peruvian Ambassador, called yesterday afternoon. Apparently
he had no knowledge of tender of good offices by us, and had called to say
that ship with about 230 Peruvians had sailed from Callao for Arica, that
another ship with some 300 Peruvian candidates for registration was about
to embark, and that these two ships would be followed by others.
Mr. Velarde also said that, as Chile had not put into effect all prerequisite
resolutions voted by Plebiscitary Commission and as plebiscitary
atmosphere which the Commission desired had not yet been established, the
Peruvians would have no guarantees for their personal safety except those
which might be furnished by the Commission. Accordingly, he requested on
behalf of the Government of Peru that I recommend that such measures be
taken as you could take for protection of these Peruvians. I told Mr. Velarde
that I would inform you of what he had said, and that I was sure you would
do all you could in regard to the matter.
It is evident now that both parties to this controversy intend to maintain
their respective technical positions intact by going on with all formalities
for celebrating plebiscite. I think that it is also reasonably clear that neither
party has faith in the plebiscite as solution of the problem but neither one
will take the responsibility for calling it off by withdrawal or otherwise.
Both are determined to fasten responsibility for failure of plebiscite upon

the United States. They have no right to do so, and it should not be
permitted. I am not yet able to reconcile myself to idea of playing into their
hands by making an advance finding, based on disputable issues of fact, to
effect that reasonably fair plebiscite is absolutely impossible. Outcome of
this proceeding will be either decision by plebiscite that can be sustained or
clear conclusion that plebiscite has been frustrated by Chile. It is difficult to
see how case for frustration can be deemed complete and closed until
attempt, at least, to carry through registration phase has been made.
In the second of your recommendations where you refer to Peru’s rejection
of tender of good offices, you say that if the reason is simply that she
prefers plebiscite, we are then warranted in going ahead. That is what has
happened. Peru has rejected offer, has indicated that she prefers plebiscite,
and is actually sending into the territory her candidates for registration. She
is not saying anything more about withdrawing.
With both parties insisting on the plebiscite, we have no choice in matter,
and dominant consideration from now on must be to conduct proceedings
with all care to protect Arbitrator and ultimately to place blame for failure
where it belongs. I can see no way clear to accomplish this aim save by
taking both parties at their word and by going on with plebiscite, which
they have said they want, until Plebiscitary Commission is in fact blocked
by either or both of them. If at this juncture the Commission should take
initiative in calling off plebiscite in face of avowed desire of both
contestants to carry on, Commission’s action would plainly provide them
with opportunity they are looking for to put responsibility for failure upon
Commission and the Arbitrator. As matters now stand, Peru has assumed
responsibility of rejecting tender of good offices made to her while Chile
accepted tender; and if, eventually, Chile frustrates a fair plebiscite, we have
only to lay facts before world opinion.
 
We can no longer run risk of being blamed for any disorders that may take
place. Plebiscitary Commission and Arbitrator are not in position of having
pushed proceedings relentlessly toward such crisis. Chile and Peru
themselves are doing this. Peru has been given her chance to avoid
disastrous complications of this character and has rejected it, deliberately

choosing to go ahead, her eyes open to the danger. If trouble should follow,
the responsibility for it cannot fail to rest upon Peru and Chile.
KELLOGG

723.2515/1972: Telegram
[Document 175]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
WASHINGTON, March 2, 1926—2 p.m.
18. Please deliver at once to the President and the Minister of Foreign
Affairs the following memorandum.
“I am instructed by the Secretary of State to acknowledge the
receipt of the memorandum by the President of Peru10 which the
Secretary of State understands to be a rejection by the
Government of Peru at this juncture of the offer of good offices
by the United States for the friendly adjustment outside the terms
of the award of the existing differences between Peru and Chile
concerning the provinces of Tacna and Arica and to indicate that
the Government of Peru prefers the solution by plebiscite under
the conditions provided in the award. The Secretary of State feels
certain that the Government of Peru fully appreciates that this
offer was made by him in the sincere belief that the renewed
effort to adjust the differences in this way would serve the
interests of both countries and furnish a reasonable opportunity
for the restoration of amicable relations between them.
The Secretary deeply regrets the inability of the Government of
Peru to avail itself of such tender of good offices at this time. I am
further instructed by the Secretary of State to say that the
suggestion 
contained 
in 
the 
second 
paragraph 
of 
the
memorandum by the President of Peru is not acceptable to the
United States. The Secretary of State authorizes me to say that if
the Government of Peru should later take a different view and
desire to avail itself of the good offices of the United States, the
offer may be regarded as open for considereration.”

You may state orally to the President and the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
that Chile had accepted the tender.
KELLOGG
10 See telegram No. 16, Feb. 26, from the Ambassador in Peru, p. 317 [Pg.
317 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174].

723.2515/1974: Telegram
[Document 176]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
LIMA, March 2, 1926—9 p.m.
[Received March 3—10:37 a.m.]
18. I have just [seen] the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the President and
delivered to each of them your memorandum11 in writing. Shortly before
this I had received a message from the President requesting me to call at the
palace, which I did. The President handed me a copy of a letter just received
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs from the Minister of Peru in
Montevideo, in which the Peruvian Minister confirmed his telegram in
which he explained the circumstances of the visit of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Argentina to Montevideo and stated that at that time Mr.
Gallardo proposed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay that the
President of Uruguay should offer his mediation in the question of Tacna
and Arica and proposed certain conditions for the division of the provinces.
The President of Peru apparently looked upon this alleged offer of the
Argentine Minister, which was refused by the Uruguayan Government, as
having been prompted by Chile. The President then referred to your
memorandum offering the good offices of the United States and his reply
thereto. He stated that he had been giving the matter considerable thought
and that he had great reluctance in rejecting any proposition by the United
States and reiterated his willingness to accept any settlement which might
be made by the United States, provided the United States would be a party
to the agreement; and he suggested that if the United States did not desire to
become a party to such an agreement that the United States enter into an
alliance with Peru and cited the case of Great Britain and Portugal as an
example of such an arrangement, or that in some such way the effect of a
guarantee of the United States be indirectly accomplished. I stated to the
President that you had been very explicit in the rejection of anything of this

character and that I was thoroughly satisfied that it could not be considered
but at his request would cable to you what he had said. …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
POINDEXTER
11 See telegram No. 18, Mar. 2, 2 p.m., to the Ambassador in Peru, supra.

723.2515/1974: Telegram
[Document 177]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru
(Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 4, 1926—3 p.m.
21. Department does not understand that your conversation with Minister
for Foreign Affairs and President Leguía which you report in your No. 18,
March 2, 9 p.m., makes any change in situation. If you think it important or
necessary in order to eliminate any possible misunderstanding, you may
explain to President and to Minister for Foreign Affairs that it is the
Secretary’s view that an acceptance of our tender of good offices with a
condition annexed cannot be accepted by the United States, that it is
equivalent to rejection of offer as made … He wholly approves position you
took in your recent conversation. It is clear that the United States cannot
undertake to guarantee any settlement, and that all speculation over ways to
accomplish that aim indirectly is futile.
At same time, I am sure you appreciate importance of leaving no doubt in
minds of President and Minister for Foreign Affairs that tender of good
offices stands, and that the Secretary will receive any later indication of its
acceptance by Peru in spirit and on terms in which offer has been made.
GREW

723.2515/1994: Telegram
[Document 178]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
ARICA, March 9, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received March 10—9:10 a.m.12 ]
From Lassiter. At meeting of Plebiscitary Commission yesterday afternoon,
Peruvian Commissioner read long statement setting forth Chilean
delinquencies, and concluded by offering resolution to postpone
commencement of registration and all other acts connected with plebiscite
election until conditions in plebiscitary territory were satisfactorily
reformed.
 
Just before the meeting of the Commission, Mr. Freyre came to me to say
that he was going to submit resolution calling for what he termed indefinite
postponement; and that if resolution were voted down, he had instructions
from his Government to withdraw. His action is based on the conditions
which culminated on March 5 in Tacna when procession of Peruvians
which included members of Peruvian plebiscitary delegation was stoned.
Freyre said that these men telegraphed their Government stating that
conditions were intolerable and recommending that Peru go no further with
the plebiscite.
Chilean Commissioner said he wanted time to communicate with his
Government. Accordingly, the vote on the resolution is delayed a couple of
days, but with things as they are here it is indispensable that decision be
reached promptly.
Conditions are not now compatible with fair plebiscite and responsibility
rests with Chile. Merely to postpone plebiscitary operations would be

useless. There are only two possible courses: (1) State candidly that
conditions are incompatible with fair plebiscite, but continue with
registration in hope that they may be improved; (2) terminate plebiscitary
operations now and fix responsibility on Chile, where it belongs.
I am convinced that it is quite useless to proceed to registration in hope of
amendment of conditions unless Department moves energetically to support
such course by advising Chile that failure immediately to establish and
maintain plebiscitary conditions which are satisfactory to the Commission
will result in termination of plebiscitary operations with responsibility
definitely fixed on her. …
After hearing from Department I intend to write to Freyre advising him of
the two courses outlined above, except insofar as plan suggested involves
action by the Department; and then to offer as substitute resolution one or
other of the two courses suggested, whichever he may choose, unless he
himself offers such a substitute . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lassiter
VON TRESCKOW
12 Telegram in two sections.

723.2515/2003: Telegram
[Document 179]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, March 10, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received 11:05 p.m.]
30. Cruchaga was unanimously confirmed as Ambassador today.13 This is
supposed to assure a representative in Washington heartily in sympathy
with present Government’s determination to secure a fair plebiscite.
[Paraphrase.] Mathieu called me to his office today and said that he was
much disturbed by reports from Arica that Mr. Freyre, the Peruvian
delegate, had asked for, or will ask for an indefinite postponement of
proceedings until atmosphere more favorable to Peru exists. Mathieu feels
that this request is equivalent to demand by Peru that the plebiscite be
postponed until Peru is sure that she can win. In his opinion the Peruvians
are in the minority, so that Peru has all the time been seeking to avoid the
plebiscite instead of participating in it. He said that the feeling among the
Chilean populace over the protracted delay that has taken place is such that
it will be nearly humanly impossible to prevent an outbreak. It is difficult at
best, he said, to prevent one, bearing in mind antipathy of resident Chilean
white population to submit to a Peruvian sovereignty which would be won
by a large block of radicals containing a large colored element.
Naturally I am not as conversant with situation as Lassiter is; but it is my
personal opinion, which of course I have not revealed to Government here,
that if Peru’s request for a postponement be denied, the Peruvian
Government may be inclined in that event to accept new tender of good
offices.
Government of Chile feels that to compel departure of persons from
province who are not now holding any official position simply for the
reason that they are acquainted with the voters and have influence over
them, is wholly improper and is a denial of right Chile has to present her

case through any lawful agency; and that consistency would require that a
large number of persons who are campaigning for Peru be expelled. There
has been tension here during the last few days.
If ever the time comes when we have to discontinue the plebiscite, alleging
that blame for doing so rests on Chile, I hope that we can put it on ground
of her inability to control the people of the plebiscitary territory rather than
to charge a breach of faith against the Chilean Government; and I hope
likewise that reasons given in resolution for discontinuance will not be such
as to cause those unfriendly to us throughout Latin America to start a
concerted campaign against us and to make invidious allusions to electoral
practices in our southern States by which the negroes are deprived of their
constitutional rights of suffrage. There have already been insinuations of an
unpleasant nature to that effect.
I continue to impress upon Chilean Government necessity for fairness as
well as of order. [End paraphrase.]
COLLIER
13 Miguel Cruchaga Tocornal, Chilean Ambassador at Washington.

723.2515/1994: Telegram
[Document 180]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von
Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 10, 1926—6 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your March 9, 11 a.m. Peruvian Commissioner’s resolution
together with his informal statement to you that his Government has
instructed him to withdraw should resolution be voted down, presents no
new question and is important chiefly as indicating evident disposition on
part of Peru to precipitate issue at this time.
Department does not understand that general conditions bearing upon
possibility of ultimately celebrating fair plebiscite have materially changed
during past few weeks. Incidents such as those of March 5 at Tacna are
cumulative but, as far as we can form opinion from reports, are not
sufficiently conclusive to justify sudden reversal of existing policy. It seems
that Peru is taking incident of March 5 as pretext for action she has
contemplated for some time. In an interview here on March 8 with
Ambassador Velarde he gave no intimation of withdrawal or even of desire
for postponement, but on contrary he discusses ways for future avoidance
of such trouble as occurred on March 5.
Second alternative stated in your telegram, to terminate plebiscitary
operations at once and to place responsibility on Chile, involves, as has
been previously explained, a premature finding of fact which would draw
Commission into controversial attitude toward one of parties to the
plebiscite, both dangerous and unnecessary at this stage. Department does
not think that Commission should allow itself to be forced into such a
position. Your other alternative is also seemingly open to same objection, as
it calls for a finding that present conditions are incompatible with holding
of a plebiscite and provides for continuing proceedings only in hope that

conditions may improve. In many ways this course would be worse than
calling off plebiscite at once, as it would amount to official notice that
strong presumption for that cause existed in minds of the Commissioners
and as result entire plebiscitary process would henceforth be virtually
condemned in advance to failure.
Precise problem presented is to find way to carry on until time arrives for
determining finally question whether fair plebiscite can in fact be held. As
Department intimated in its telegram February 27, 5 p.m., Commission can
not safely make this decision until registration stage has been entered and
perhaps concluded. Any other course appears, in Department’s view, bound
to impose upon Plebiscitary Commission and Arbitrator responsibility far
greater than they ought to take, as well as to diminish chances of placing
blame where it belongs. Department is strongly of opinion that Peruvian
resolution for indefinite postponement should not, at this juncture, be
considered and if pressed to a vote it should be rejected on ground that issue
is prematurely raised. On record as it stands, this question of existence of
conditions or of a so-called plebiscitary atmosphere favorable to fair vote is
one which has been before the Commission for months and various
attempts have been made to force hand of Commission in regard to it.
Department does not see how the record justifies decision practically
calling off plebiscite today any more than it did two months ago.
Department does not think it wise to engage in written communications
with Peruvian Commissioner, as you suggest. Department thinks that it is
highly advisable, however, for you to have informal conversations with
both Freyre and the Chilean member of the Commission for purpose of
making clear to them that your mind is open on possibility of abandoning
plebiscite or of postponing it indefinitely; that you will consider that
question later, if necessary; and that if pending resolution comes to vote you
will either vote against it or will vote for its postponement, placing your
reason for such action upon the record. This action on your part, in
Department’s view, makes it very difficult for Peru to carry out her threat of
withdrawal.
Doubtless you have already observed that Freyre’s resolution is drawn so as
to leave Peru in position to contend that she has reserved her right to a

plebiscite under the treaty. She is asking now only indefinite postponement,
and question of abandoning plebiscite would still be before Plebiscitary
Commission even if resolution were passed. Resolution is accordingly
another attempt to get rid of plebiscite without taking blame for it, and to
maintain at same time Peru’s technical position that she wants plebiscite.
Department is convinced more than ever that Commission cannot afford to
do otherwise than to continue with plebiscitary arrangements until point is
reached where responsibility for change can be allocated definitely and
conclusively to either Chile or to Peru, or to both.
GREW

723.2515/2005: Telegram
[Document 181]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, March 11, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received 7:45 p.m.]
From Lassiter. Acting Secretary’s telegram, March 10, 6 p.m.
(1) Essence of Department’s stand is that it has not yet been
proved that fair plebiscite cannot be held and that I must
somehow find way to go ahead until it is proved. Department
ignores entirely fact that my advisers and I are in close touch with
situation; that I have stated categorically in my telegram of March
9, 11 a.m., that conditions are not now compatible with fair
plebiscite and that responsibility rests on Chile. I have informed
Chilean member of the Commission twice in last two weeks that
these were my views, and he has so informed his Government.
(2) Department appears to think that I must do something to force
Peru to push on blindly into a contest where, it is my conviction,
she has no fair chance to register and cast her vote and where
suffering and bloodshed will follow. If Peru goes ahead it must be
on her own initiative; she states she will not go ahead until
conditions have been changed radically for the better. Peru might
go on if Chile were formally notified by Commission that
conditions are unsatisfactory and that responsibility for improving
them rests on her.
(3) Alternative is that Peru withdraw. If she takes that step, I have
not faintest idea where I could find anyone willing to be the
Peruvian member, and there is no personnel available for the
Peruvian registration boards, appeal courts, etc., which requires in

all more than one hundred persons. As all Peruvians, moreover,
would abstain from the plebiscite, it would be mere farce which I
should disown at the end.
(4) Situation is intensely strained and any postponement would
precipitate trouble. I believe my plan14 can be carried out with
minimum of friction. Alternative resolutions mentioned in my
March 9 telegram can be sustained by the record; they are
conservative in character and are calculated to avoid stirring up
bitterness. I do not think they would greatly surprise Chilean
member.
(5) Not possible to delay my decision beyond evening of March
12, if proper instructions are to reach personnel at a distance by
time set for beginning registration. My legal advisers and the
secretary general of the Commission are unanimously agreed that
my plan is only one to take under circumstances. We have
canvassed situation thoroughly and are unable to reach any other
solution, though manner of presentation of plan will be suitably
modified. I must go ahead with it, unless the Arbitrator desires to
appoint some one else to take my place.
(6) No additional personnel should be sent here, as it would be
wholly unjustifiable to add to already enormous expense of this
plebiscite. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW
14 See telegram Mar. 9, from the consul at Arica, p. 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions
of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178].

723.2515/2003: Telegram
[Document 182]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile
(Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 11, 1926—7 p.m.
20. Please deliver following memorandum immediately to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs:15
“I am instructed by the Secretary of State to refer to his recent
memorandum in which inquiry was made as to whether the
Government of Chile would be disposed to avail itself of the good
offices of the United States in an endeavor to arrive at a friendly
adjustment of the existing differences with Peru concerning the
provinces of Tacna and Arica;16 and also to refer to the
memorandum of the Minister for Foreign Affairs in reply thereto
signifying the acceptance of the said offer by Chile.17 Attention is
also drawn to the subsequent notification conveyed through the
Ambassador of the United States at Santiago of the fact that Peru
had not been able to accept the offer and of the further declaration
by the Secretary of State that the offer of good offices might be
regarded as remaining open for the consideration of both parties
whenever they might desire to avail themselves of it. Further
consideration of this subject in view of the continued pendency of
the offer of good offices and the obvious desirability of providing
against any possible misunderstanding concerning its nature and
scope prompts the Secretary of State to make the following
observations by way of explanation and interpretation:
The term ‘good offices’ is not employed in any limited or
technical sense. It was and is the purpose of the Secretary of State

to give the term its widest possible intendment. Consequently, it
is the Secretary’s view that if the offer were accepted by both
parties the Government of the United States should be prepared to
exercise its good offices to any extent reasonably consistent with
the main object of effecting a genuine and lasting settlement of
the differences referred to. The Secretary of State would, if the
parties desired, place at their disposition his services as mediator
in any negotiations which might ensue and by his presence or
representation if desired at the negotiations exert every effort to
see that the fullest opportunity of reaching an essential agreement
is afforded to the two Governments concerned. I am instructed by
the Secretary of State to submit to the Government of Chile the
foregoing explanation and interpretation of the nature and scope
of the offer.”
If you think it appropriate in order to avoid leaving any false impressions,
you may state to Minister for Foreign Affairs that the above memorandum
has been formulated on our initiative and that a memorandum in same sense
is being forwarded American Embassy in Peru18 for delivery to President
Leguía and the Minister for Foreign Affairs. For some time we have
contemplated advisability of making this further interpretation of offer of
good offices so as to guard against any misunderstanding.
Referring to your telegram No. 30 of March 10, 5 p.m., we have been
informed by Lassiter that Peruvian member of the Plebiscitary Commission
has presented resolution reciting that the assaults and offenses against
Peruvian delegation and Peruvian officials are incompatible with the
plebiscitary proceedings, and calling for the indefinite postponement of the
program. Whether Government of Peru eventually accepts offer of good
offices is impossible to predict, but in meantime you will appreciate
importance of our being promptly advised of any change or modification of
attitude of Chilean Government in this matter. It is not our understanding
that liberal interpretation of the offer embodied in above memorandum can
induce any change in attitude of Chile.
GREW

15 Text of memorandum not paraphrased.
16 See telegram No. 10, Feb. 16, to the Ambassador in Chile, p. 298 [Pg. 298
includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159].
17 See telegram No. 22, Feb. 19, from the Ambassador in Chile, p. 305 [Pg.
305 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164].
18 Telegram No. 23, Mar. 11, 5 p.m.; not printed.

723.2515/2005: Telegram
[Document 183]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 12, 1926—11 a.m.
For Lassiter. Your March 11, 2 p.m. I have no right to dictate your official
action and at no time have I had any disposition to do so. I can only give
you our sincere and carefully considered advice. You are receiving not only
best that my associates and I have to offer, but also the advice of former
Secretary of State Hughes, who has followed matter closely and is
cognizant of every message sent you, including this one.
(2) Please rest assured that we are all thoroughly appreciative of practical
difficulties which you face and that we are anxious to meet your views and
to support you in every possible way. Without in any way attempting to
commit Arbitrator we are ourselves disposed to accept unreservedly any
final determination which you may reach on question of possibility of
holding plebiscite. What we do feel necessary at all costs to avoid is a flat
abandonment of plebiscite in such a manner and under such circumstances
as to permit either or both of parties to seize opportunity, which we are
convinced they are seeking, to blame you and eventually Arbitrator and this
Government for calling off plebiscite.
(3) From your latest message it is not entirely clear which of the alternatives
mentioned in second paragraph of your telegram March 9, 11 a.m.,
constitutes plan which you now refer to in your telegram March 11, 2 p.m.
For reasons which need no repetition, we could not approve second of these
alternatives at this time; and first alternative, as we have stated, seems an
unfortunate expedient, although it may be necessary one considered in light
of your latest message. In your telegram of March 9, 11 a.m., you intimate
that registration might go forward in hope of improved conditions, provided
Department moves energetically to support such course by advising Chile

that failure immediately to establish and maintain plebiscitary conditions
which are satisfactory to the Commission will result in termination of
plebiscitary operations with responsibility definitely fixed on her; and in
your telegram of March 11, 2 p.m., you say that Peru might go ahead if
Chile were formally notified by Commission that conditions are
unsatisfactory and that responsibility for improving them rests on her. It
appears to us that a plan would be feasible which calls for going on with
plebiscitary operations even with another slight postponement of dates, if a
postponement be deemed necessary, coupled with formal notice to Chile
that Commission does not regard conditions as satisfactory and that if they
are not made satisfactory to Commission, it will have to consider question
of terminating plebiscitary operations. As we have already suggested, this
plan would involve postponing for time being consideration of Peruvian
resolution.
(4) I hope you can find way to adopt this course; and you will see that it is
all the more vital to adopt it as this opportunity may be last we shall have to
place squarely before the contestants proposal for adjustment without
holding plebiscite. Yesterday we placed in hands of Governments of Chile
and Peru another memorandum containing a liberal interpretation of our
pending offer of good offices. We did this in order to clear away any
possible misunderstanding and in hope that Peru might be disposed to
change attitude in regard to offer. Simultaneously with submission of this
new memorandum, we received yesterday from Chilean Embassy here a
communication18a which indicates clearly that Chilean Government’s
attitude towards offer of good offices is still receptive.
Under these circumstances I am sure you will agree that it would be
unfortunate were Commission to take any attitude which would close door
and leave Peru to conclude that she had succeeded in having plebiscite
called off without having to assume responsibility for it and at same time in
having blame placed on Chile.
(5) Until further word from you, sailings of additional personnel will be
held up; they could sail either March 12 or March 18, as may be desired.
KELLOGG

18a Not printed.

723.2515/2012: Telegram
[Document 184]
The Chargé in Peru (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, March 12, 1926—9 p.m.
[Received March 13—9:30 a.m.]
24. Embassy’s telegram number 23, March 12, 3 p.m.19 Received the
following at 8:30 this evening from the President in writing:
“Memorandum by the President of Peru. The Government of Peru
feels very much indebted to the Government of the United States
for the explanation and interpretation, which the Secretary of
State has directed you to kindly convey to me, of the term ‘good
offices’ referred to in his previous memorandum,20 as well as in
that of today’s date,21 and it is very gratifying to me to tender you
my very best thanks therefor.
The nature and scope of ‘good offices,’ even in its widest possible
intendment, would not protect one of the parties from aggression
from the other, in case either of them should think that the
aggression involves the best of all possible solutions for the
question subject to the action of the good offices; and this is
precisely what Chile, in my opinion, is aiming at, as intimated in
my memorandum of 26th February last.22
Under the influence of such conviction, it would not be
compatible with my conscience, however deferent I may wish to
be towards the United States, to take any different attitude with
respect to the recent offer than is contained in my aforementioned
memorandum; but fully mindful of my duty to go at this time
even beyond the limits of prudence with a view to secure a
genuine and lasting settlement of the differences between Peru
and Chile, I would be prepared to accept the good offices as now

explained by the Secretary of State, provided that the same should
entail the assurance of the United States that, whether the direct
negotiations should result in an agreement or not, there shall be
no war between Peru and Chile—in other words that the United
States will not allow Chile to make war on Peru.”
WADSWORTH
19 Not printed.
20 See telegrams No. 12, Feb. 16, to the Ambassador in Peru, p. 302 [Pg. 302
includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161] and No. 18, Mar. 2, p. 319 [Pg. 319 includes
portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175].
21 See telegram No. 20, Mar. 11, to the Ambassador in Chile, p. 327 [Pg. 327
is part of Doc. 182] and footnote 18, p. 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc.
183].
22 See telegram No. 16, Feb. 26, from the Ambassador in Peru, p. 317 [Pg.
317 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174].

723.2515/2021: Telegram
[Document 185]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, March 15, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received March 16—2 p.m.]
From Lassiter.
(1) It is vital for protection of Arbitrator’s position and best
interests of the United States to prevent a situation from arising
within plebiscitary territory which might lead to serious
disturbances and loss of life. Although Arbitrator’s efforts have
been for purpose of promoting peace and settling this controversy,
a situation has developed which involves increased suffering and
hardships among local Peruvian population and may possibly lead
to outbreak of hostilities between Chile and Peru.
(2) Based on foregoing, I wish to give you my forecast of
probable sequence of events here should Department’s second
attempt to bring about settlement outside plebiscite prove to no
avail, and to make definite recommendations.
(3) I expect Plebiscitary Commission to meet March 24 and vote
down the two pending resolutions which were submitted
respectively by members for Peru and Chile. I expect the
Peruvian member then to submit immediately a resolution to
terminate the proceedings. I have not talked with him about this
since day before yesterday; but I understand he has drawn up his
resolution in measured language but that he definitely places
responsibility for failure upon Chile. If I do not like Peruvian
draft, I shall submit a substitute. I assume that this resolution will
be passed, that my vote will be accompanied by brief statement in

restrained language giving my estimate of situation, and that my
statement will be published with the resolution.
(4) Chilean member would probably request 2 or 3 days for
consideration of last-mentioned resolution. I assume that vote on
resolution would take place about March 27. Five days up to
April 1 would then be allowed for appeal. It would surely require
10 days to prepare case for Arbitrator; and bulkiness of briefs
would make necessary their despatch by mail, thus taking 3
weeks more. The case could hardly reach Washington before May
1, and undoubtedly the Arbitrator would need 2 weeks for
consideration; so no final decision could be reached before about
May 15.
(5) In meantime unless some decisive action had been taken,
Peruvian and American electoral boards and committees, as well
as Plebiscitary Commission and all the imported and idle voters
now in territory, would be kept inactive in this tense atmosphere.
It would be a miracle, under such circumstances, if there were no
clashes or incidents that might become of gravest international
importance. I deem it to be our imperative duty to move quickly
to relieve this situation and to permit territory to revert with all
possible rapidity to more adjustable status.
(6) In view of foregoing, I make following recommendations
which I request will be conveyed to Arbitrator as expressing my
sincere convictions; I feel strongly that they should be taken, and
every technical point strained to bring them about.
(a) As soon as you receive word from me that
Plebiscitary 
Commission 
has 
passed 
resolution
recommending 
termination 
of 
proceedings, 
the
Arbitrator should instruct Commission by cable
somewhat as follows: “Reserving all powers to pass
with or without appeal upon Commission’s findings,
and to order, if deemed advisable, resumption of
plebiscitary proceedings, the Arbitrator directs that all
electoral proceedings be suspended for minimum period

of at least three months, and that election board’s
personnel be withdrawn, to be replaced at later date if
necessary.”
(b) 
Simultaneously, 
the 
Arbitrator 
shall 
direct
Plebiscitary Commission to adjourn to meet in
Washington on May 1, or as soon as practicable after
that date, to present all sides of case to him. My
advisers perceive no legal or other objection to
procedure proposed.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(12) If the Arbitrator should call the Commission to Washington,
it would be quite agreeable to me were General Pershing to
resume his duties as president of the Plebiscitary Commission; I
should greatly prefer to return to the Canal Zone. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2022: Telegram
[Document 186]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, March 16, 1926—midnight.
[Received March 17—10:25 a.m.]
36. Minister of Foreign Affairs today handed me a memorandum, first
stating that the delay had been due to absence of the President from the
Capital. The following is a translation thereof:
“The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile has taken due note of
the memorandum of the Ambassador of the United States, dated
the 12th day of the present month,23 and is informed by it that the
spontaneous offer of good offices by that Government to
endeavor to make an arrangement of the difficulties between
Chile and Peru, has been formulated with the understanding that
in case of being accepted by both parties [sic] would empower the
Government of the United States to exercise them with ail the
amplitude compatible with the original purpose of accomplishing
a lasting solution of the pending differences.
The Government of Chile appreciates the friendly interest which,
for the arrangement of the difficulties with Peru, is manifested by
the Government of the United States in its statement that
notwithstanding the negative received from one of the parties, the
offer of its good offices must be considered as subsisting. My
Government adds that it has not altered its disposition to accept
said good offices in the form indicated in the memorandum of
Your Excellency (the Ambassador of the United States) which the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile now has the honor to
answer. Dated March 16th, 1926.”
COLLIER

23 See telegram No. 20, Mar. 11, to the Ambassador in Chile, p. 327 [Pg. 327
is part of Doc. 182}.

723.2515/2028: Telegram
[Document 187]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 18, 1926—4 p.m.
For Lassiter. It is quite clear to all of us here that the controversy should be
disposed of, if possible, by diplomatic settlement; but if this is to be
reached, way to it must be kept open. Please understand that our policy in
this matter is dictated entirely by what seems to me to be the absolute
necessity for creating and maintaining state of affairs which will lead both
Chile and Peru eventually to accept good offices or mediation, and, by this
means, to arrive at permanent settlement of existing differences.
Let me try to make clear to you precise situation in which for the moment
we find ourselves. Principal difficulty lies with Peru who has now second
time declined our good offices, although Chile has unqualifiedly accepted
them. I intend to publish at once the exchanges on this subject with both
Chile and Peru. From these notes it will appear that Peru occupies the
extraordinary position of attempting to dictate our policy on plebiscite and
at same time to reject all offers of good offices. If these tactics are
successful, I am convinced that the issue of Tacna-Arica will be kept alive
and will remain impossible of settlement for many years to come. Peru is
evidently now striving for an official declaration in this arbitration that
plebiscite provided for in Treaty of Ancon has been frustrated by Chile; she
undoubtedly attaches importance to such a finding as enabling her
thereafter to assert legal title to provinces in dispute. Only way to keep door
open for an appropriate settlement is by publishing correspondence over
good offices and by voting down both resolutions now pending before
Plebiscitary Commission, so that Peru must either continue with plebiscite
or withdraw. She will have to do one or the other. If she goes forward with
plebiscite, even though under protest, she will do it with eyes open to risks
after having twice rejected opportunity for avoiding plebiscite and

discussing settlement by other means. If she makes good the threat of
withdrawal, Arbitrator can deal with situation as it then presents itself, and
if it be found advisable to postpone plebiscitary proceedings indefinitely,
then Peru, as well as Chile, will bear her proper share of responsibility.
The program you sketch in your March 15, 6 p.m., would only serve to
facilitate Peru’s obstructive tactics, and to render difficult, if not impossible,
any later settlement. For that reason I cannot approve it. You will see from
what I have said that, although I am alive to difficulties of situation, I am
bound to attribute supreme importance to manner in which proceedings are
now handled. We must, above all avoid creation of any situation which
would aggravate difficulty of bringing Chile and Peru together and which
would indelibly stain honor of one party and give other a moral victory
coupled with claim to legal title to the territory, while diminishing, if not
defeating altogether, chances for a proper settlement. This is what a flat
decision terminating plebiscite on ground that it has been frustrated by
Chile would do. On the other hand if the two resolutions pending are voted
down, there would then be every inducement for both parties to favor
settlement through diplomatic channels.
If the two resolutions be voted down, it would not seem necessary at this
time for you to introduce any resolution, as failure of the other resolutions
would leave proceedings for plebiscite unaffected. If you wished to make
any statement in explanation of your vote in opposition to proposed
Peruvian resolution, you might state briefly that while you did not wish to
formally review present conditions at this time, you were voting against
resolution in hope and expectation that appropriate safeguards for plebiscite
would be provided. If Peru threatens to withdraw, or does actually
withdraw, I think you should make no statement, but report situation to me
immediately.
I am sure you will appreciate importance of not conveying to either Chilean
or Peruvian member of Commission outline of policy I have indicated.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2012: Telegram
[Document 188]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Peru (Wadsworth)
WASHINGTON, March 18, 1926—4 p.m.
25. Please deliver immediately to the President and the Minister of Foreign
Affairs the following memorandum:
“I am instructed by the Secretary of State to acknowledge the
receipt of the memorandum by the President of Peru which was
received on March 12th and to express the regret of the Secretary
of State that the President of Peru is still unable to accept the
Secretary’s good offices as proposed. It must be manifest to the
President of Peru that the Secretary of State cannot give any such
undertaking as the President has suggested but the Secretary
desires to do all in his power to promote a fair and proper
adjustment of the existing controversy. To this end the Secretary
cherishes the earnest hope that the President of Peru will take a
more favorable view of this proposal which will be kept open.[”]
Telegraph double priority immediately when you have delivered it.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2034: Telegram
[Document 189]
The Chargé in Peru (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, March 19, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received 4:18 p.m.]
27. Department’s telegram number 25, March 18, 4 p.m. Following your
instructions I presented in person your memorandum in the form of a note
to the Minister of Foreign Affairs at noon today, but on hearing that the
President was too ill to see me for several days I gave the note for the
President to the Minister for Foreign Affairs who informed me that he
would see that the President received it today.
From past conversations with the President I feel quite convinced that he
will not alter his views regarding the holding of a plebiscite. There is in
Peru a tremendous enthusiasm for a plebiscite and I believe the President
would find himself at odds with the people were he to adopt any other view
than that with which the Department is already acquainted.
WADSWORTH

723.2515/2037: Telegram
[Document 190]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, March 19, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received March 20—11:45 a.m.]
From Lassiter.
(1) I never cease to keep before me the fact that the Department
feels that final determination of entire Tacna-Arica controversy
should be arrived at by diplomatic adjustment if possible. I feel
very strongly, however, that in order to create situation
Department seeks, we must avoid any action which will alienate
either or both of the parties and prevent their reception of further
suggestions. For that reason I deem it my duty to state as my most
sincere conviction that the course of action sketched in your cable
of March 18, 4 p.m., will prejudice more than it will favor
creation and maintenance of state of affairs Department desires.
(2) Publication, at this time and during carrying out of arbitral
award, of correspondence regarding offer of good offices showing
that Peru has rejected them while none of proceedings of
Plebiscitary Commission bearing on actions of Chile in
connection with carrying out of plebiscite has been made public,
would, it is my opinion, cause Peru to accuse the United States of
bad faith.
(3) By voting down the two resolutions pending before the
Commission and then voting down Peru’s motion to terminate
proceedings, it is true that we can force Peru either to withdraw or
to continue. If I voted against her resolution with noncommittal
remarks such as suggested by the Department, I believe that Peru

would certainly withdraw and would spare no pains to make her
reasons for withdrawing known to the world. She would feel that
we had treated her unjustly and it is difficult to believe that she
would be in a mood to accept any negotiations. It will be difficult
to draw Peru into any negotiations at all unless United States
takes part in ultimate treaty and does something to guarantee
result. If she feels that we have treated her unjustly in this
plebiscite, it is unlikely that she will be interested in our good
offices.
(4) If Peru withdraws, either the Arbitrator must call off
proceedings on his own initiative or I must go on and hold
farcical one-sided plebiscite. If Arbitrator should, on his own
initiative, call off plebiscite, I do not know on what he would base
his action; but if one-sided plebiscite were insisted on, I should
have to vote against accepting result. It seems to me that
Arbitrator would have to sustain my position, and then Chile
would be much more disgusted with our action than she would be
were proceedings to be terminated now.
(5) Chile seems to have made up her mind fully to fact that
plebiscite will not be carried out, and according to present
Chilean member of Commission, Mr. Claro,24 she prefers
alternative of terminating now rather than to continue plebiscite
with foregone conclusion that result would be declared null and
void. My resolution for terminating proceedings is very restrained
and I believe Chile will accept it without too much clamor.
Undoubtedly Peru will be satisfied with fact of termination. Door
will be left open for further negotiations, and cause of the
plebiscitary proceedings will have been carried to logical and
legal conclusion.
(6) I desire to repeat that it is profound conviction of myself and
of all my advisers that course advocated by Department can lead
only to antagonism of one and possibly of both the parties; that
we have worked out and have furnished you with a logical
solution of impasse which will be accepted with relief by both

Chile and Peru; and that this solution more than any other will
leave door open to further negotiations.
(7) I do not believe there is any chance whatever that Peru will
accept good offices unless some very substantial guarantees are
offered, and that I view with trepidation. Whole question is going
to be reopened of attempting to carry out plebiscite in vain hope
that conditions are going to be improved. I hope that Department
will clearly and definitely understand that it is pure waste of time
to endeavor to change these conditions. Please realize that I am
here in more or less a judicial position, and that I must act and
vote in accordance with facts presented to me and dictates of my
own conscience. I can assure you that your cable of March 18, 4
p.m., causes me utmost concern. I have not committed myself to
any course of action whatever, but execution of your program
would place me in most embarrassing position. I trust Department
will recede from its present stand, and so must decide
immediately. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW
24 Samuel Claro Lastarria, who had been legal adviser to the Chilean
member of the Plebiscitary Commission.

723.2515/2035: Telegram
[Document 191]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 20, 1926—6 p.m.
26. I wish to outline for you situation as it now stands: Two resolutions are
pending before the Plebiscitary Commission. The Peruvian member has
offered the first, which calls for indefinite postponement of plebiscite on
ground that conditions compatible with holding of fair plebiscite do not
exist. This resolution fixes blame for these conditions squarely upon Chile.
Second resolution, which has been offered by Chilean member, recites that
his Government has complied with all prerequisites prescribed for fair
plebiscite, and calls for continuation of schedule, without prejudice,
however, to right of Arbitrator in exercise of his reserved powers to declare
vote void if he shall consider that results justify his taking this action.
On March 14 the Commission by majority vote, Chilean member voting
contra under instructions from his Government, deferred action on both
resolutions until March 24.
On March 12 I submitted to Governments of Chile and Peru a further
interpretation of my offer of good offices. Peru replied on March 13,
rejecting offer on substantially same terms as before. You are aware of
Chile’s reply.
General Lassiter has reported continually increasing difficulties and has
pointed out fully the inherent dangers in present situation. He is convinced
that Chile has absolutely failed to comply with prerequisites laid down by
Commission and that fair plebiscite is impossible under present conditions.
In fact, he has suggested that for this reason the plebiscitary proceedings be
terminated. I am advising him25 not to take any action for present on the
resolutions pending and to take further adjournment of few days, when

Commission reconvenes on March 24. I am doing this in the hope that door
can be kept open for diplomatic adjustment and especially with view to
affording opportunity for Chile to consider fully and to present, if she is so
advised, any new suggestion such as enlargement of Arbitrator’s powers.
If Chile were to come forward on her own initiative with proposal either to
invest Arbitrator with unlimited powers or otherwise, we should all regard it
as distinct step forward in direction of a settlement, and it would be our
hope that it would lead to actual negotiations. I do not know how long
General Lassiter can or will maintain status quo in Plebiscitary
Commission; for that reason it becomes exceedingly important that you
explore all possibilities with Chilean Government at once.
KELLOGG
25 Telegram of Mar. 20, 6 p.m.; not printed.

723.2515/2041: Telegram
[Document 192]
The Chargé in Peru (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, March 21, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received 8:00 p.m.]
31. Embassy’s telegram number 30, March 20, 10 p.m.26 Received the
following at 9 last night from the President in writing:
“Memorandum by the President of Peru. The Government of Peru
begs to thank the Government of the United States of America
once more for the deferential spirit in which it again offers its
good offices for a direct settlement of the Tacna-Arica question,27
which at the present moment is subject to a plebiscitary decision;
but the Government of Peru regrets that, as it has already
manifested on previous occasions, no effort whatever that may be
made to come to a direct solution of the controversy is possible,
in view of the procedure of the Chilean Government and the
invariable want of good faith with which it has always treated
Peru, even in the presence of the Arbitrator’s representatives; and,
further, that any such efforts would only be conducive to bringing
about a position for Peru which would be worse than the one that
it is undergoing in the present circumstances and which would
only terminate in war.
In view of the fact that the Government of the United States is not
disposed to guarantee the present state of peace between the two
countries in case of need and which in the opinion of the
Government of Peru is likely to result in hostilities brought about
by Chile owing to the methods which the latter country usually
adopts and which methods would make war inevitable, the
Government of Peru is of the opinion that there can be no better
solution of the problem than a plebiscite and that the Government
of the United States within the ample faculties reserved by the

Arbitrator to himself can create a situation that will permit the
carrying out of a free and honest plebiscite, in view of the open
opposition of Chile to comply with the guarantees promised by
the Plebiscitary Commission. Lima, 20th March, 1926.”
WADSWORTH
26 Not printed.
27 See telegram No. 25, Mar. 18, to the Chargé in Peru, p. 334 [Pg. 334 includes
portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188].

723.2515/2042: Telegram
[Document 193]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, March 21, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received March 22—10:50 a.m.]
From Lassiter.
1. There is nothing before me to justify a further postponement of
plebiscitary proceedings; and, were I again to propose one on my
own initiative, a very bad impression would be created and would
render me subject to all sorts of imputations by Chileans. Claro’s
attitude is definite that we must either continue or stop, and his
positive instructions from his Government are to oppose further
postponement. He has also stated that in event of another
postponement he could [not] control his people. I shall ask him,
however, if he has any proposition to offer or if he desires to
consult his Government on desirability of affording the several
chanceries more time to seek solution. Department might cable
Santiago at once to effect that any further postponement must
have Chilean concurrence.
2. If Claro should oppose a postponement and say that he does not
care to consult his Government, I suggest that I then see Freyre
and ask him what he intends to do if both pending resolutions are
voted down; and, if he tells me that he intends to make a move to
terminate proceedings, that I then tell him I would vote for a two-
point resolution if he would present it, as follows:
(a) That, subject to approval of Arbitrator, plebiscitary
proceedings should be terminated;

(b) That, pending instructions from the Arbitrator,
operations of registration and election boards are hereby
suspended.
I merely propose this resolution for your consideration; I do not
recommend it and would do nothing more than show it to Freyre
for his consideration. Its passage affords, I think, best hope for
keeping both parties in mood to negotiate and permits terminating
plebiscite in dignified and orderly way.
3. If Freyre is [not?] willing to present foregoing resolution, it is
my own strong conviction that I should then join with him in
passing his resolution terminating plebiscite and assigning as
reason that Chilean authorities had failed to establish conditions
suitable for fair plebiscite. This resolution would be phrased in
very restrained language. In my opinion it would be grave
mistake to force Peru out at this stage and would cause us to be
subjected to much future criticism and condemnation.
4. If, however, Department still insists on its own complete
program and thinks both the foregoing resolutions prejudicial to
it, I will do everything I can to carry out that program. I will not
say anything to Freyre. If he moves to terminate, I will vote
negatively; and I will make statement to accompany my vote that
while I do not consider conditions in the territory have been or are
compatible with conduct of plebiscite fair to both parties, still I
am prepared to continue plebiscitary proceedings, observing
conditions and utilizing all information gathered throughout to
formulate a judgment as to further decisions to be taken.
5. If Peru withdraws, the Plebiscitary Commission will be unable
to function in any matters of importance and I believe you will
agree with me that it will be futile to carry out one-sided
plebiscite. So that I may plan for this contingency, and especially
for the orderly termination of the plebiscite, I beg you to let me
know what Arbitrator proposes to do if this situation arises.

6. Until all plebiscitary proceedings are terminated, I strongly
recommend that correspondence concerning good offices be not
published.
7. I should like to have Department’s reply by Monday night or
Tuesday morning, so that I may have it for meeting of
Commission on Wednesday, March 23. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2045: Telegram
[Document 194]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, March 22, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received March 23—9:15 a.m.28 ]
40. Your No. 26, March 20, 6 p.m. I have had a long talk with Mathieu. He
is not able to reach decision immediately, as President Figueroa will not
return to Santiago until noon tomorrow and also because Mathieu has had
an engagement for some time to address the Senate in Executive session on
Tacna-Arica question; he dare not recommend that Chile submit matter to
Arbitrator without limitation on latter’s powers until he ascertains
sentiments of Chilean Congress. He said that he was unable thus to
repudiate protocol of Washington without congressional approval. In
answer to a question from me he said he thought he could accept good
offices or mediation.
Although Mathieu insists on continuing with plebiscite without interruption,
I think that if there is possibility that Commission will pass resolution
terminating plebiscite it would be better to postpone again for some 10 or
15 days. The purpose of the postponement, however, would be defeated if
put upon ground that conditions did not yet permit holding of fair plebiscite,
or if impression were given that postponement had been granted to open
way for some method of solution besides plebiscite. There should be some
reason given that will not add to belief of Peruvians that Commission is
sympathetic to their views.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mathieu said that even if there had been some irregularities before he
returned here, he felt that, in general, order had been good since then and
that presence of 600 Peruvians peacefully camped at Arica was proof of that

fact. It was impossible for him to see how Arbitrator could say that present
conditions prevented fair plebiscite; Chile would regret keenly decision by
Arbitrator’s representative that fraud and violence rendered the plebiscite
impracticable; the Chilean Congress realized injury that such a decision
would cause, but was disposed, nevertheless, to appeal to judgment of the
world. He astonished me by adding that Chile would not abandon the
province if plebiscite were held impracticable. In that event, he said, let the
Peruvians come and try to evict the Chileans. If plebiscite be held, Chile
will accept result in good faith, whatever it may be.
He read me closing paragraph of telegram he had sent to Chilean
Ambassador at Washington on March 18,28a in which he instructed
Ambassador Cruchaga to ascertain specifically from you what further
guarantees or conditions consistent with award the Arbitrator would
consider necessary to hold an honest plebiscite. He declared that he had
accepted post of Minister for Foreign Affairs in order to cooperate with you
in carrying out award; and he said that he was completely discouraged, for,
although he had complied with every demand Arbitrator had made and had
offered to do everything else consistent with the award, there was on
General Lassiter’s part an ill-concealed intention never to permit the
plebiscite.
Mathieu showed me a telegram he had sent a few days ago to Ambassador
Cruchaga stating that he thought his own 7 years of work in Washington
endeavoring to bring Chile and the United States into close friendly
relations were now being undone and that his age and failing vigor were not
sufficient to cope with the task he was facing; he felt a break with the
United States would soon come and that he would resign first. He repeated
this statement during the conversation and said that he might resign after
addressing Congress on Thursday.
I told him that now was the time to stick to his post and to render his
country a real service. He asked what, placed in his position, I should do. I
said that I had no authority to speak for the Secretary of State but that it was
my personal belief that I should offer to leave entire matter to Arbitrator
without limitations.

Mathieu repeated his doubts about congressional approval; and he said that
Peru would interpret this step as a sign of weakness and that the United
States had shown no willingness to try to get Peru to accept such an
arrangement, although virtually trying to coerce Chile to accept it. I asked
what he meant by “coercing”. He said by such statements as General
Lassiter had made to Claro at last meeting of Commission; these statements
were that Commission would have to vote impracticability of plebiscite and
put blame on Chile unless conditions changed. Mathieu characterized these
statements as a threat. I said that they were neither a threat nor pressure, but
were a friendly allusion to conditions which were thought bad, in hope that
Chile might find way to correct them. I said that my own inference was that
trouble arose from fact that though many guarantees had been given by
Chilean Government, they were not carried out by officials.
We talked about two hours. Mathieu referred again and again to difficulty of
getting Chilean Congress to approve an unlimited enlargement of
Arbitrator’s faculties; but he said that if Chile could be assured she would
receive Arica, the Congress would promptly give authorization. He again
expressed wish that it were possible to have separate plebiscites, one for
Tacna, the other for Arica.
Toward the end he made the only practicable suggestion, worthy possibly of
serious consideration. He said in effect: The Chilean Government has
accepted mediation; it could do this as acceptance was advisory rather than
obligatory, and for that reason Chilean Congress did not have to be
consulted in advance. Let the Arbitrator bring pressure on Peru to induce
her to accept mediation. He can compel both nations to consent to
mediation and then to accept whatever he recommends. He can use same
measure toward Chile that his representative is using now, namely, to have
Commission vote passage of a resolution that plebiscite cannot be held
because of the alleged frauds and violence. He can coerce Peru by letting
her know that procrastination, evasion, vague generalization and much
agitation, and unsupported accusations must cease and that plebiscite will
be held at once. At the present moment the United States will not allow the
plebiscite to be held and Peru will not allow any other solution to be tried.
If mediation is accepted, let the plebiscite be kept alive by adjournment so
that its coercive power will not lapse.

723.2515/2047: Telegram
[Document 195]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
WASHINGTON, March 22, 1926—5 p.m.
For General Lassiter. The following telegram from Mathieu to Chilean
Ambassador just received by me.28b
“No. 44. Next meeting of the Commission will be held in Arica
March 24, and we need to be well informed beforehand. I suggest
that you obtain, as early as possible, an interview with Secretary
Kellogg in order to transmit to him the following:
a) That above all our Government wishes, in fulfillment
of the Award, to carry out the plebiscite already started
and under way since the Regulations for Registration
and Election were enacted and dates were fixed for their
operation;
b) That we are willing to sincerely carry out all
measures of guarantees already adopted and duly
fulfilled by us and all those to assure a correct plebiscite
which may yet be deemed necessary; but to this end it is
indispensable that such guarantees be indicated in
concrete terms and not under vague expressions such as
“plebiscitary atmosphere”, “equality of conditions” or
similar ones, because due to their vagueness we are
unable to find out the American Commissioner’s
intentions as to the way in which these should be
fulfilled.
c) That we entertain no illusions as to the possibility of
also pleasing Peru, for she carries on logically the anti-
plebiscitary policy which she started in Washington at

the Conferences which led to the Arbitration, pursued in
the controversy before the Arbitrator and in her protest
following the Award and, finally, insisted upon in Arica
through hindering and postponing the plebiscite with
the hope to bring about its failure by means of violent
incidents which are difficult to prevent in any electoral
contest, many of such incidents craftily provoked by the
Peruvians themselves and some which have been, most
unfortunately, the fault of our own people.
d) That notwithstanding the unconquerable timidity
which is said to prevail among Peruvian voters, it is a
fact that Peru has concentrated in the territory, up to the
present time, without obstructions but to the contrary,
with facilities tendered by us, a mass of about 600
prospective voters. It is evident that if Peruvians were
questioned with regard to their fears, they would answer
that they believe to have good grounds for them; but
meantime, it can be assured that no prospective voter
will fail to register and to vote;
e) That in accordance with the Regulations adopted all
those who have left the territory, whether expelled or
not, can return to register and vote. Many have already
been returned to the province immediately upon the
Government learning of their particular cases. At any
event, this matter has been grossly exaggerated and
allegations made without support of evidence as in the
Case Peru submitted to the Arbitrator. The few voters
who could thus be excluded would not influence the
results of the ballot and in case their votes did have any
bearing upon them, the Arbitrator would examine their
cases in order to approve or void the plebiscite. But it
cannot be said that it is impossible to carry out a
plebiscite in which probably between five and six
thousand voters will participate because there may be a
certain indetermined number of such cases which are at

any rate few and have never been pointed out even
approximately.
2. You may add that the aforesaid is not intended as a
Brief to oppose the views which may have been formed
by the two American High Commissioners, against
whose opinions we realize it would not be proper, much
less practical, for us to argue; but that it expounds the
viewpoint under which the Government considered the
situation when trying to fix its policy in the matter, it
decided to cooperate to the honest fulfillment of the
Arbitrator’s Award, without avoiding means for that
purpose and without consideration [as] to whether the
results of a correct plebiscite would favour or not
Chile’s interests. While we are spontaneously adopting
some additional measures intended to restore, as much
as 
possible, 
the 
confidence 
of 
the American
Commissioner,—besides those requisities he might also
deem necessary,—in [on] the eve of the first step of real
plebiscitary character, Peru interposes with her proposal
for indefinite postponement of the plebiscite, softened
down by that of the American Commissioner for a
temporary adjournment of 13 days in the proceedings.
Such a short delay would be of little significance if it
were not aggravated by the opinion which General
Lassiter expressed to our Commissioner that to his
judgement as to that prevailing in Washington, at no
time a correct plebiscite could be held. Therefore we
have been unable to understand the purpose of the
temporary adjournment and we are at a loss to
conjecture whether this will be the only one or whether
it will be followed by others which would virtually [be]
tantamount to the indefinite postponement demanded
by Peru. We would readily understand any delay which
were intended for the fulfillment of some requisite or to
put into operation a measure considered necessary.

3. You may further add that we are not blindly obstinate
in carrying out the plebiscite, notwithstanding the fact
that public opinion here would consider that, through
bringing about its failure, Chile was being deprived of a
sure success at the polls; but that for the sake of peace
in this section of the Continent we sincerely wish to end
decorously this long and vexatious question, without
Chile being the only party from whom sacrifices and
renunciations are demanded. This was the reason why
we hastened to accept the proffer of good offices, such
as they have been tendered, trusting in the equanimity
of that Government with whom we desire, as the
primordial factor in our foreign policy, to maintain the
friendly relations which bound us at the present time.
According to what we have learned until now, Peru has
refused the same tender of good offices without us
knowing or being able to explain her motives. There is
no doubt, in our estimation, that Peru does not desire
the plebiscite and we would not know what to think
about her intentions if she also refuses now to reach an
intelligence, under an intervention which must deserve
her confidence as much as ours. Whichever her
intentions, the situation, when considered under the
light of what has already been said in this dispatch,
would lead us to the following absurd[ity]: there would
be no plebiscite because of American opinions formed
in Arica and in Washington, if they did really exist;
neither would there be any settlement or attempt at
settlement on other basis different from those
established by an Arbitral Award under operation. It
will be understood why we do not wish to assume
responsibility for such an ending of an initiative we
took with the best of purposes, even abandoning the
advantages we enjoyed as possessors of the disputed
area, and to which initiative the Government of the
United States of America tendered its cooperation.

4. We desire, as it is natural, to clarify the situation by
presenting it frankly and as we understand it to be, to
His Excellency the Secretary of State, in order that if he
so wishes, and has no objections to such a course, he
may offer us any suggestions he considers as being
compatible with his Government’s action, with the
assurance that they will be considered here with all the
respect and good-will he so highly deserves. Mathieu.”
KELLOGG
28b Copy dated Mar. 18, 1926, handed to the Secretary of State by the
Chilean Ambassador, Mar. 22, 1926.

723.2515/2042: Telegram
[Document 196]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 22, 1926—6 p.m.
For Lassiter.
1. I have received your telegram of March 21, 6 p.m., in which
you point out objections to further postponement of plebiscitary
proceedings, renew your recommendations for immediate
termination of those proceedings, and express your willingness to
carry out program outlined in Department’s telegram of March
18, 4 p.m., if we still feel that that is best course.
2. Within past 24 hours both the Chilean and Peruvian
Governments have again expressed their desire to continue with
plebiscite. Peru categorically declines to accept alternative which
has been presented to her, and states that there can be no better
solution of the problem than a plebiscite and that she expects
Arbitrator to hold plebiscite in accordance with the award. Peru
complains about conditions, but in official statements to me she
carefully refrained from making any suggestion of terminating
plebiscite because of conditions. Chilean Government not only
insists on plebiscite likewise, but inquires what further steps she
can take to insure a fair plebiscite.
3. In view of these circumstances we could not possibly terminate
plebiscite at this time without deciding two things: (1) That
conditions are not such as to permit a fair plebiscite; (2) that
nothing can be done to create conditions under which fair
plebiscite can be held, in spite of fact that Chile now offers
formally in writing to do anything that is required. All of us,

including Mr. Hughes, are definitely of opinion that proper course
to follow is one referred to in paragraph 4 of your telegram of
March 21, 6 p.m., which may be outlined as follows:
(a) Vote down both resolutions now pending before the
Plebiscitary Commission.
(b) Vote down any additional resolution calling for
termination or postponement of the plebiscitary
proceedings which either party may offer.
(c) Put upon record with your negative vote on any
resolution for termination following statement:29
“I am prepared to continue the plebiscitary
proceedings with the hope and expectation
that appropriate safeguards for the plebiscite
will be provided and with the intention of
observing 
conditions 
and 
utilizing 
all
information 
gathered 
throughout 
the
plebiscite to formulate a judgment as to
further decisions to be taken.”
(d) Refrain from making any communication to either
Peruvian or Chilean member which is inconsistent with
idea of going ahead with plebiscitary process to its
normal conclusion.
4. I seriously doubt that Peru will withdraw; if she does, take the
briefest possible adjournment for purpose of submitting that fact
to Arbitrator and of receiving instructions. If Peru should not
withdraw, then you should go ahead at once with registration, and
judgment on question of fairness of plebiscite must be reserved
until vote has been taken.
5. For present I am withholding publication of correspondence
over good offices.

6. Chile’s formal statement, which is going forward to you as a
separate message is obviously one of utmost importance. You
should at once seize this opportunity to make specific demands
upon Chilean Commissioner looking to immediate improvement
of any conditions which you think necessary to the holding of fair
and free plebiscite. Chilean Ambassador understands that Foreign
Minister Mathieu’s statement is being transmitted to you for this
purpose.
KELLOGG
29 Quoted passage not paraphrased.

723.2515/2045: Telegram
[Document 197]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 23, 1926—6 p.m.
25. Your No. 40, March 22, 3 p.m.
(1) Since my No. 26 of March 20, 6 p.m., to you, I have received from
Ambassador Cruchaga the communication you mention and a further
memorandum from President Leguía in which the latter indicates that
Peru’s position is still unaltered in respect to offer of good offices. After
exchange of messages with Lassiter, I sent him last night following
suggested program which I believe will be effected when Plebiscitary
Commission reconvenes tomorrow: [Here follows text of program set forth
in paragraph 3 of telegram of March 22, 6 p.m., supra.]
Should Peru withdraw from plebiscite as result of these measures, I have
requested General Lassiter to take briefest possible adjournment for purpose
of submitting that fact to Arbitrator and receiving his instructions. Should
Peru not withdraw, it is my understanding that registration will proceed at
once and judgment upon question of fairness of plebiscite will be reserved
until vote has been taken. I have also made the suggestion to Lassiter that,
in view of Chile’s inquiry about what further guarantees or conditions are
deemed necessary for the holding of a fair plebiscite, he seize this
opportunity to make specific demands upon the Chilean Commissioner
looking toward improvement of any conditions he thinks necessary. I have
transmitted to Lassiter the communication from Mathieu on this subject,
handed me yesterday by Ambassador Cruchaga.
(2) The program I telegraphed Lassiter yesterday has following advantages:
(a) It provides for logical continuation of plebiscitary process, providing
Peru does not withdraw, and defers decision on question of fairness until

plebiscitary vote has been taken; (b) it keeps door open for negotiations for
settlement, for on one hand it avoids any premature finding on conditions
which might render it difficult, if not impossible, for Chile to entertain
mediation, and on other hand it furnishes Peru with maximum inducement
to consider settlement without a plebiscite.
In regard to Chile I am sure the risks of present situation are fully
appreciated. Views of General Lassiter and of his advisers at Arica on
unsatisfactoriness of existing conditions appear to be thoroughly
understood. If plebiscite goes on and conditions are not improved,
possibility that Lassiter may feel obliged to declare plebiscitary vote void
and certify that decision to the Arbitrator must be considered. In these
circumstances it seems that Chile should make strongest possible effort to
improve conditions in the plebiscitary territory and, at same time, to
continue receptive to diplomatic settlement of question.
(3) In regard to plebiscitary conditions, Chile’s fundamental point of view
has been constantly at variance with that of the president of the Plebiscitary
Commission. From time to time Chile has emphasized idea that her position
as administrator of the provinces in dispute gives her advantages over the
contending party which she is entitled, as a matter of right, to insist upon
and which she is entitled to maintain; the impression has been created that
Chile has tendency to give too little weight to high responsibility,
necessarily imposed upon her by her position as administrator, to see that
conditions are absolutely fair to both sides.
The feeling can not be avoided that if at this juncture Chile would take
vigorous measures on her own initiative to guarantee public order and to
punish offenses against the regulations, matters would be helped
considerably. I can not, of course, at this distance make specific
suggestions. I do not desire Mathieu to feel that I am putting any pressure
upon him to agree to an enlargement without limitation of Arbitrator’s
powers, as such a step is something outside the protocol of submission. This
suggestion did not originate with me but came from Santiago. I have not
consulted the Arbitrator on question whether he would accept unlimited
powers, and anyway he could not accept them unless Peru were willing.

You might understand my telegram No. 26 of March 20, 6 p.m., as an
invitation to bring pressure to bear on Chile. It was not so intended. I have
taken every appropriate step to afford Peru opportunity to accept our good
offices, or mediation, but to present she has declined.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2052: Telegram
[Document 198]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, March 24, 1926—9 p.m.
[Received March 25—12:07 a.m.]
33. The Minister for Foreign Affairs handed me this evening the following
memorandum in writing:
“Memorandum by the President of Peru. Referring to the
memorandum dated 20th instant,30 and notwithstanding the
expressions therein contained, the Government of Peru, taking
into consideration the situation which today exists in the
plebiscitary territory, according to the latest advices received from
its delegation in Arica, showing that the situation far from having
improved has become worse, thus making certain that the
plebiscitary act of the inscription of voters, should it take place
within three days, would be carried out under the same
atmosphere of terror now reigning there, manifests to the
Government of the United States, with due appreciation of the
situation that the high motives which have induced the
Government of the United States to offer its good offices, make
themselves felt; in accordance with the explanations which said
Government has been good enough to make, and trusting, once
more, in its rectitude and disinterestedness, the Government of
Peru accepts the good offices for the present, while at the same
time it wishes to express its recognition for the offer of the same.
Lima, 24th March, 1926.”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
POINDEXTER

30 See telegram No. 31, Mar. 21, from the Chargé in Peru, p. 338 [Pg. 338
includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192].

723.2515/2054: Telegram
[Document 199]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
ARICA, March 25, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 9:10 p.m.]
[From Lassiter.] At Commission meeting this morning the two pending
motions before reported were voted down. Peruvian member then
introduced a motion for neutralization of territory, which was voted down.
Peruvian member next introduced a very long motion reciting reasons why
a fair plebiscite could not be held and ending up with a series of resolutions
whose main effect was that Chile was in default of the award. The principal
concluding resolution was as follows:
“That, in view of the facts above stated, the celebration of a free
and fair plebiscite as established by the award is impossible of
realization and in consequence thereof it is the duty of the
Plebiscitary Commission to so inform the Arbitrator.”
My statement in connection with the latter resolution was as follows:
“As stated before when voting on the resolution introduced by the
Peruvian member for indefinite postponement, I am prepared to
continue plebiscitary proceedings with a hope that appropriate
safeguards for the plebiscite will be provided and with the
intention of observing conditions and utilizing all information
gathered throughout the plebiscite to formulate a judgment as to
further decisions to be taken; an expression of the conclusions of
the Commission upon plebiscitary conditions is at this moment
not essential or advantageous; I therefore abstain from voting on
the resolution.”
The motion accordingly was not carried. Full text is being cabled to you.31

2. Freyre told me before the meeting that his Government had
accepted good offices unconditionally. He also said he had no
instructions as to withdrawal in case his resolutions were not
accepted and apparently did not know what he would do about
commencing registration on Saturday. He made no further
propositions for postponement. If Peru does not take part in
registration on Saturday and does not formally withdraw, situation
will be very embarrassing.
3. If both Governments have accepted good offices, suggest you
notify each Government immediately to cable its representative
here to vote for such postponement as you deem necessary. It
would put us in a bad light for me to initiate such a proposition. It
is most important to stop all plebiscitary proceedings if
reasonable excuse can be found.
VON TRESCKOW
31 Telegram not printed. Text of the Peruvian motion is printed in Spanish in
El proceso de Tacna y Arica (1925–1927) ; reseña de las principales
sucesos, etc. (Lima, Casa Editora “La Opinion Nacional,” 1927), p. 303.

723.2515/2052: Telegram
[Document 200]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)32
WASHINGTON, March 25, 1926—6 p.m.
30. Please deliver immediately to the Minister of Foreign Affairs the
following memorandum:
“I am instructed by the Secretary of State to refer to his
correspondence with the Government of Chile on the subject of
good offices, and particularly to the memorandum handed to me
by the Minister of Foreign Affairs on March 16th33 in which it
was stated that the Government of Chile had not altered its
disposition to accept the good offices of the United States in the
form indicated in the previous memorandum of the Secretary of
State dated March 11th.34 The Secretary of State welcomes the
acceptance by the Government of Chile of the good offices of the
United States as a new evidence of the desire of the Government
of Chile sincerely to seek an adjustment of its differences with the
Government of Peru concerning the provinces of Tacna and Arica.
In view of this acceptance of good offices as heretofore offered by
the United States, and in view of the acceptance by the
Government of Peru of the same offer of good offices, the
Secretary of State desires me to suggest that, pursuant to the
terms of the offer, appropriate steps should be at once taken by
the Plebiscitary Commission looking to a suspension of the
plebiscitary proceedings, without prejudice to their resumption if
it should later appear that the differences between the two
countries are not susceptible of adjustment other than by the
celebration of a plebiscite; it being understood that pending the
consideration of any adjustment other than by the celebration of a
plebiscite the authority of the Plebiscitary Commission and the
general arrangement made by it for the holding of a plebiscite

under the terms of the award shall be maintained unimpaired. The
Secretary of State, therefore, wishes to inquire whether the
Government of Chile will not forthwith issue to its delegate on
the 
Plebiscitary 
Commission 
appropriate 
authority 
and
instructions to cooperate in taking the steps referred to. The
Secretary of State further inquires whether the Government of
Chile will authorize representatives on its behalf to enter into
negotiations at Washington with representatives of Peru similarly
authorized, the good offices of the United States with respect to
such negotiations being exercised by and through the Secretary of
State. Identical inquiries are being simultaneously submitted by
the Secretary of State to the Government of Peru.”
KELLOGG
32 On the same date a similar telegram was sent to the Ambassador in Peru
(see infra); the substance of these telegrams was telegraphed at the same
time to General Lassiter at Arica, latter telegram not printed.
33 See telegram No. 36, Mar. 16, from the Ambassador in Chile, p. 332 [Pg.
332 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186].
34 See telegram No. 20, Mar. 11, to the Ambassador in Chile, p. 327 [Pg. 327
is part of Doc. 182].

723.2515/2052: Telegram
[Document 201]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
WASHINGTON, March 25, 1926—6 p.m.
27. Your 33 March 24, 9 p.m., received. Please deliver immediately to the
President and the Minister of Foreign Affairs the following memorandum:
“I am instructed by the Secretary of State to acknowledge the
Memorandum of the President of Peru which was handed to me
on March 24, and to say that the Secretary of State deeply
appreciates the sentiments expressed by the President concerning
the motives and disinterestedness of the Government of the
United States, and that the Secretary welcomes the acceptance by
the Government of Peru of the good offices of the United States
as a new evidence of the desire of the Government of Peru
sincerely to seek an adjustment of its differences with the
Government of Chile concerning the provinces of Tacna and
Arica. In view of this acceptance of good offices as heretofore
offered by the United States, and in view of the acceptance by the
Government of Chile of the same offer of good offices, the
Secretary of State desires me to suggest that pursuant to the terms
of the offer appropriate steps should be at once taken by the
Plebiscitary Commission looking to a suspension of the
plebiscitary proceedings, without prejudice to their resumption if
it should later appear that the differences between the two
countries are not susceptible of adjustment, other than by the
celebration of a plebiscite; it being understood that pending the
consideration of any adjustment other than by the celebration of a
plebiscite the authority of the Plebiscitary Commission and the
general arrangement made by it for the holding of a plebiscite
under the terms of the award shall be maintained unimpaired. The
Secretary of State, therefore, wishes to inquire whether the
Government of Peru will not forthwith issue to its delegate on the

Plebiscitary Commission appropriate authority and instructions to
cooperate in taking the steps referred to. The Secretary of State
further inquires whether the Government of Peru will authorize
representatives on its behalf to enter into negotiations at
Washington with representatives of the Government of Chile
similarly authorized, the good offices of the United States with
respect to such negotiations being exercised by and through the
Secretary of State. Identical inquiries are being simultaneously
submitted by the Secretary of State to the Government of Chile.”
KELLOGG

723.2515/2056: Telegram
[Document 202]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, March 26, 1926—2 a.m.
[Received 9 a.m.]
From Lassiter. The indications are that Peru will not participate in the
registration which starts tomorrow. Now that Peru has accepted our good
offices, she looks to us to protect her. Unless a postponement is ordered at
once a most difficult situation will arise, as one party will not be
represented in the registration. Please arrange to have the Chilean and
Peruvian members of the Commission notified by tonight to join with me in
unanimous motion to postpone registration for 30 days.35 Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW
35 On Mar. 26, 1 p.m., the Department telegraphed General Lassiter that it
was impossible to get word from Chile and Peru in time to advise him
finally about suspension of plebiscitary proceedings and suggested that he
arrange for adjournments from day to day. (File No. 723.2515/2058.)
723.2515/2054: Telegram
[Document 203]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 26, 1926—10 a.m.

For Lassiter. Your telegram March 25, 3 p.m., received. I wholly approve
position you took in proceedings yesterday and think that the formal record
at this time is satisfactory. I shall send further suggestions, especially with
regard to the resolution for the suspension of proceedings, as soon as replies
have been received from Santiago and Lima, as stated in my telegram of
March 25, 6 p.m.36
KELLOGG
36 See footnote 32, p. 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200].

723.2515/2060: Telegram
[Document 204]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, March 26, 1926—noon.
[Received 7:53 p.m.]
45. I handed your memorandum to the Minister for Foreign Affairs this
morning. Mathieu expressed great astonishment and disappointment and
fear that Chilean Government would not accept, inasmuch as it regards
Peru’s move as dictated solely by desire to obtain delay and avoid
plebiscite. …
 
… I hope Chile will accept this renewed offer of good offices; but I believe
her Government may insist either upon going ahead with registration or
upon delay of only ten or fifteen days, allowing a few days for presentation
of the views of the litigating nations through their Ambassadors and
attorneys now in Washington, and expecting the President to make his
recommendations two or three days later and the Congresses of Chile and
Peru to take final and definite decision within very few days after that, with
the plebiscitary proceedings to be hurried forward from that date.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COLLIER

723.2515/2063: Telegram
[Document 205]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, March 26, 1926—11 p.m.
[Received March 27—9:55 a.m.]
47. The Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs, who has just seen me, says
that Chile will be unable to answer your memorandum until early next
week. He states, however, that Chile believes her acceptance of good
offices to be binding but that she is inclined to think that there ought to be
no suspension of plebiscitary proceedings. Chilean Commissioner has
telegraphed Foreign Office that Lassiter has informed him that you
telegraphed Lassiter to suspend proceedings, alleging that suspension was
agreed upon in acceptance. Chile says that, in accepting, express reservation
was made that exercise of good offices should not impede plebiscitary
proceedings, and that that reservation has never been modified.
The Under Secretary said that great nervousness exists here at idea of
suspension and that there is great possibility of popular outbreak in Arica.
To allay this feeling, the Government will, he said, publish in tomorrow’s
papers your first memorandum and the Chilean reply. I suggested that if any
memorandum on the subject were published, all should be published.
Chile also takes exception to General Lassiter’s call of a meeting of the
Plebiscitary Commission tonight with less than the 24 hours’ notice
required by the regulations.
COLLIER

723.2515/2065: Telegram
[Document 206]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
ARICA, March 27, 1926—8 a.m.
[Received 11:55 a.m.]
From Lassiter for Secretary Kellogg, with the request that this message be
communicated at once to the Arbitrator.
1. As representative of the Arbitrator I have now been forced into an
impossible situation through having carried out the urgent requests of the
State Department. I have, it is true, followed a perfectly consistent policy,
namely, that I was prepared to go ahead with the plebiscite; but now that
Peru has been led to conform to the State Department’s policy, Chile eludes
that policy and insists on going on with the plebiscite. To go on with the
plebiscite means to drive Peru out, as the conditions here are too intolerable
for her to stay in. What we ought to do under the circumstances is to revert
to the policy I proposed some time ago of terminating the plebiscite and
fixing the blame in restrained tones on Chile; but, having just two days ago
put myself on record as prepared to go [ahead] with the plebiscite, I am at a
great disadvantage.
2. The situation here is ominous. Outbursts of violence are almost certain to
occur and no one can tell how far they will go. No matter how far we
attempt to carry out this plebiscite, it can end in no acceptable result. It
should be terminated at once and thus avoid the suffering, the loss of life,
and the added bitterness sure to accrue and enable our country to get out of
this affair in something like a dignified way.
3. I accordingly ask that you intervene and on your motion terminate the
plebiscite on the grounds that the experience of the past 7 months fully
convinces you that an acceptable plebiscite cannot be carried out under
existing conditions and that it is necessary to put an end to the above
proceedings leading only to increased animosities, or that you rule on your

own motion that for the same reasons given above that in order for the
plebiscite to be continued the territory must be neutralized.
4. This morning I received the following from Mr. Freyre.
“In compliance with instructions from my Government to the
effect that according to the understanding with the Government of
the United States I should take steps at once looking to the
suspension of the plebiscitary proceedings, I have today given
instructions to the Peruvian members of the registration boards
not to concur thereto.”
We now have reached the impasse in which one party refuses to go ahead
on account of its acceptance of good offices and the other insists on
proceeding despite the acceptance of good offices.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2060: Telegram
[Document 207]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 27, 1926—10 a.m.
For Lassiter. Message from Ambassador Collier indicates that Chile is now
hesitating about accepting good offices. Under the circumstances it is
imperative that you go ahead with registration today, if possible; if not, be
prepared to continue at any moment. We shall keep you informed. I am still
hopeful that our good offices will be accepted.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2060: Telegram
[Document 208]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 27, 1926—10 a.m.
32. Your No. 45, March 26, noon, was complete surprise to me, as Chile has
indicated through you again and again that she desired a settlement outside
plebiscite and we have no fewer than three unqualified acceptances of good
offices as tendered by this Government, the latest on March 16. Of course, I
appreciate that acceptances are revocable, but revocation of acceptance of
good offices at this time by Chile would discourage any future efforts and
would probably make reaching of any adjustment impossible. It is not
possible to carry on within 15 days the negotiations which are to settle a
dispute of 41 years’ duration.
I shall notify Lassiter at once that agreement for acceptance of good offices
is not yet complete, as I had supposed it to be. It is improbable that he is
prepared to go ahead today with registration.
Chile must understand, of course, that Lassiter has gone ahead with matter
with great reluctance, as he has abundant evidence that Chilean authorities
have failed to maintain conditions conducive to fair election, and that the
Commission is likely at any time to so declare. In view of what you quoted
from Mathieu in your No. 40, March 22, 3 p.m., I do not understand his
attitude now. We have followed his suggestions exactly. Under the
circumstances, we had better have answer of Chilean Government in
writing at earliest moment possible.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2067: Telegram
[Document 209]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
ARICA, March 27, 1926—noon.
[Received 3:23 p.m.]
From Lassiter. As Peru is not participating in the registration and another
impasse has been reached, I think that, even in light of stand I have taken in
last three days, I should be justified in saying that I do not believe that there
is any hope of acceptable solution of this problem through a plebiscite and
that, with a view to terminating plebiscite and to facilitating good offices, I
am willing to vote for resolution suggested in my telegram of March 21, 6
p.m. …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lassiter
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2072: Telegram
[Document 210]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, March 27, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 6:45 p.m.]
From Lassiter. Situation simply cannot be allowed to drift as you suggest in
your telegram of March 27, 10 a.m. Registration is now under way without
Peru’s participation. She asserts she is obeying request of United States for
suspension of plebiscite and that all registration now taking place is void.
Chile is proceeding regularly to register her voters, and every day that we
allow this farce to continue the more right will she have to protest against
our inconsistent course should we later on put blame on her.
It is obvious that for present good offices are dead. Thing to do now is to
liquidate this situation before we become entangled in worse
embarrassment. Steps of program I propose are as follows:
(1) You to cable Peru to notify Freyre that request to participate in
suspension of plebiscite is annulled;
(2) I to offer Freyre choice of proposing his own motion to
terminate plebiscite, or else either to proceed with registration or
to withdraw; I am sure that Freyre is entitled to have his choice
and should not now be forced to withdraw.
Unless you carry out part (1) of this program there is absolute deadlock
here, for I do not think that Freyre will budge as long as he is able to quote
our request for suspension. Chile will steadily proceed with registration, of
course.

I want to consult Freyre on this suggested program not later than morning
of March 29, so that action can be taken that afternoon. Haste is necessary, I
can assure you, and only possible way out of present most distressing
dilemma is to terminate the plebiscite at once.
Please notify me of your instructions to Lima, so that I shall be able surely
to arrange for meeting of the Commission on March 29.37
Lassiter
VON TRESCKOW
37 At 8 p.m., Mar. 27, the Secretary telegraphed General Lassiter that the
Secretary’s telegram of 6 p.m., Mar. 27, was a complete answer to this
telegram; see p. 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 223].

723.2515/2065: Telegram
[Document 211]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 27, 1926—4 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your telegram of March 27, 8 a.m., has been received and
shown to the Arbitrator, who is at all times kept fully informed. It is
obviously impossible for him to terminate plebiscitary proceedings on his
own initiative as you request. Position Chile is adopting at this moment
seems to be based on misunderstanding which I am endeavoring to clear up.
I have not yet received definite reply from Santiago, and have just been
advised that Chile’s reply to my latest memorandum may not be received
before next week.
Chile has stated that she considers her acceptance of good offices to be
binding and the only question for determination is over suspension of the
plebiscitary proceedings during negotiations. I am certain that this difficulty
can and will be overcome. In the meantime we have no choice but to go
ahead with registration even though Peru, for the time being, declines to
participate. Any other course of action would be misunderstood and would
be construed by Chile as abandonment of plebiscite.
As far as Peru is concerned, if effort to exercise good offices ultimately
breaks down, the Commission could extend the period for registration so
that her interests therein would not be prejudiced by continuance of
registration during next few days without her participation. Neither
Arbitrator nor anyone representing him can undertake to terminate
plebiscite at this juncture. Only thing to do is to go on with the registration
until both parties to the plebiscite agree upon suspension of proceedings as
contemplated by offer of good offices.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2063: Telegram
[Document 212]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 27, 1926—5 p.m.
35. Your No. 47, March 26, 11 p.m. As Chile deems her acceptance of good
offices to be binding, only question over which there is misunderstanding is
suspension of the plebiscitary proceedings during negotiations. Apparently
the distinction between such suspension as is contemplated by terms of
offer of good offices and a postponement or termination for plebiscite needs
emphasis. General arrangement for plebiscite should not be disturbed or
impaired, but execution of plans which have been formulated by the
Plebiscitary Commission can and should be held in abeyance during
proposed negotiation; this can be done without in any way prejudicing
resumption of plebiscitary operations if and whenever it shall appear that
negotiations can not reach satisfactory conclusion.
It is manifestly impracticable to carry on negotiations and at same time
have plebiscitary activities proceeding with the attendant risks of
complications and disorders which would aggravate whole situation. I can
perceive little hope for successful negotiations on any other phase. Chile’s
acceptance embodied in her memorandum of February 19 was based on her
understanding that the proceedings or steps taken in exercise of the good
offices offered in my memorandum would not impede the plebiscitary
proceedings provided in the arbitral award. I have understood this to be an
unqualified acceptance of offer of good offices in accordance with terms
and spirit in which it was made, and the intimation you now convey that
Chile thinks she made an express reservation that plebiscitary activities
should continue during the negotiations comes as a distinct surprise. I am
unable to believe that Chile, on reflection, will insist upon a reservation or
condition which qualifies her acceptance in such a way as to render it
wholly illusory.

If any part of correspondence with Chile in regard to good offices is
published, I think that entire correspondence with her on that subject should
be given out, and for that reason I shall furnish it to the press.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2067: Telegram
[Document 213]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
WASHINGTON, March 27, 1926—6 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your March 27, noon. Our proposition to Chile for good
offices, which was accepted, is as follows: “I am instructed by the Secretary
of State to inquire whether the Government of Chile would be disposed to
avail itself of the good offices of the United States in an endeavor to arrive
at a friendly adjustment of the existing differences with Peru concerning the
provinces of Tacna and Arica, it being understood that pending the
consideration of any adjustment other than by the celebration of a plebiscite
the authority of the Plebiscitary Commission and the general arrangement
made by it for the holding of a plebiscite under the terms of the award shall
be maintained unimpaired.” In Chile’s reply she stated that she accepted the
good offices “with the understanding that the proceedings or steps taken in
the exercise of such good offices will not impede the plebiscitary
proceedings, as was set forth in the memorandum which Your Excellency
was good enough to deliver to me”. Chile claims we have no right under
this to suspend the proceedings without her consent and I think there is very
serious question whether we have such a right. In any event, the
abandonment of the plebiscite at this time and the failure to continue with
the registration will cause us the utmost embarrassment and is liable to
prove prejudicial to all plans for settlement under consideration. It is clear
under the Award that a majority of each registration board may act and that
one side withdrawing cannot prevent the board from functioning. Have
shown your last message March 27, Noon, to the Arbitrator and it is his
desire that you should go ahead with the registration at present and if
necessary he will make an order to that effect. I hope you will not oblige
him to do so.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2070: Telegram
[Document 214]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, March 27, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received March 28—12:10 a.m.]
48. I have just received a memorandum from the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of which the following is a translation:
“The Minister for Foreign Affairs has received the memorandum
of His Excellency the Ambassador of the United States dated
March 26th,38 in which under instructions from the Secretary of
State he communicates the acceptance on the part of the
Government of Peru of the good offices of the United States,
already accepted by the Government of Chile, for the friendly
arrangement of differences pending between the two countries.
In this situation Your Excellency suggests, under instructions
from your Government, the Plebiscitary Commission immediately
adopt a resolution calculated to agree upon a suspension of the
plebiscitary proceedings without prejudice of renewing them if
later it should appear that the differences between the two
countries are not susceptible of being solved by an arrangement
other than that of the plebiscite, and upon the basis that the
authority of the Plebiscitary Commission and the general
arrangement made by it for the holding of the plebiscite, shall be
maintained without alteration.
Your Excellency terminates by saying that the Secretary of State
desires to know if the Government of Chile would be disposed to
instruct its delegate in Arica to cooperate in the adoption of such
resolution and if it will authorize some representative to
participate in Washington with representative similarly authorized
by the Government of Peru in the said exercise of good offices.

In reply to this memorandum, the Government of Chile takes
pleasure in seeing the good offices of the Government of the
United States accepted and its (Chile’s) sincere, desire to seek a
friendly arrangement for the pending differences recognized.
The Government of Chile reiterates on this occasion its support
manifested in its memorandum of February 19th, to accept the
good offices offered ‘with the understanding that the proceedings
to which they may give place will not impede, as set forth in the
memorandum which Your Excellency has been pleased to deliver
to me, the plebiscitary proceedings’; and, with that understanding,
will immediately give instructions to its Ambassador in
Washington that he participate, upon conditions expressed by
Your Excellency, of [in?] the corresponding negotiations.
The Government of Chile keenly deplores that it is not in
condition to accept the suggestion to suspend immediately the
plebiscitary proceedings, especially since that would signify a
return to the situation uncertain and full of peril to which an end
was put by the recent resolution of the Plebiscitary Commission;
and it is certain that the prosecution of those proceedings, which
in no way can prejudice the exercise of good offices, will favor a
solution which, once reached, even in principle, will indicate the
hour for considering without the inconveniences which in this
moment exist, the suggestion which Your Excellency has been
pleased to transmit. Santiago, March 27th, 1926.”
The words within quotation marks are new and possibly more literal
translation of exactly the same Spanish words as appeared in the text of the
memorandum of the Minister for Foreign Affairs dated February 19th,39
which I assume you have received by this time. The Spanish text of the
memorandum which I am now telegraphing to you, as well as of the
memorandum received on March 16th, will go to you in the next pouch due
at Washington about April 20th.
COLLIER

38 See telegram No. 30, Mar. 25, to the Ambassador in Chile, p. 350 [Pg. 350
includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200].
39 See telegram No. 22, Feb. 19, from the Ambassador in Chile, p. 305 [Pg.
305 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164].

723.2515/2073: Telegram
[Document 215]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, March 27, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received March 28—12:10 a.m.]
36. I received this evening a note from the Minister for Foreign Affairs
which, after reciting the contents of your memorandum of March 25, 6
p.m., states as follows:
“In reply, I am pleased to state to Your Excellency, with the
request that you be kind enough to transmit the same to the
Secretary of State, that, in agreement with the President of the
Republic, I have already issued to the delegate of Peru on the
Plebiscitary Commission at Arica the necessary authorization and
instructions to cooperate in the immediate suspension of the
preliminary proceedings of the plebiscite which, however, shall
remain unaltered as in the case of the authority of the
Commission; and that my Government is disposed to accredit
representatives in Washington to enter with those of Chile’ into
the negotiations that may be suggested by the Secretary of State,
or that may be suggested through his estimable mediation.”
POINDEXTER

723.2515/2069: Telegram
[Document 216]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, March 28, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 6:30 p.m.]
50. [Paraphrase.] Like you, I had never thought that Chile’s acceptance of
good offices meant that there should be no suspension of plebiscitary
activities. Until day before yesterday there was nothing in my conversations
with the Foreign Office to give me any such impression. I had supposed that
terms used in your memorandum and in Chilean replies meant merely that
authority of Plebiscitary Commission and general arrangements were to
remain unaffected. I am not prepared to say, however, that Chile is showing
bad faith. It may be honest difference of interpretation and of opinion over
best way to make the good offices effective.
Today’s papers report official instructions and public sentiment which make
plain how extremely difficult and probably impossible it will be to get Chile
to consent to postponement, but I will do all I can to obtain consent. In the
meantime, I urge most strongly that until this misunderstanding is cleared
up, or until an arrangement is made, or unless there is disorder or gross
fraud in the registration, the registration be not interrupted, and that there be
no failure to execute program adopted last Thursday by the Commission.
Otherwise we shall be charged with bad faith and inconsistency by Chile
who will probably assert that we have abandoned plebiscitary proceedings
and she will act on this assumption. She will be sustained by a great body of
South American opinion. [End paraphrase.]
Peruvian refusal to register yesterday has in the opinion of Chile furnished
concrete evidence to support its reiterated declaration that Peru because of
lack of votes would never attend the plebiscite and that it sought merely to
delay and evade.

I shall endeavor to see Mathieu at once and if I can not find him today will
certainly see him tomorrow morning. [Paraphrase.] I will impress strongly
on Minister for Foreign Affairs the views expressed by you in your telegram
No. 35, March 27, 5 p.m., and in most tactful but forceful way point out
perils of situation for Chile as indicated in your No. 32, March 27, 10 a.m.
[End paraphrase.]
COLLIER

723.2515/2076: Telegram
[Document 217]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 29, 1926—1 p.m.
30. Both Chile and Peru have now accepted this Government’s good
offices. Original offer, which has never been modified, embodied express
understanding40 “that pending the consideration of any adjustment other
than by the celebration of a plebiscite the authority of the Plebiscitary
Commission and the general arrangement made by it for the holding of a
plebiscite under the terms of the award shall be maintained unimpaired.”
The present difficulty arises from the different interpretations the two
parties give to this construction. Peru’s construction is that it imposes an
immediate suspension of all plebiscitary proceedings including registration.
Chile’s construction is precisely the opposite; that is, it guarantees that all
proceedings, including registration, shall continue. Neither interpretation
corresponds to the true intent and purpose of the offer which was, as it
states, to the effect that Commission’s authority and the general
arrangement for holding plebiscite should be maintained unimpaired so that
it might be held should the negotiations prove fruitless. Nothing was said in
the offer about suspension of plebiscitary activities, the Secretary of State
having assumed that the proceedings in the plebiscitary area would, in event
of acceptance of good offices, readily be adjustable to needs of the new
situation by agreement on part of Chile and Peru. This agreement to be
carried out through proper instructions to be given by Governments of Chile
and Peru to their respective delegates on the Commission.
Accordingly, after receipt of acceptance of good offices, the Secretary of
State suggested to both Governments that they issue appropriate
instructions to their respective delegates looking to suspension of
proceedings during the negotiations. It will be appreciated, therefore, that
the only question remaining open now is whether, all things being taken

into consideration, the plebiscitary activities now under way, including
registration, should not be held in abeyance, pursuant to suggestion of the
Secretary of State, during the negotiations.
As such suspension was not imposed by the offer of good offices and by its
acceptance, it is clear that registration should proceed until some definite
agreement is reached on the matter.
The Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs has met with difficulty in
reconciling Chilean public opinion to an immediate suspension of
plebiscitary proceedings; but I am hopeful that this problem, which, after all
is only incidental to main object with which all of us are concerned, will be
solved within a few days to satisfaction of everyone. In meantime, you will
please impress upon President Leguía and the Peruvian Minister for Foreign
Affairs importance of taking no measures which could aggravate the
situation and be of embarrassment to me in my efforts to bring about
complete agreement regarding suspension. The direction the Peruvian
Government gave to its member of the Commission to agree to suspension
was, to that extent, a gratifying compliance with suggestion I made; but I
am informed that Mr. Freyre has, in addition, ordered Peruvian members on
the registration boards to withdraw and has refused to take part in
registration proceedings. I presume that this action was taken on mistaken
idea that offer of good offices and the acceptance imposed suspension of
registration; in reality, as I have pointed out, a suspension can be effected
only by agreement of the parties registered by Commission itself. Until
agreement to that end is reached and a suspension can be authoritatively
provided for, Peru’s refusal to participate in the registration interjects a new
complication, seriousness of which I trust you will be able to obtain
President Leguía’s cooperation, and that of Minister for Foreign Affairs, to
minimize as far as possible.
Latest information from Chile is that I cannot expect a decision in matter
before March 31, although Chilean Government has already authorized its
Ambassador here to represent it in negotiations, contemplated by exercise
of good offices. Peru has not yet definitely taken same step, although I note
that she is disposed similarly to designate her Ambassador.

In my opinion, you would do well to discuss present situation fully and with
candor with both President Leguía and Minister for Foreign Affairs, and
following your discussions I should be glad to have your report promptly.
KELLOGG
40 Quoted passage not paraphrased.

723.2515/2076: Telegram
[Document 218]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 29, 1926—4 p.m.
36. This morning I received a telegram from General Lassiter41 giving
substance of letter presented to him by Claro in which position is taken that
Chile’s acceptance of good offices was accompanied by condition that
plebiscitary proceedings should not be suspended during negotiations; that
neither Plebiscitary Commission nor Arbitrator has power to direct a
suspension, which can be brought about only by unanimous vote. I do not
wish to express any opinion at this time on the technical correctness of this
position; however, I desire to emphasize the most prominent features of
existing situation as follows: [Here follows text of the first paragraph of
telegram No. 30, March 29, 1 p.m., to the Ambassador in Peru, supra.]
I have already expressed the same views, in identical terms, to Peru. I feel
that offer and acceptance of good offices has lifted this whole matter to
distinctly higher plane, and that it is now desirable for all of us to take
broadest possible view of problem, ignoring, as far as we can, technical
considerations. Fully appreciating the difficulties faced by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, I again express the earnest hope that he will find a way to
agree to suspension of plebiscitary activities during the forthcoming
negotiations.
KELLOGG
41 Telegram not printed.

723.2515/2076: Telegram
[Document 219]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 29, 1926—7 p.m.
For Lassiter. I have telegraphed today to Ambassador Collier as follows:
[Here follows text of telegram No. 36, March 29, 4 p.m., to the Ambassador
in Chile, supra.]
 
I have also transmitted a similar analysis of situation to Ambassador
Poindexter. I wish to reiterate the point that best and perhaps only hope of
settlement by negotiation lies in maintaining situation for the present just as
it is. I am convinced that we are serving real interests of all the parties
concerned by holding both Governments firmly to their responsibilities for
the present situation and by maintaining intact the conditions conducive to a
resort to negotiations, and not by taking any other course which would lead
to terminating the plebiscite with almost certain result that door to
negotiations would be closed and controversy perpetuated.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2081: Telegram
[Document 220]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LIMA, March 30, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received 9:05 p.m.]
38. Your No. 30, March 29, 1 p.m. I have talked at length with the President
on the matter. He seems to be sincerely disposed to cooperate with you in
good faith. Freyre’s disinclination to proceed with registration of voters is
based primarily upon Peruvian assertion that conditions in the provinces are
such that it is impossible to go on with the plebiscitary activities without
suffering and loss of life, and that acceptance of good offices of the United
States for settlement by direct negotiations is preferable. I told President
that you were anxious that Peru should not delay in appointing her
representative at Washington in the proceedings under your good offices.
President Leguía agreed to inform you at once but said that he desired to
submit nomination of Peruvian representative to Congress for its approval.
He has practically decided to send Freyre as Peruvian Plenipotentiary.
President Leguía remarked that Freyre’s appointment would be confirmed
as soon as definite understanding was reached on suspension of plebiscitary
proceedings. I also saw Minister for Foreign Affairs and told him you
wished to proceed in exercise of good offices as promptly as possible, and
urged upon him desirability of prompt action in appointment of Peruvian
Plenipotentiary. The Minister assured me that Peru would not delay action
in this matter.
POINDEXTER

723.2515/2081: Telegram
[Document 221]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 31, 1926—1 p.m.
31. Your No. 38, March 30, 4 p.m. Position taken by Peru at this juncture I
deem not only against her own best interests, but if persisted in may,
indeed, defeat all efforts to settle this controversy either by exercise of good
offices or by a plebiscite. Let me place situation before you as I see it:
1. Question of suspension of plebiscitary proceedings in order to
permit exercise of good offices under favorable conditions is one
with which Plebiscitary Commission cannot properly concern
itself. Commission has no authority to suspend proceedings for
that reason. If it can suspend at all, it can do so only for reasons
directly connected with holding of the plebiscite it is committed
to conduct. In the circumstances now existing, suspension of
plebiscitary proceedings can properly be brought about only by
agreement with Chile and Peru in same manner as was agreement
for a diplomatic settlement by resort to good offices.
2. Persistence on part of Peru in declining to participate in
registration in absence both of any agreement for suspension and
of any order made by Plebiscitary Commission in proper exercise
of its power and authority will be equivalent to a withdrawal from
the proceedings which are being taken pursuant to Arbitrator’s
award; Peru should realize that a withdrawal under these
conditions may place her in position of rejecting the award and of
defeating execution of article III of Treaty of Ancon which
provides for a plebiscite. Peru would be taking this action without
legal justification and entirely upon her own motion, for there is

no official determination that plebiscite cannot and should not be
held.
3. By this situation Peru is making it possible for Chile to contend
that the former, having abandoned the proceedings on her own
initiative, has given up her legal right to a plebiscite and, in
consequence, to the territory in dispute. Chile will also contend,
no doubt, that Peru is acting in bad faith, as she declines to
participate in registration, nothwithstanding Commission’s order
to continue, and now proposes to withdraw her Commissioner
and to send him to Washington, in this way emphasizing her
disposition to enforce abandonment of plebiscite without legal
justification.
4. My efforts to have Chile accept suggestion of suspension of
plebiscitary proceedings during negotiations here are being
seriously embarrassed by failure of Peru to maintain attitude of
cooperation both with me and with chairman of the Plebiscitary
Commission to maintain unimpaired plebiscitary process until
some agreement on suspension can be reached. I hope you can
impress upon President Leguía and upon Minister for Foreign
Affairs great importance of cooperation, such as avoiding action
which can be construed as withdrawal or as giving Chile
opportunity to bring charges of bad faith. It is clear that
registration must continue until an agreement is reached, and
Peru’s participating in it for the present is best evidence she can
offer of her sincere desire to promote a settlement.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2084a: Telegram
[Document 222]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 1, 1926—10 a.m.
For Lassiter.
(1) Current press reports state that Peruvian voters who were sent
into the plebiscitary territory a few weeks ago to register are now
being sent out without their having been registered. I have
understood that five or six hundred Peruvian voters have for
several weeks been encamped near Arica. I should like to be
advised of reasons given by Peruvian delegate for removal of
these candidates for registration if they are now being removed. It
is also our understanding that there are hundreds of other voters in
the territory who have not yet tried to register. Inquiry made to
Ambassador Velarde and his counsel for reason for this
nonregistration has failed to elicit any satisfactory answer. Please
report fully.
(2) I have also been informed that President Leguía is thinking of
sending Freyre here as Peruvian Plenipotentiary; if this were
realized, negotiations would be delayed for at least four weeks
more.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2088: Telegram
[Document 223]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
LIMA, April 1, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received April 2—8:43 a.m.]
40. [Paraphrase.] Your No. 31, March 31, 1 p.m. I have just seen President
Leguía and conveyed to him the sense of your message. He gave most
careful and deliberate attention and thought to the statement, and seemed,
for the first time since I have been conferring with him on this matter,
almost overcome by difficulties and burdens of the problem, and, as he said,
by the sudden disappointment in development of the situation just when he
was feeling measure of relief at what appeared to be some hope of solution.
He said Peru could not accept responsibility for situation which has come
about or for failure of plebiscite or of good offices, if that should follow. He
had assumed that you had come to conclusion that it was not practicable to
continue with plebiscite and that you had thereupon intervened with offer of
good offices, to replace in that way proceedings under the award which
situation rendered impossible. Immediately after he had accepted your offer
of good offices, he said, he had received your message of March 25 asking
Government of Peru to instruct Freyre to cooperate in bringing about a
suspension of the registration.42 Accordingly, instructions to that end had
been given at once, and he appeared deeply moved and saddened that he
was now seemingly condemned for his action, after having given these
instructions at your request.
… He said that he had accepted your offer of good offices notwithstanding
failure to concede conditions which he had urged, in the hope that some just
settlement nevertheless might be found. He seemed quite overcome by fact
that in this he was to be disappointed and that blame was to be put on Peru.
The entire burden of the problem, he said, rested on him personally, and it
was only through his determination that Peru’s delegation had remained in

Arica as long as it had. … He also said that he could not understand your
statement that the Commission lacks authority to suspend the plebiscitary
proceedings, as the terms of the award expressly give the Commission this
authority. I made the following explanation: [End paraphrase.]
That my understanding of your statement was that the Plebiscitary
Commission had no authority to suspend or postpone the plebiscitary
proceedings merely on account of the acceptance of good offices and that I
did not understand it to deprive the Commission of the authority to carry
out the terms of the award in the discretion of the Commission. The
President stated that General Lassiter had stated to the Peruvian delegate
that he could not act in the matter without instructions from Washington and
that he had received no instructions. I explained to the President that, as I
understood the situation, it was that in your desire if possible to bring about
a lasting settlement of the controversy, you did not desire to make a final
breach with either party which would close the door to further negotiations
and so, upon a failure of the plebiscite as well, leave matters unsettled, and
that perhaps for that reason the Commission had been as lenient as it had
been with Chile. I told the President that I did not understand that you
intended in any way to blame him or Peru for any action which they had
taken in the past, but that in view of the new situation which had developed
and of your earnest desire to be of service to both parties and to bring about
a final settlement of the dispute, you were appealing to him to cooperate
with you with that end in view; and I suggested to the President that he
cable to Mr. Freyre to have a frank consultation with General Lassiter about
the entire matter from all angles with a view to cooperating towards that
end. The President stated that he would do so, but reiterated that unless
protection were given to Peruvian voters and the terror which reigns in the
provinces were stopped it would be impossible for them to participate in the
plebiscite; and referred again to the findings on this question which had
been made by the American advisers on the ground.
He said that in addition to this the whole morale and spirit of the Peruvian
delegation had been broken by the offer and acceptance of good offices and
the general assumption in Arica that this meant that the plebiscite would not
be carried through.

POINDEXTER
42 See telegram No. 27, Mar. 25, to the Ambassador in Peru, p. 351 [Pg. 351
includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201].

723.2515/2088a: Telegram
[Document 224]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
WASHINGTON, April 1, 1926—7 p.m.
For Lassiter. As the result of communications which I have had with the
two governments, I am submitting the following concrete program for the
approval of both Peru and Chile:43
“In conformity with the offer of good offices and mediation by
the United States and the acceptance thereof by Peru and Chile,
the Secretary of State hereby submits for the approval of both
Peru and Chile the following program:
First. That the Governments of Peru and Chile
designate immediately their respective plenipotentiaries
to meet with the Secretary of State in Washington not
later than the 6th day of April, 1926.
Second. That the Secretary of State submit to the said
plenipotentiaries for their consideration a concrete basis
or bases of adjustment.
Third. That immediately upon the acceptance in
principle by the parties of a basis of adjustment so
submitted the plebiscitary proceedings be suspended for
such term as may be necessary in order to determine
whether an agreement can be reached. The Secretary of
State desires me to inquire whether the foregoing
program is approved by the Government of Peru.”
If this program is accepted I have reason to believe that an arrangement for
suspension of the plebiscitary proceedings may be made effective during
the coming week.

Kextoce

om Telegrams No. 37 to Chile and No. 32 to Peru, Apr. 1, 7 p.m.: neither
printed.

723.2515/2087: Telegram
[Document 225]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, April 1, 1926—midnight.
[Received April 2—8:43 a.m.]
From Lassiter. Your telegram April 1, 10 a.m. I have cabled you several
times (see my cables of March 27) that Peru is not taking any part in the
registration proceedings. On the first day of registration, March 27,
Peruvian members of registration boards were withdrawn, and no Peruvians
are registering. The reasons given by Freyre are that he is observing the
undertaking of the Government of Peru that during the consideration of any
adjustment other than celebration of a plebiscite, the plebiscitary
proceedings should be suspended. Peru’s failure to participate in
registration is not on ground that conditions are unsuitable but that she is
complying with request of our Government to cooperate in suspending
plebiscitary proceedings during negotiations under good offices. Peru is
now awaiting next move from Department of State, and Freyre says that
they will withdraw if complete suspension is not granted. Indications here
are very convincing that Chilean Government has absolutely no intention of
suspending proceedings and as Chilean and American members of the
registration boards are functioning, Chilean voters are being registered at
rate of 200 a day. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2088c supp.: Telegram
[Document 226]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 2, 1926—5 p.m.
33. I am most anxious that there should be no risk of misunderstanding or
of misinterpretation of memorandum quoted in my No. 32, April 1, 7 p.m.44
I want you to know that chief idea in submitting this program is to afford
Chile and Peru full opportunity to take immediate advantage of mediation
and good offices, in confident hope and expectation on my part that if they
do, it will then be possible to find basis of adjustment which for purposes of
discussion could be approved in principle. It is not my idea to bind either
the one or the other, or both, by a rigid formula or basis submitted by me.
Basis for discussion adopted in principle might well be a modification of
my proposals or it might be a suggestion by the parties themselves.
Point of whole matter is that, as soon as some basis of discussion which the
parties can approve in principle has been established, door would be open
for immediate suspension of plebiscitary proceedings and for prosecution of
negotiations to their logical conclusion.
Your No. 40, April 1, 6 p.m., indicates that President Leguía rests under
some misapprehension about my attitude which I fully expressed in my No.
31, March 31. I hope you can make clear to him that this question of
suspension of the plebiscite while negotiations are taking place can be
brought about only by agreement between the parties. I have no way to
impose this condition upon them, nor do I believe that the Plebiscitary
Commission can do anything regarding it except to record agreement of the
parties on this matter, if one is reached.
KELLOGG

44 Not printed; see telegram of the same date to the consul at Arica, p. 369
[Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224].

723.2515/2094: Telegram
[Document 227]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, April 3, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received 7:18 p.m.]
58. I have just received a memorandum, of which following is translation:45
“The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Chile has the honor of
expressing his conformity with the three points of the plan
proposed by the Secretary of State for the development of the
proceeding by good offices to which reference is made in the
memorandum of His Excellency Mr. Collier, dated April 2; and he
takes pleasure in adding that the Chilean Ambassador in
Washington is duly instructed to participate in said proceedings.
Santiago, April 3, 1926.”
I am reliably informed that Chile will be reluctant to accept any solution of
the problem except partition of the territory, and that the Minister for
Foreign Affairs believes that the plan proposed by Edwards for a
neutralized state will result in future discord between the three nations
which would adjoin it and might possibly lead to war.
COLLIER
45 Text of memorandum not paraphrased.

723.2515/2095: Telegram
[Document 228]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, April 4, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received April 5—9:33 a.m.]
44. Your 32, April 1, 7 p.m.46 I have just received from the President a
memorandum in Spanish of which the following is a translation:
“Memorandum. The Government of Peru in like manner approves
the program which the Secretary of State recently submitted by
the intermedium of the Embassy of the United States in Lima in
execution of the good offices and of the mediation offered and
which the Peruvian Government has already accepted. In
harmony with that program:
First. The Government of Peru has named as
Plenipotentiary ad hoc the Ambassador of the Republic
in Washington, Dr. Don Hernan Velarde, who will
receive the authorization and instructions necessary to
meet not later than Tuesday the 6th of the present
month 
with 
the 
Secretary 
of 
State 
and 
the
Plenipotentiary who may be named by the Government
of Chile;
Second. The Secretary of State will submit to the said
Plenipotentiaries for study the base or bases of
adjustment;
Third. Upon the acceptance by the parties in principle
of the bases of adjustment which may be submitted, the
plebiscitary proceedings will be suspended for the time
which may be necessary to see if an adjustment can be
reached without this agreement being interpreted as a

modification in any respect of the attitude assumed by
Peru in harmony with the existing situation. Lima, April
4, 1926.”
POINDEXTER
46 See footnote 43, p. 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224].

723.2515/2100: Telegram
[Document 229]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
SANTIAGO, April 6, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received 4:30 p.m.]
60. Minister for Foreign Affairs gave following statement to press
yesterday:
“The proceeding under good offices is limited to the differences
between Chile and Peru. The matter of reaching a friendly
arrangement with Bolivia is the subject of satisfactory
conversations between the Government of Bolivia and the
Chilean Minister at La Paz.”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[Paraphrase.] I do not believe that Minister for Foreign Affairs has changed
views attributed to him in my No. 53, March 30,47 and that he and a great
majority think that the cession of both Tacna and Arica to Bolivia is the
really just and proper settlement. Position of Minister for Foreign Affairs
and others is due to their desire that Chile by subsequent direct negotiations
shall obtain material compensation and, even more, that by gratifying
Bolivia’s aspirations she may win her thanks and her friendship. Same
motive explains in part why Minister objects to plan for neutralization of
the territory. [End paraphrase.]
COLLIER
47 Not printed.

723.2515/2103c: Telegram
[Document 230]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
WASHINGTON, April 6, 1926—7 p.m.
For Lassiter. The first meeting with the Ambassadors of Peru and Chile
acting as plenipotentiaries of their respective Governments took place here
this afternoon. After the usual preliminary addresses I made a formal
statement to the parties, the essential portion of which was as follows:
“The Secretary of State now has the honor to suggest to the
Plenipotentiaries of the two Governments concerned:
A. That both Governments accept in principle as a basis
of adjustment of their differences concerning the
provinces of Tacna and Arica, reserving all details for
consideration in the course of the ensuing negotiations,
an equitable division between them of the territory in
dispute;
B. That upon the acceptance of such basis in principle,
the plebiscitary proceedings be forthwith suspended for
such term as may be necessary in order to determine
whether an agreement can be reached.
The Secretary of State in making these suggestions fully
appreciates that the ensuing negotiations, having as their purpose
a permanent settlement of these differences, may take a wide
range and that, consequently, the acceptance at this time in
principle of the basis proposed should not be regarded as
precluding the parties, or either of them, or the Secretary of State
himself, from bringing forward for consideration other bases of
adjustment as the negotiations proceed. Entire liberty of action in
this respect should be deemed to be reserved by the participants in

the negotiations. The Secretary of State would suggest that the
parties agree on a definite term of suspension of the plebiscitary
proceedings in the first instance, subject to extension if later
deemed appropriate.”
The foregoing statement has not been made public.
The Peruvian Ambassador thereupon stated that his instructions required
him to transmit my suggested basis to his Government for its consideration
and further instructions. The Chilean Ambassador indicated that he was
ready to discuss the basis suggested by me, but did not think he ought to do
so until the Peruvian Ambassador had received instructions adequate to
permit him to proceed. Accordingly an adjournment of the conference was
taken until Thursday morning, April 8th at 10 o’clock.
I have received your April 5, 6 p.m.48 and am inclined to agree with your
view that neither party can construe the record as calling for the election on
April 30. I shall communicate further as soon as we have had opportunity to
examine the regulations.
KELLOGG
48 Not printed.

723.2515/2118: Telegram
[Document 231]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Extract—Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 10, 1926—11 a.m.
For Lassiter. At request of Plenipotentiaries of both Chile and Peru, the
conference called for this afternoon has been adjourned until 10 a.m.,
Monday, April 12, to give them ample time to consult their Governments.
…
I realize that time is running on and that we are approaching expiration of
period now set for registration; we must consider question of a failure to
settle upon and formulate a plan for future proceedings. If Commission
should extend time for registration so as to allow full 30 days to Peru,
would she go on and register her votes? Peru has, it seems to me, greatly
weakened her position by not attempting to register the voters who were in
the territory and ready for registration, and not sending in the others she had
ready, and also that it was a mistake not to attend registration proceedings
and challenge any votes to which she might object. Is Peru still in position
where she could examine registration records and make challenges? Please
cable your views.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2118: Telegram
[Document 232]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 10, 1926—2 p.m.
43. I have received following message this morning from General
Lassiter:49
Edwards has returned as Chilean Commissioner. He takes the
very strong stand that the Washington negotiations will reach no
solution, that political conditions in Chile and Peru prevent their
agreeing on any common plan, that Chile will surely win
plebiscite and that then she will consider doing something for
Bolivia and perhaps for Peru, and that everything depends upon
completion of the plebiscite. Chileans are enrolling large number
of registrants, as practically all who apply are accepted for lack of
well-informed Peruvian opposition and challenge; the Chileans
will point to these figures to show that their strength in the
community is heavily preponderant, and that the province,
therefore, must be theirs. Edwards, therefore, says that they
fought for it, won it, and that it is theirs. At banquet last night in
honor of Edwards and Claro, both men made speeches to effect
that it was desire of Government of Chile to carry plebiscite
through to conclusion; that the award required this to be done;
that Chile’s triumph was certain; and that this involved definite
incorporation of Tacna and Arica in Republic of Chile.
Following is report of my subsequent conversation with Ambassador
Cruchaga:
I told the Ambassador that I was astonished at Edwards’
statement; that it was Edwards who first proposed an adjustment

outside the plebiscite, that he had frequently urged it on General
Pershing, and that Chilean Government had from time to time
suggested it through the American Ambassador in Chile.
Furthermore, just as General Pershing was leaving Arica,
Edwards definitely proposed to him that territory be neutralized;
Pershing made written statement in pencil of proposition, showed
it to Edwards, and latter approved it; Edwards had frequently
made statements of the same sort to Mr. Stabler, the secretary
general of the Commission and member of the American
delegation; and if Edwards or Government of Chile had any idea
that either the American Commissioner or the President
[Arbitrator?] would permit them to proceed with a one-sided
registration and end it there and sustain such an election as would
follow, they were entirely mistaken. Every opportunity would be
given to Peru to register if she wished, her rights would be
protected, and any such election as is now proposed would, if
held, most certainly be set aside.
The Chilean Ambassador expressed his great disappointment and
astonishment at position Edwards has taken and said that he was
urging Chilean Government to make a definite proposition.
Both Chilean and Peruvian Plenipotentiaries have requested adjournment of
conference until April 12 (Monday), at 10 a.m., stating that they wished to
consult their respective Governments, and hoped to be ready then to make
counterpropositions. Ambassador Cruchaga intimated to me that he
expected that some proposition which would include Bolivia would be
submitted.
KELLOGG
49 telegram of Apr. 9, 2 p.m.

723.2515/2120: Telegram
[Document 233]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 11, 1926—1 p.m.
44. Any assumption that negotiations have developed to a stage where no
settlement can be made is wholly without foundation. Only one proposition
has been submitted. This has been rejected by Peru, but both parties have
intimated strongly that on Monday they would suggest counterpropositions
and have asked for adjournment for the purpose. If neither brings forward
any suggestion, I shall myself certainly make further suggestions, for I
propose to exhaust every possibility of a settlement before I permit these
negotiations to fail. My statement to Ambassador Cruchaga yesterday was
deliberate and was intended to convey my emphatic opinion that any
scheme such as Edwards is now proposing can not be tolerated.
Do not deliver any note on this subject, but position I have expressed
should be made clear to Mathieu. In trying to put through a one-sided
plebiscite which could not be recognized by world opinion as having settled
anything, Chile is taking great risks.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2124: Telegram
[Document 234]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, April 11, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received April 12—6:18 a.m.]
67. … If idea of equitable solution must be given up definitely, would it not
be wise course at meeting tomorrow of Plenipotentiaries to suggest formula
substantially as follows:
In view of unwillingness of parties to make an equitable division
of the territory, the mediator suggests that in interest of
international peace and cordial rapprochement between them,
they consider advisability of mutual and joint sacrifice in form
either of grant of independent nationality to the inhabitants or of
cession to Bolivia, in fulfillment of assurances made repeatedly
and publicly since commencement of the plebiscitary proceedings
by spokesmen of both countries that Bolivian aspirations for a
port on the Pacific would be considered sympathetically.
I think it highly desirable that proposition be presented in an alternative
form, for in that way you will gain time and be able to have both plans
considered. Otherwise, rejection of another separate proposition tomorrow
may cause Chile to declare that good offices are no longer desired;
furthermore, if matter is presented in alternative form, discussion here may
follow and opportunity be given for expression of the powerful opinion
which favors a cession to Bolivia. I am told by former Prime Minister
Mardones that he favors Edwards’ plan and thinks that it may be accepted
when better understood, but I am very doubtful. I think it should be brought
up, however, and should be presented either first or along with cession plan,
for criticism of it that is sure to follow will strengthen sentiment in favor of
cession. … A United Press despatch today from Arica gives plan in detail

but does not attribute it to Edwards. It seems to me that this affords
Department an opportunity to tell press quietly that Edwards is the author
and was the advocate of it. If press will show his active efforts in favor of it,
he will be put on defensive and opposition he now offers will be greatly
minimized, and much of the talk here about our having forced good offices
on Chile will be silenced. Result will be either acceptance of plan or else a
great impetus will be given movement for cession, although sentiment here
is now strong against anything but the plebiscite.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COLLIER

723.2515/2123: Telegram
[Document 235]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extracts—Paraphrase]
ARICA, April 11, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received April 12—8:17 a.m.]
From Lassiter. Your telegram April 10, 11 a.m. If Peru were now told to
proceed with plebiscite, I am sure she would demand the cancelation of all
registration to date and the postponement of further registration until such
reform had been made in conditions here that Peru would have reasonably
fair chance of taking part in a plebiscite. …
If told to proceed without cancelation of present registrations and without
postponement for reforms, it is almost certain that Peru would withdraw. …
[I am aware] that the Arbitrator has ruled that he is unable to neutralize
territory during the plebiscite, but we shall be faced with very grave
situation if negotiations fail. In years to come we should be in position to
show that we have exhausted every possible means of healing this breach
between Chile and Peru. We could defer action until Commission had done
all that is possible to carry out plebiscite with the territory under the control
of one of the contending parties and until Department had done all it could
to obtain solution by negotiation; but if we stopped there and allowed these
proceedings to end in a confused wrangle, we shall certainly not occupy
very enviable position. I think that we ought to make one more vigorous
effort, namely, to offer Chile choice either to neutralize the territory during
plebiscite, removing from it all her officials and allowing us to assume full
charge so that we can carry out real plebiscite, or else to recognize that
plebiscite must be terminated with blame for its frustration placed on her. A
definite, clear issue could thus be raised whereon we could take our final
stand before the world. The Arbitrator, in view of the very definite
information which General Pershing and I have given him on impossibility

of carrying on fair plebiscite with Chile in control of the territory, would
now be in a position, it seems to me, to take this action.
If no agreement can be reached through the negotiations in Washington and
if the Arbitrator is averse to intervening in matter in any way, then it is
important that plebiscite be terminated without further delay. In that event,
opportunity must surely be given Peruvian Commissioner, before he
withdraws, to participate in passage of resolution to terminate plebiscite for
reasons given.
My purpose herein has been to give you, as you request, the situations to be
faced if no agreement can be reached in Washington. I still have hope in the
negotiations, and shall keep you informed of anything taking place here
which may affect the issue. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2125b: Telegram
[Document 236]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)50
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 12, 1926—2 p.m.
45. No further suggestion which can be considered was advanced by either
party in proceedings here this morning. Peruvian Plenipotentiary presented
statement which can only be construed as reiteration of Peru’s original
position that she is entitled to entire territory. I am obliged, under these
circumstances, myself to submit a new suggestion. Evidence is
accumulating that some solution involving Bolivia is in minds of both
parties. Statement by Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs given to press, as
reported in your No. 60, April 6, 11 a.m., is of significance in this
connection. Of course I am reluctant to make any suggestion which
involves Bolivia when I do not know if such a course would be agreeable to
the Governments directly interested; so I should like to have you see
Mathieu at earliest possible moment, talk with him confidentially about this
matter, and endeavor to ascertain if Government of Chile would be willing
for me to submit to the Plenipotentiaries for their consideration some plan
of settlement which would include equitable adjustment with Peru and
Bolivia, both. Naturally, I should not expect Mathieu to commit himself in
advance on the proposition, but only to indicate willingness of Chilean
Government to have me make a proposal of that nature for consideration. I
am most anxious that proposal on these lines should not be misunderstood
and, if I should make it, that no ulterior motive will be attributed to me.
KELLOGG
50 Similar telegram sent on the same date to the Ambassador in Peru as
Department’s No. 40.

723.2515/2125b supp.: Telegram
[Document 237]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 12, 1926—6 p.m.
46. My No. 45, today, 2 p.m. Please understand that similar inquiries are
being made in Peru through Ambassador Poindexter.
At conclusion of conference with Plenipotentiaries this afternoon an
adjournment was taken until April 14, 3 p.m. (Wednesday). If at that time
neither party comes forward with concrete suggestion, I expect to resume
initiative by suggesting for consideration another basis of settlement. At
conference this afternoon I asked both parties if they desired to continue the
negotiations; both assured me that they did and they are proceeding
accordingly. It is very important that Chile should not deem proposition
made today by Peru to be final, and end negotiations because of it.
Ambassador Velarde has informed me that by Wednesday he hopes to be
able to make another proposition.
I think substance of suggestion for a proposition which you advance in your
No. 67, April 11, 1 p.m., is very good; and should I receive favorable reply
from you, I may be able to frame one along that line.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2127: Telegram
[Document 238]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, April 12, 1926—noon (?).
[Received April 13—4:27 a.m.]
69. Your No. 45, April 12, 2 p.m., and No. 46, April 12, 6 p.m. I have had
an extended interview with Minister for Foreign Affairs. He desires
personally to settle matter by cession of entire province to Bolivia.
Tomorrow he will discuss matter with the President whose support he
expects. The question will be considered by the Cabinet on Wednesday, but
he is apprehensive that majority there will oppose him. To offset this
opposition he will endeavor to have the presidents of the Senate and the
Chamber of Deputies and the chairmen of the two Committees on Foreign
Affairs meet with the Cabinet, as he believes that they favor cession,
although recent speech of President of Peru and the steadily mounting
registration is strengthening demand in governmental circles for the
plebiscite, as well as among the masses. …
… Mathieu needs several days for shaping public opinion in favor of
cession. He astonished me by complaining that you were demanding a
prompt reply from him to your propositions and inquiries. I told him that I
felt your requests for promptness arose from his own demand that matter be
expedited and that I was sure you would give any reasonable time to an
earnest effort that promised success.
I think that it would be unwise for us at next meeting to propose cession as
concrete plan. Let either Chile or Peru propose it or, if it becomes necessary
to do so, I suggest alternative formula of my telegram 67, April 11, 1 p.m.
COLLIER

723.2515/2126: Telegram
[Document 239]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 13, 1926—6 p.m.
43. I have had my attention called to a speech made by President Leguía on
April 9, 1926, at a banquet he tendered to the Vice President of Bolivia.51
President Leguía is reported to have said during the course of this speech
that Peru-Bolivian unity through history and in the unfortunate War of the
Pacific is still being firmly maintained with the aim of restoring ancient
boundaries and without any intention to legitimatize, either through fear or
from a spirit of commercialism, the crime of conquest of which they were
the victims. The Vice President of Bolivia is reported to have responded by
accepting in general terms the ideas President Leguía expressed. I am
advised that in Chile the latter’s speech is being construed as a virtual
announcement of Peru-Bolivian alliance, whose aim is restoration of
ancient boundaries in violation of Treaty of Ancon, of Washington protocol,
and of Arbitrator’s award. Ascertain whether President Leguía has been
reported correctly and also obtain any information you can on his real
intentions. I hardly need to point out that utterances of nature reported add
at this juncture not only enormously to difficulties of conducting
negotiations, but, if not explained, may well destroy every prospect of
settlement.
KELLOGG
51 In Peru as Ambassador on Special Mission.

723.2515/2130: Telegram
[Document 240]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, April 13, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received April 14—12:55 a.m.]
From Lassiter. Your telegram March 22, 6 p.m. No action in the nature of
making specific demands upon Chile was taken; for, before it was
physically possible to comply with suggestion, your March 25, 6 p.m.,52
arrived announcing Peru’s acceptance of good offices and quoting
Department’s memorandum to both Chile and Peru suggesting suspension
of plebiscite. Department’s telegrams of March 27, 6 p.m.53 and 8 p.m.,54
followed, saying to continue with registration. I assumed that Department
would not approve my running risk of interfering with negotiations by
proposing the radical reforms which would be necessary. This assumption
was confirmed by Department’s telegram of April 5, 11 a.m.,55 requesting
me to maintain existing situation unchanged until further notice, and its
telegram of April 8, 4 p.m.,55 that there should not be any change in the
program. There would have been no purpose, moreover, in making
demands, in view of Peru’s abstention from plebiscite.
If you wish it, an outline of the demands it would be necessary to make
upon Chile if plebiscite is to be held, will be forwarded. Reforms absolutely
necessary must be such as to change entire character of Chilean control and
to substitute law and order for official oppression and for lawless terrorism.
Authorities here have full information on substance of necessary
fundamental reforms. It does not now appear that they need advice upon
this matter. Registration must, of course, be suspended pending execution of
essential reforms. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

52 See footnote 32, p. 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200].
53 Ante, p. 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213].
54 See footnote 37, p. 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211].
55 Not printed.
55 Not printed.

723.2515/2135: Telegram
[Document 241]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
SANTIAGO, April 14, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received 3:30 p.m.]
71. Mercurio this morning publishes editorial ridiculing plan of
independence and neutralization, declaring it impracticable and absurd. …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[Paraphrase.] I think that it would be most undesirable, in fact almost
disastrous, for us to present this plan as our own proposition except in
alternative form and then only if press could be informed without violation
of confidence on our part and if they would then immediately communicate
to all South American papers that Edwards was author or advocate of this
plan. [End paraphrase.] …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COLLIER

723.2515/2130: Telegram
[Document 242]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 15, 1926—6 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your telegram April 13, 7 p.m. At earliest possible moment
cable me full information on particular respects in which you are able to
show that Chile has failed to comply with the several demands which the
Plebiscitary Commission has made upon her. What I want is statement of
tangible and specific defaults on Chile’s part in meeting these demands.
The following questions, which are based upon the prerequisites resolution
of last November,56 seem to me to be pertinent. In all cases in which your
answer may indicate noncompliance, either wholly or in part, or further
measures which remain to be taken in order to obtain satisfactory
compliance, you will bear in mind the necessity of having grounds for your
position which, if occasion requires, can be adequately supported.
1. To what extent has there been reduction in. Army in accordance
with the first prerequisite? Can you state what armed force is
being actually maintained in plebiscitary area? Have you any
figures for comparison with armed force maintained by Peru in
equal area immediately northward? Has Plebiscitary Commission
found that force Chile is maintaining in Tacna-Arica is so large as
not to be compatible with fair plebiscite, and if it is, why?
2. Has force of carabineers been reduced to number on duty in the
territory on July 20, 1922? If it has not been, what additional
personnel has been retained in or transferred to Tacna-Arica for
replacement? What are figures on present force being maintained?
Are any individual carabineers being kept on duty after

Commission has found their retention to be incompatible with fair
plebiscite? If there are, how many?
3. Have police and secret service personnel been reduced in
number, using July 20, 1922 as date for calculation? If they have
not been, give figures of additional personnel in each class which
are being maintained. Are any individual members of the police
and secret service forces being retained whose retention has been
found by Commission to be incompatible with fair plebiscite? If
there are, how many in each class? State when and how
Commission took action.
4. Have civil officials, duly appointed, replaced all army,
carabineer, police, and secret service personnel relieved from duty
as described in fourth prerequisite?
5. What specific requests, if there have been any, has the
Commission made under fifth prerequisite; and if requests have
been made, what action, if there has been any, have Chilean
authorities taken pursuant to them? As far as possible give details.
6. Have any of the relieved subdelegates, district inspectors, or
other civil executives referred to in sixth prerequisite not been
transferred from plebiscitary area? If there are, how many remain
and who are they?
7. Specify restrictions the removal of which has been demanded
by Commission and give in each instance action taken by Chilean
authorities. If Commission has found the supervision and
limitation by Chilean Government to be inconsistent with a fair
plebiscite, state whether this inconsistency has been made subject
of specific demands; if it has, state when and how.
8. State what restrictions upon travel Commission has asked to
have removed and what modification of hotel and guest laws the
Commission has demanded; what action has been taken by
Chilean authorities in response to these demands, and what

conditions in this respect has Commission found to be
inconsistent with fair plebiscite, giving reasons?
9. What public meetings, parades, addresses, and other forms of
legitimate propaganda relating to plebiscite, etc., have suffered
interference? What action, in each instance, has Commission
taken? When and how? Please give same information in regard to
flags.
10. Has censorship referred to in tenth prerequisite been
removed? If it has not been, specify instances of censorship of
mails, cables, radio, press, etc., and explain any bearing they may
have upon plebiscitary activities, and what action regarding them
Commission has taken.
11. What evidence can you produce, if any, regarding failure to
return individuals referred to in eleventh prerequisite to the
plebiscitary territory? If possible give number of individuals
involved, names and present location, and evidence showing their
desire to return.
Data similar to foregoing should be furnished in connection with any other
demands which, from time to time, may have been made upon Chilean
authorities in addition to the eleven prerequisites. If a full statement on
these matters cannot be cabled promptly, please cable the best preliminary
report that is practicable.
I am asking these questions so that I may know as exactly as possible the
position in which Arbitrator would be placed in predicating action upon
alleged defaults. It is of gravest importance that any action taken by
Arbitrator should have impregnable foundation in verifiable data that
cannot be assailed successfully. As far as possible I wish to know present
state of the record on all cardinal points before deciding on definite
instructions, should good offices fail.
What is present number of registrants and what is best estimate you have of
total qualified voters, both Chilean and Peruvian? What is basis of such an
estimate?

Kertoce

26 Foreign Relations 1925, vol. ,.R. 382.

ee)

723.2515/2135: Telegram
[Document 243]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 15, 1926—7 p.m.
50. On January 27, the day that General Pershing left Arica, Edwards made
proposition of neutralization to him. Pershing wrote it down in pencil.
Edwards refused to sign it, but said that he had talked it over with
Alessandri and that he and Alessandri were agreed upon it and that he
thought Chilean Government would favor it. Later he told Mr. Stabler,
secretary general of the Commission, that he favored it, and I am informed
that within the week just past that he told Freyre the same thing.
Of course we have no written statement from Edwards. He suggested that
Pershing present the proposition to me, and it may be that he was trying to
get us to make a proposition which he could oppose. In view of facts do you
think that General Pershing should give out an interview, or should we give
an intimation to the press to be carried to all South America?
KELLOGG

723.2515/2143a: Telegram
[Document 244]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 15, 1926—8 p.m.
For Lassiter. The Plenipotentiaries met this afternoon at 3 o’clock and I laid
the following proposition before them:57
“The Secretary of State has the honor to suggest that in the
interest of international peace and a cordial rapprochement
between the parties they consider the advisability of a mutual and
joint sacrifice whereby either, (1) the territory of Tacna and Arica
shall be constituted a neutralized state, either independent or
under the protectorate of South American States, as may be
agreed, or, (2) the provinces of Tacna and Arica shall be
transferred (upon an apportionment of equitable compensation,
and appropriate economic arrangements, to be agreed upon) to a
South American State not a party to these negotiations.
As neither party is willing to surrender the territory in question to
the other, and as the proposal for a division of the territory
between them has been rejected, the remaining opportunity for a
solution of the long-standing controversy would appear to be
found in one of the suggestions above made or in a modification
thereof if such is deemed to be advisable.”
 
Ambassador Velarde accepted the first proposition for Peru. Chile has not
yet accepted, but Ambassador Cruchaga is consulting Chilean Government.
In view of fact that proposition of neutralization first came to Pershing and
in statements made by Edwards to Stabler, and within last week I have

understood from the latter that Edwards made the same statement to the
Peruvian Commissioner, can you suggest, discreetly, to Edwards that he
urge Chilean Government to accept?
KELLOGG
57 Quoted passage not paraphrased.

723.2515/2138b: Telegram
[Document 245]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)58
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 15, 1926—8 p.m.
44. The Plenipotentiaries met this afternoon at 3 o’clock, and I laid the
following proposition before them: [Here follows text of proposition quoted
in the telegram to the consul at Arica for General Lassiter, supra.]
After it was explained that first proposition contemplated that if there were
to be a protectorate of South American States it was to be one by agreement
of Chile and Peru and might be simply a guarantee by those two powers and
no others, Ambassador Velarde accepted this proposition as basis of
adjustment. He raised objection to second proposition on ground that it
proposed to turn the territory over to a third State, Bolivia, he supposed,
without the consent of the inhabitants. I said that both Chile and Peru had
been negotiating with Bolivia to turn over portion of the territory, and
public statements had been made to that effect; that I was unable to perceive
any greater objection to turning over a part than the whole; and that in any
event my second proposition was subject to such modifications as the
parties might agree to.
Ambassador Cruchaga promised to consult Chilean Government and to let
me know at earliest possible moment.
KELLOGG
58 Similar telegram sent on the same date to the Ambassador in Chile as
Department’s No. 51.

723.2515/2145: Telegram
[Document 246]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
SANTIAGO, April 16, 1926—noon.
[Received 2:25 p.m.]
76. Your 50, April 15, 7 p.m. Wednesday night I addressed a note to the
Foreign Office as to injustice of accusations and insinuations in Mercurio’s
editorial of April 14th, referred to in my telegram No. 71, especially in view
of the fact that the plan that was criticised was Edwards’, whose activity in
promoting it I set forth in detail. I made no demand but intimated that I felt
the Government should inform the papers. I received a reply last night, and
this morning the following statement by the Foreign Office appeared in the
Mercurio and all other papers:
“The Ambassador of the United States has made representations
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs as to the injustice of the attack
directed against his Government by a newspaper of Santiago with
respect to the possibility that the Secretary of State of the United
States might, in the exercise of good offices, favor the
neutralization of the territory of Tacna-Arica; and he has stated
that said formula was initiated by the Chilean members of the
Plebiscitary Commission who had suggested it with insistency
before General Pershing returned to the United States.
The Ambassador requests that they inform the press as to this fact
with the object of avoiding judgments adverse to the Government
of the United States based upon conditions in whose origin
neither that Government nor its agents have had any participation.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs has answered stating that he
deplores the editorial referred to and the injustice of the attack in

it against the Government of the United States.
It adds that the Government of Chile had knowledge of the facts
set forth by the Ambassador of the United States with regard to
the origin of this formula of neutralization of the territory of
Tacna-Arica and that it has taken the necessary steps to avoid that
suggestions strictly personal, contrary to or absolutely opposed to
the ideas of government, however well inspired they may have
been, can create obstacles in the prosecution of the plebiscite or
of the pending friendly negotiations.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs terminates by availing himself of
the occasion to make note of the noble and disinterested spirit
with which the Government of the United States endeavor to
secure a solution of the differences between Chile and Peru.”
End of the statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, literally and
textually accurately translated.
Give to the press immediately.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COLLIER

723.2515/2150a: Telegram
[Document 247]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
WASHINGTON, April 17, 1926—3 p.m.
52. I gave the following statement to the press this noon.
“Concerning the pending negotiations for the settlement of the
Tacna Arica dispute, the Secretary of State has been advised that
the suggestion which he made to the Plenipotentiaries of Peru and
Chile at their last meeting here on April 15th has been given
partial publicity in the capital of one of the countries involved. In
order to avoid confusion and possible misunderstanding the
Secretary, acting with the consent and approval of both
Plenipotentiaries, now deems it wise to make public the full terms
of this suggestion, which are as follows:”
(Here follows the proposal quoted in my April 15th 8 p.m. to
you.59 )
“The Secretary further stated that in view of certain press
comments, and particularly in view of a statement issued to the
press by the Foreign Office of Chile, he thought he ought to say
that the idea of neutralization of the territory in dispute has been
from time to time, in the course of this controversy, advanced
informally by publicists and others on both sides in such a manner
as to lead him to believe it might prove acceptable to both Peru
and Chile. This type of solution was in particular advocated by
Señor Agustin Edwards, the Chilean Delegate on the Plebiscitary
Commission, to General Pershing just before his departure from
Arica, and General Pershing laid it before the Secretary of State
on his arrival in Washington. It has also informally come to the
attention of the Secretary from Peruvian sources. Naturally
informal proposals of this character are not binding upon the

respective Governments, who now have the entire suggestion, as
above set forth, under consideration. The Secretary of State
merely desires it to be understood that in exploring all the
avenues of adjustment he is taking advantage of every proposal
which seems to have a reasonable prospect of success.
The statement issued to the press on April 16th by the Foreign
Office of Chile above referred to is as follows.”
Here follows the Foreign Office statement quoted in your 76 April 16th
noon.
KELLOGG
59 See telegram of same date to the consul at Arica, p. 384 [Pg. 384 includes
portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244].

723.2515/2150: Telegram
[Document 248]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, April 17, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received 9:30 p.m.]
78. After an interview with Minister for Foreign Affairs today I later
conferred with President of Chile alone. Both gentlemen declared that
creation of neutralized independent state is unacceptable, and Ambassador
Cruchaga has been so advised. I strongly urged acceptance of alternative
proposition to cede territory to Bolivia. Both the Minister and the President
said that as Peru had refused to accept this proposition it was not necessary
for Chile to state position on it. I said that although I was uninformed, it
was premature to think that because there had been a refusal, the mediator
might not yet persuade Peru to accept. … I argued that cession to Bolivia
now will only anticipate that which the Government of Chile desires to
make, and that to make it now would be an advantageous act and will avoid
the inevitable discussions of our terms that would surely arise later, to say
nothing of fact that national sentiment will inevitably oppose cession once
territory has been won in a plebiscite. … I also said that if Chile is sure that
Peru will not cede at this time, it would be stroke of high policy for Chile to
offer cession, thus winning Bolivia’s friendship and turning her against
Peru. President Figueroa said they feared to cede entire province to Bolivia
in light of recent speeches of President Leguía and of Bolivian Special
Ambassador to Peru in regard to regaining their ancient frontiers, which
convinced him that a union between Peru and Bolivia was either in
existence or in process of formation, and that Chile is in very perilous
position; I again expressed opinion that offer of cession now to Bolivia
would break up such a union, but he disagreed with me. I am inclined to
believe that President is sincere in his fears. Both he and Mathieu expressed
their desire to make any fair settlement that is consistent with Chile’s vital
interests, but neither the President nor the Foreign Minister is disposed to

accept either of your alternative propositions which were presented to them
April 15 (Thursday). Each says that Congress insists on a plebiscite and
they cannot resist Congress. They are right. Unless full publicity is given to
your alternative proposition, good offices cannot succeed, and it will be
difficult even then. Mathieu told me today that publicity would
unquestionably help, and that if you wished to publish he would instruct
Ambassador Cruchaga to consent. …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COLLIER

723.2515/2151: Telegram
[Document 249]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, April 18, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received 6 p.m.]
79. News despatches from Arica say that Edwards’ friends expressed
surprise as to my statements in my note to Minister for Foreign Affairs and
that I had not correctly stated Edwards’ position. I was convinced that my
own word was likely to be called in question and to protect it as well as our
national honor I felt that immediate publicity of my note of April 14 and
one I sent to the Minister for Foreign Affairs yesterday was necessary.
[Paraphrase.] I consulted the Minister for Foreign Affairs who replied in
writing that he could not deny my right to publish notes but requested me
not to say that he had given his consent, as Edwards’ friends are charging
him with having made grave diplomatic error in making admission
contained in Foreign Office statement which I reported to you in my No.
76, April 16, noon. The Santiago papers have published my notes in full,
and their text has been sent abroad by United Press. If you wish, I shall
cable their full text which is being sent by mail, but you will probably
receive them from United Press. I believe that their publication will shatter
Edwards’ influence completely, and may cause the Chileans to take good
offices more seriously. Time is now our ally, and proceedings in
Washington and Arica should be delayed and protracted in every way
possible in order to give pacifying sentiment here a chance to develop. In
order to break down Chilean overconfidence from the heavy registration,
now about 4,500, in the plebiscitary territory, Ambassador Cruchaga should
be constantly impressed with danger of nullification; the Commission
should give as wide publicity to corrupt practices which would justify
nullification of proceedings as can be done without making the Peruvians
overconfident.

Mathieu again complains that you give him too little time to answer your
proposition. Undoubtedly he wishes time in order to negotiate with Bolivia.
If your latest proposition is to be accepted, this negotiation must be
thwarted; otherwise, there is no chance whatever. Permit me to refer you to
my No. 78, April 17, 4 p.m., and other telegrams where I have touched on
this matter.
If you are unable to obtain acceptance of your last proposition after holding
out as long as you can, I suggest that you try division of the territory based
upon cession of Arica to Chile to be at once ceded by her to Bolivia and
retention of Tacna by Peru. It has lately occurred to me that, failing even
this solution, it might be good idea to suggest, in your mediation, that award
be modified and each department (Tacna and Arica), separately, be
permitted to determine to which nation it wishes to belong, and that further
guarantees could be obtained in this connection which would ensure
reasonably fair plebiscite. Mathieu has often expressed his desire that
plebiscite be departmental and has stated his willingness to give every
guarantee, saying that he cares nothing about Tacna if he can retain Arica.
Peru, on the other hand, cherishes Tacna; and, although she will not cede
Arica, she might consent to that sort of plebiscite which would greatly
lessen temptation and opportunity to commit fraud and might ward off
disagreeable necessity to us of nullifying the plebiscite. Every effort should
be made to suspend or delay proceedings in Arica. In my opinion we can
take more chances on this now than we could have three weeks ago, and not
give as much heed to the clamor which will be made against it.
Bolivian Minister here will telegraph his Government today to advise
suspension of all direct negotiations with Chile as means to get her to
accept your proposition. [End paraphrase.]
COLLIER

723.2515/2150: Telegram
[Document 250]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 18, 1926—1 p.m.
53. Your No. 78, April 17, 4 p.m. There seems to be a misunderstanding in
regard to present attitude of Peru on the alternative proposals which I
submitted to the Plenipotentiaries on April 15. Facts are as follows: (1) Peru
has definitely accepted first alternative, relating to neutralization; (2) Peru
has not rejected second alternative. Ambassador Velarde has merely
submitted his personal observations on it by way of criticism.
Today Ambassador Velarde has indicated to me that my two alternatives
might be susceptible of combination; he suggested neutralization of all the
territory in dispute with exception of strip preferably along extreme
southern border which could be transferred to Bolivia. I think it would be
unwise to let Chile know that this suggestion came from Peru, but the
Ambassador’s talk with me today indicated that they are endeavoring to
find some compromise between the two propositions and that they have not
at all rejected the second.
Under these circumstances, if, as you say, Chile is determined to reject the
first alternative, it is clear that assumption that she need not deal with
second is unjustified. If she should accept second, which Peru has not
rejected, there would, perhaps, be an opportunity to bring about an
agreement either on second as it stands or on combination of the two.
It should be made clear to Government of Chile that Peru did not reject
second proposition.
Do you think it would be helpful if Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay joined
with me in urging settlement upon both Chile and Peru?

Ketoce

723.2515/2153: Telegram
[Document 251]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
ARICA, April 18, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received April 22—1 a.m.60 ]
From Lassiter. Your April 15, 6 p.m. The following statement prepared by
my legal advisers is forwarded herewith: Chile’s real default does not lie in
the technical nonfulfillment of this or that provision of the prerequisites
resolution or of any other specific demand of the Commission, although
technical nonfulfillment can be shown. Her real default lies in the ruthless
deportation of Peruvian electors which has continued since the protocol, the
submission, and the award, in flagrant fraud of all three. It lies in the
establishment and maintenance since the award, through open violence and
secret coercion, of a reign of terrorism over the Peruvians who have been
allowed to remain in the province. Chile, by her deportations and by her
consistent campaign of open violence and secret terrorism, has placed
herself in a position where she can afford to accord from time to time a
purely technical and formal compliance with a number of the provisions of
the prerequisites resolution without in the least relaxing her unlawful
strangle hold on the situation and without permitting any improvement in
essential conditions. See telegram March 17, 6 p.m.61
Every impartial person acquainted with the situation here knows that the
foregoing is the simple truth. But because it is the truth, it follows that it is
difficult to prove it as one proves an ordinary case in court. If it is true that
the Chilean authorities systematically deport Peruvians, it follows that they
will leave no written record of what they have done and that when
questioned they will one and all deny it. If it is true that Peruvians are living
in terror of their lives, it follows that they will fear to give evidence, even of
the fact that they are afraid, in the presence of the representatives of the
men they fear. If it is true that a man who complains is likely to disappear
without a trace, it follows that most men will be ready to make an affidavit

that they have no cause for complaint. The case against Chile must
therefore be proved by the best evidence which in the nature of the situation
is available. We are able to prove by legal evidence direct participation of
the authorities in deportations and other acts of violence in a few cases,
such as the forcible wholesale deportations of March, 1925, in which the
Chilean officials have been unusually bold or careless or the victims
unusually courageous, and around these cases we are able [to] group a great
many incidents where direct complicity cannot be proved but which seem to
every American here to afford ample corroboration.
It will practically never be possible to establish any facts in regard to this
conspiracy except by a preponderance of conflicting evidence. Chile is of
course counting on this situation; she is counting on the difficulty of
obtaining satisfactory evidence; and counting on the facility and impunity
with which she can manufacture counter-affidavits by the wholesale.
Edwards said in the Commission that “it is a Chilean doctrine that no
Chilean testifies against his own country.” Chilean counsel said in a
document submitted to the investigating committee: “The Peruvian will say
one thing and [the?] Chilean will never be lacking to say the opposite. How
can the truth be gleaned?” It can be answered that the truth can be
ascertained, first, out of the mouths of American witnesses who have made
a record of what they have seen and heard here for the past 8 months and
that the situation is one in which any Anglo-Saxon court would also admit
opinion evidence because of the impossibility of conveying a correct
impression of all the facts in any other way; second, that the truth may be
ascertained by the impartial judgment of the investigating committee and its
examiners and, finally, of the Commission itself based upon the testimony
of a large number of witnesses which has been taken with every formality
except that it has not been deemed either necessary or desirable to
administer an oath to the witnesses. It is submitted that it is a function of the
Commission, and finally of the Arbitrator, to determine the truth by reliance
upon these means.
Further to the Department’s questions regarding fulfillment of the
prerequisites. Resolution will follow in another cable. Discussion in this
cable of two or three items will illustrate Chile’s formal and technical
compliance combined with her substantial evasion and refusal.

Item 5. The Commission at various dates has requested the relief of 18
officials in the interest of a fair plebiscite. Chile has technically complied in
17 instances. In two cases, after a long delay partly due to Edwards’
withdrawal on November 21; in the remaining case Chile claimed that the
official in question, registrar in charge of the civil registry, was a judicial
official and pleaded constitutional difficulties; but the relieved officials
have in every instance been relieved and replaced in a manner to deprive
their removal of every particle of corrective significance and to accord the
Commission the shadow without the substance.
Barcelo, Intendente of the province, and Bustos, Governor of Arica,
relieved on request of the Commission, received every possible mark of
honor and respect on the occasion of their relief. A great public banquet,
attended by officials, was tendered Barcelo; and Bustos, among other
honors, was asked to a dinner given by Edwards at which General Pershing
was a guest. Bustos was promoted to be Intendente at Tarapaca where he is
in a position to continue his electoral activities by preventing the escape of
the many Peruvians unlawfully deported from this province and interned in
the nitrate fields; and Barcelo remains as unofficial mentor of the new
Intendente and as the principal public figure in conducting the Chilean
campaign.
Blanlot, subdelegate of Azapa, was relieved; and, after serving temporarily
as judge in Arica in the court in which a number of cases involving attacks
on Peruvians were and are pending, he has been appointed a member of the
registration and election board in Azapa; and the Peruvian peasants, in
whose deportation to the nitrate fields he was involved and who stand in
deadly fear of him, must face him as an election official if they return to
vote. Vargas, former prefect of police at Tacna, Lopehandía, former
subdelegate of Lluta, Herrera, former police inspector of Molinos, all hated
and feared by the Peruvian people, and Quiroga, the official of the civil
registry above referred to, have also been named as Chilean board
members.
These election officials can be removed by the Commission under the
regulations if good offices fail and a real election is to be attempted; but

their appointment gives a true measure of Chile’s good faith in accepting
the decisions of the Commission.
Item 8. The indefensible travel restrictions were nominally revoked. No
information has been obtained to the effect that the objectionable hotel and
guest law has been revoked or modified, but no complaint that the law is
being formally invoked against Peruvians has been recalled.
The situation both as respects free transit and as respects the right to
entertain Peruvians, item 8, as well as equal opportunity for propaganda and
flag display, item 9, may be judged from a report made yesterday by Udy
who has just returned from taking the testimony of over 30 witnesses both
Peruvians and Chileans in Putre, a town in the interior. Udy is an examiner
appointed pursuant to a resolution of the Commission. The testimony given
before him has of course been made of record. His report shows: (a)
flagrant interference with the transit of returning Peruvian electors by
carbineers despite the often proclaimed repeal of the transit restrictions; (b)
repeated brutal beatings of these same electors by carbineers and Chilean
propagandists; (c) a beating of the mother of a returning Peruvian elector
because she received her son in her house; (d) prevention of legitimate
Peruvian propaganda by espionage and intimidation to such an extent that
the townspeople do not dare to speak to returning Peruvian electors or
Peruvian personnel of the registration and election board; (e) forbidding
Peruvians to fly the Peruvian flag; (f) depriving returning Peruvian electors
of their personal property and the use of their real property; and (g) a
complete failure on the part of the local authorities either to punish the
perpetrators of any of these offenses or to prevent their recurrence and
continuation. In fact the ring leaders and instigators of the unlawful
oppression, coercion, intimidation, and violence are the Chilean member of
the registration and election board and the local commander of carbineers.
The situation in Putre is typical of conditions which exist all over the
province and which would render any election under present conditions a
farce.
 
Carbineers exercise strict control over circulation in the interior by means
of posts established for that purpose at the more important towns, villages,

and intersections of trails. This control is explained at times as being
exercised to prevent smuggling but it is applied irrespective of direction in
which the traveller is proceeding. The result is that Peruvians cannot
circulate in the interior without being subjected to constant carbineer
observation and interference. This control is exercised even in the presence
of American observers and is just as effective as if the travel [permits
were?] revoked.
Right here in Arica transit to the pier for the purpose of proceeding to the
transport upon which the Peruvian Commissioner makes his headquarters
which was the subject of an agreement embodied in a memorandum on
September 4th last, is even yet precarious and is interrupted by frequent
incidents several of which were recently the subject of formal
correspondence.
Item 9. Flag flying. The best evidence that Peruvians dare not fly their flag
is the fact that they do not fly it although the flags of many other nations are
constantly displayed in the plebiscitary territory. An attempt to fly the
Peruvian flag means an incident like that reported by Udy at Putre; see
October 21, midnight.62
Parades. The only time that Peruvians have ventured to parade was at Tacna
on March 5. Parade was disgracefully mobbed. On this occasion Chile
carefully furnished the form without the substance of police protection. No
one was punished. Returning Peruvian electors were brutally mobbed in
Tacna on January 6; see General Pershing’s January 863 and 12.62 On
several subsequent occasions groups of returning voters were escorted
through the streets of Tacna by police in order to protect them from injury,
but these were not parades.
Propaganda. The sale of La Voz del Sur, the Peruvian paper, has been
constantly interrupted by incidents. Peruvian propagandists have been
constantly interfered with. The second report of the investigation committee
(Kreger,64 December 16, transmitted December 26)62 deals with several
instances of interference with propaganda.

Prerequisite number 9 was accepted in law and in theory but is absolutely
disregarded in administration and in practice.
Items 1, 2, and 3. According [to] rosters and reports supplied by Chilean
authorities, reductions in the army carbineers, police, and secret service to
substantially the numbers agreed to by the Commission were made during
the month of January, 1926. How many of each class have returned to the
territory we do not know as it is impossible for the Commission to cope
with the ability of the authorities to defeat the prerequisites. The reduction
was sought in the hope of eliminating some of the terror and abject
subjection induced among the Peruvians by the activities of the official
agencies referred to, but that hope has proved futile. Carbineers, police, and
secret service agents continually appear as engaged in unjust or obstructive
tactics directed against the Peruvians.
Items 4 and 6. No important information is available on these two points.
Experience has shown that nothing effective could be gained by these
prerequisites as any officials removed from the province could be replaced
by individuals whose activities were equally prejudicial to a fair plebiscite.
Item 10. On December 14th Edwards said the censorship had been
abolished. However, distribution of the Peruvian publication Yoz del Sur has
repeatedly been impeded and often entirely prevented.
Item 11. Remarks regarding Peruvian electors within Chilean jurisdiction
outside of Tacna Arica will be included in a later date cablegram in which I
endeavor to summarize the principal evidence indicating frustration of the
plebiscite and in which I shall refer also to deportations and expulsions.
VON TRESCKOW
60 Telegram in four sections.
61 Not printed.
62 Not printed.
63 Ante, p. 266 [Pg. 266 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142].
62 Not printed.

64 Col. Edward A. Kreger, legal adviser to the president of the Plebiscitary
Commission.
62 Not printed.

723.2515/2154: Telegram
[Document 252]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, April 18, 1926—midnight.
[Received April 19—12:10 p.m.]
80.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I deem it absolutely necessary that you immediately communicate your
views to Chilean Government both through me and through Chilean
Ambassador, impressing them upon the latter most strongly and expressing
them in terms of absolute finality and as being, if that be possible, the views
of the Arbitrator. If you can add anything which will shake their confidence
in validity of present registration, which is now approaching 4,800, that
would be highly desirable. In order to have our last proposition accepted,
their confidence in the plebiscite must be shattered. Keep our proposition
pending, give me time, and protract matters all you can. It might be well if
you presented your views in the form of an identic memorandum to be
handed to both Cruchaga and Velarde and to be sent to both Chile and Peru.
COLLIER

723.2515/2183: Telegram
[Document 253]
The President of Bolivia (Siles) to President Coolidge
[Translation]
65
LA PAZ, April 19, 1926.
[Received April 21.]
It is my duty to express to Your Excellency the satisfaction of the
Government and people of Bolivia at the suggestion of the Secretary of
State of the great Republic to the most excellent Governments of Chile and
Peru, to the effect that in the dispute over Tacna and Arica or in its results
the desire of Bolivia for a port be taken into account.
That high inspiration agrees with the offer made to my Government by the
Government of Chile of the port of Arica, or some other port under Chilean
sovereignty, in order that Bolivia may have it for customs or pecuniary
compensations and furthermore agrees with the generous announcement by
which the most excellent Government of Lima offered to La Paz a port in
the disputed territory itself, subject to the power of the Arbitrator.
This plausible action of Chile, which would in part atone for the unjust and
shameful outrage suffered by Bolivia, could not be in keeping with the
obstacle opposed by Chile to Bolivia in the deliberations at Washington. If
Chile manifests a disposition to give to my country the port of Arica, which
is not the exclusive property of Chile, and depends on the insoluble dispute
with Peru, and if it offers that port, it is clear that it binds Bolivia to the
outcome of the dispute referred to the consideration of the Arbitrator. There
surely would be contradiction in speaking of Arica and discussing the
subject without at the same time taking in the one international jurisdiction
that will decide as to the fate of that port, that which is instituted in the
Capital of the Union. Being so convinced, I have declared to the most
excellent Government of Santiago that my Government insists that the

conversations begun along that line immediately determine that Bolivia
shall be present in Washington, as there is no object in carrying on any
direct negotiations.
The great Republic which has a directing influence in the destinies of
America will thus contribute in bringing about a solution of the old-
standing question of the Pacific which concerns three and not two peoples,
of which none suffered more painfully from the war than the one over
which I have the honor to preside suffered through its maritime mutilation.
I present to Your Excellency for the above-mentioned proposition of the
Department of State to Chile and Peru, the assurance of my thankful
consideration.
H. SILES
65 File translation revised.

723.2515/2164a: Telegram
[Document 254]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
WASHINGTON, April 19, 1926—4 p.m.
For Lassiter. General Pershing requests that you deliver to Augustin
Edwards the following personal message from him.
“Your proposition for permanent neutralization of Tacna and
Arica has been most favorably received both by the State
Department and by the American press as a possible constructive
solution. As you know I have always agreed with you that
neutralization is probably the best practicable outcome. Even if a
legally celebrated plebiscite were now feasible, which I myself
doubt very much, I am more than ever personally convinced that
after all that has happened a plebiscitary solution would not
command the moral sanction of the civilized world and serve the
best interests either of your country or of Peru. My opinion is that
neutralization would fully satisfy the inhabitants of the territory
and at the same time give equal advantages in trade and
commerce for all concerned. There is, I can assure you, the
sincerest desire here to see this vexing question settled in such a
manner as to restore for all time the ancient friendship between
Chile and Peru. My country has no other object in view. I
earnestly hope that your powerful influence will now be exercised
in openly advocating this plan. Its adoption would certainly
enhance your already great personal reputation throughout the
Western Hemisphere. I shall be happy to join you in any way that
will promote its adoption. Please accept my warmest regards.
Pershing.”
KELLOGG

723.2515/2160: Telegram
[Document 255]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 20, 1926—5 p.m.
56. I have cabled Lassiter today66 suggesting that Plebiscitary Commission
be immediately convened to pass resolution extending time of registration
for, say, 30 days. Do what you can discreetly to influence Government of
Chile to instruct its member of the Commission to vote for this resolution.
At meeting of the Plenipotentiaries this afternoon, Ambassador Cruchaga
again stated that he was without instructions from his Government
permitting him to discuss my suggestion made April 15. As negotiations are
thus being protracted by failure of Chile to give instructions, it would seem
only reasonable to invite her cooperation in this matter.
At yesterday’s meeting of the Plenipotentiaries, Ambassador Velarde
formally suggested combination of the two alternatives referred to in my
No. 53, April 18, 1 p.m., second paragraph.
KELLOGG
66 Telegram not printed.

723.2515/2168: Telegram
[Document 256]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, April 20, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received April 21—10:25 a.m.]
87. I saw Mathieu late Tuesday night. He showed himself more willing to
accept your plan in some form, but stated correctly that the sentiment of
Congress and of the masses still strongly demands the plebiscite. He thinks
it may change in a few days. I believe that my published notes and the letter
of the President of Bolivia to President Coolidge announcing suspension of
direct negotiations with Chile will have a powerful influence.
I informed Mathieu that Peru had not refused to accept cession plan. I gave
him no inkling that Peru had suggested combination of the two plans. …
We must hold tenaciously to your proposition of April 15 and in no event
allow it to be entirely rejected. Do not invite or permit other countries to
enter into the matter except Bolivia, and then only if both Peru and Chile
are willing.
What is absolutely essential here is to break down opposition to good
offices, which is based upon confidence that plebiscite will not be annulled.
I strongly urge the memorandum referred to in my No. 80, yesterday. Not
until false idea of strength of their legal position is destroyed can you get
the Cabinet or Congress to forego the plebiscite or even to suspend
proceedings. Only way to change sentiment of the infatuated populace is to
have some press associate spread news of Chile’s plebiscitary expenditures
in such startling way that it will have to be published here. If it could also
be sent out from London, Rio de Janeiro, or Buenos Aires, that would be
still better. Influential businessmen would also be influenced by it and if
American banks and business firms which have branches in Chile would

immediately cable their correspondents inquiring about heavy expenditures
and expressing fear over financial conditions, it would finally break into
papers and have an effect. American papers should treat editorially of
alarming condition, and press associations should cable their comments
here. …
COLLIER

723.2515/2160 supp.: Telegram
[Document 257]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 21, 1926—7 p.m.
58. Your No. 80, April 18, 12 p.m. Your suggestion regarding a formal
memorandum has been made subject of careful consideration by my
associates and myself in consultation with Mr. Hughes. Although we fully
appreciate desirability of impressing Government of Chile, at this juncture,
with gravity of the existing situation, we have reached conclusion that
memorandum of that nature can not be delivered. We feel that best and
safest way to insure continuance of negotiations is by holding plebiscitary
process in statu quo and have advised Lassiter of that view as I stated
yesterday in my No. 56.
The one vital and indispensable condition that we must always keep before
us is the unfaltering maintenance in its absolute integrity of the Arbitrator’s
impartial position in dealing with this international controversy. No one of
us has any right to speak for him and to foreshadow his attitude either
directly or indirectly. It is obvious that the Arbitrator could not himself
undertake to prejudge any aspect of this case. Until the matter comes duly
before him upon a proper record, he can not decide anything. If any attempt
were made to discount his decisions in advance, they could hardly
command respect when they are rendered. A bold stroke of this kind, no
matter how effective temporarily, would, in the long run, defeat its own end
if it involved any risk of impairing honor and prestige of Arbitrator and of
the United States, as we feel that this would.
I know that you have all these considerations in mind and I am only taking
this occasion to explain the emphasis which we give them here. To act in
accord with these views, neither you nor I can undertake by memorandum
or even by confidential intimation to attribute any opinion to the Arbitrator

which he is not yet duly called upon to express, and I think that we should
be equally careful not to forecast action of Lassiter and of Plebiscitary
Commission.
It appears to me, however, that within these limits and without making any
implied commitments, there is ample scope for wholly legitimate and very
effective pressure upon the parties in favor of a settlement. In discussing
situation with Government of Chile it can be pointed out in no uncertain
terms that to adopt and persistently apply a policy of drawing out
negotiations here and at same time blocking suspension and pushing the
plebiscite to a conclusion under present conditions, is sure to raise squarely
for decision by Plebiscitary Commission, in the first instance, and by
Arbitrator, on appeal, the question of whether this plebiscite can be held to
be a free and fair one under the treaty and the award; and that, while no one
can say for the moment what that decision might have to be upon the record
as it is finally presented, the consequences of a decision on this issue
adverse to Chile would be so far reaching and so grave as to give any
statesman pause before proceeding too far.
I am sure that responsible officials of Government of Chile are beginning to
realize risks involved, and that nothing more is needed now than a calm and
frank analysis of the situation, entirely free from threatening intimations.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2165a: Telegram
[Document 258]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 21, 1926—8 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your recent messages dealing with plebiscitary situation are
receiving our most careful consideration. I expect later on to cable you fully
on the matter. Meanwhile I desire to outline what I deem to be for the
moment the general principles of policy which should govern our action if
good offices should fail.
1. The sole vital and indispensable condition that we must always keep
before us is the unfaltering maintenance, in its absolute integrity, of the
Arbitrator’s impartial position in dealing with this international controversy.
He can not act in this matter except upon an appeal duly taken or certified
and accompanied by a proper record embodying the proceedings and the
evidence necessary for a decision. The Arbitrator can not undertake to
prejudge any aspect of the case and no one else can undertake either
directly or indirectly to attribute any opinion to him which he is not yet duly
called upon to express.
2. The president of the Plebiscitary Commission is in much the same
position, in that his opinions and decisions should not be discounted in
advance; he should not himself prejudge any aspect of the case until it has
actually been submitted to him for decision.
3. The Commission’s every decision must have as its basis a record which
embodies the proceedings and evidence appropriate and adequate to sustain
action taken. Obviously, the record upon which the Commission could act is
same record which goes to Arbitrator in event of an appeal.

4. My associates and I, as well as Mr. Hughes, with whom we are in
consultation, are much disturbed by point of view which your legal advisers
apparently take with respect to power of Plebiscitary Commission and of
Arbitrator to deal with question of frustration of plebiscite and
responsibility for it when and if that question arises. The assumption seems
to be that the ordinary principles requiring legal support for a finding may
be relaxed or disregarded, and that findings may be made and sustained by
accepting mere opinions and general conclusions without an adequate
showing of fact to support them, the statement being made that from nature
of the case proof in usual sense can not be made.
I do not mean to assert that strict legal proof meeting all technical evidential
requirements is necessary, but in all instances the proceedings in absence of
such proof as is commonly required must in some way be justified
otherwise than by mere unsupported opinion coupled with statement that
proof is impossible. Evidence can not be replaced by sweeping allegations
of fraud and intimidations; there must be substantial foundation of fact.
That is why I have been endeavoring to elicit precise information as to the
evidence actually in your possession and the possibility of presenting a
record in form and substance adequate to serve as basis of a finding and a
decision.
5. Issue, if it eventually has to be met, is one of gravest import. Commission
and Arbitrator would, in effect, be asked to indict Chile for fraud,
intimidation, and dishonorable practices, resulting in frustration of
plebiscite, the celebration of which she is solemnly committed to assist. No
matter how restrained or how measured might be the terms of this
indictment, it would indelibly stain Chile’s honor. Viewed from any aspect
this would be most serious matter for all involved; and it is unthinkable that
the Arbitrator, himself head of a sovereign State, should be placed in
position of being invited to condemn in this fashion another sovereign State
without at least having before him a record which satisfied the elementary
requirements. It is highly important, therefore, that question of imposing
further conditions to insure a proper plebiscite should be considered
carefully to end that failure to provide adequate safeguards may be proved
satisfactorily. I shall make further suggestions in this direction after you
advise me of extension of period for registration.

Ketoce

723.2515/2175: Telegram
[Document 259]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extracts—Paraphrase]
ARICA, April 21, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received April 22—1 a.m.]
From Lassiter. In view of demand by Edwards for meeting of Commission
it was necessary to hold one, and at meeting yesterday action was taken to
make clear that no date is now set for the election. This contested point is to
be settled after period of registration ends on April 26. Situation can remain
as it is to give negotiations time to develop …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The declaratory action taken at yesterday’s meeting, of which you were
unaware when your cable of that date was sent,67 accomplishes purpose
stated in your cable, that is, the maintenance of the status quo, and renders
further action to that end unnecessary. …
Lassiter
VON TRESCKOW
67 Not printed; see telegram No. 56, Apr. 20, to the Ambassador in Chile, p.
397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255].

723.2515/2175: Telegram
[Document 260]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 22, 1926—2 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your telegram April 21, 6 p.m. After conferring with Mr.
Hughes and my associates I am able to advise you that all of us are
thoroughly convinced that extension of registration period, as requested on
April 20, is only safe course at this juncture and should be followed. If the
present registration is allowed to lapse and no extension is voted before it
ends, it is clear that a new situation would be created and new legal
questions would appear, opening new fields of controversy.
Please try to understand our situation here and appreciate difficulty we have
in conveying to you adequate understanding of all the factors with which
we are faced. I must ask you to accept our judgment, which is that any new
situation such as I have referred to above would seriously prejudice, if it
would not entirely defeat, prospects of a settlement. It does not seem at all
necessary to us to inject at this time any new complication. I have just been
advised, moreover, that Chile has agreed to instruct her delegate on
Commission to vote in favor of resolution extending time of registration by
25 days, that is, up to and including May 20 or 21. It is of greatest
importance to put this through at earliest possible moment, and I should
appreciate your cabling me at once date when Commission will meet to
consider this matter and also cable date to Ambassador Collier. I am
hopeful, too, that Freyre will vote for the resolution, although it is
immaterial whether extension is voted by majority or unanimously. Should
negotiations later require further extensions, no doubt they can be arranged.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2187: Telegram
[Document 261]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, April 23, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received 1:45 p.m.]
From Lassiter. Your telegram April 22, 2 p.m. I deem it my duty to explain
how your proposition looks from here.
1. In all probability Chile will consent to extension of present sort
of registration at your request and then assert that she has
accorded all reforms and all demands made on her, and that no
one, therefore, can any longer oppose consummation of the
plebiscite. No Peruvians will participate in this farcical
registration, of course, and Chile’s pretended reforms would mean
nothing. Thus without running any risks, Chile will greatly
strengthen her position on the plebiscite and the Arbitrator’s
representative will be placed in increasingly embarrassing
position.
2. As for the good offices, Chilean opposition will see that
proposed maneuver is in Chile’s favor; and from state of relative
discouragement they will, I think, pass to one of great
encouragement while Peru will be correspondingly depressed.
3. As I feel that your proposition is prejudicial not only to good
offices but to future of the plebiscite (for I deem it wholly
unnecessary as no date is set for election and above all it means
yielding the dominating position to Chile), I urge the Department
to cable me that it withdraws its request.

4. If Department insists, I shall do what it requests, but I shall
have to ask for an immediate understanding with it on further
plebiscitary proceedings. Meeting of the Commission will be
called for April 26, noon. I shall not communicate with either
Freyre or Edwards until I hear further from you, and there will be
plenty of time for you to notify Ambassador Collier.
5. I should like to have your reply today. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2190: Telegram
[Document 262]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
ARICA, April 23, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received 7:50 p.m.]
From Lassiter. Mr. Edwards requested me to transmit the following
telegram from him to General Pershing:
“I thank Your Excellency for your courteous and kind message
and for the interest you continue to show in the future of this
territory.
The Chilean Government has intimated to me that all the political
aspects of this problem are in their hands and that in order to
avoid misunderstandings I should even refrain from exchanging
privately ideas such as were the subject of our conversations in
Arica. The Government at Santiago was duly informed of those
conversations and is in a position to decide whether they are
prepared to use them as a basis of a solution. Your Excellency
will no doubt remember that on each occasion on which we
exchanged ideas on the political aspect of this problem I
invariably stated that it was my conviction that my Government
would not consider political solution until the plebiscite had taken
place and given a clean title to the winning country.
That conviction of mine is stronger today than ever, for the
current of Chilean public opinion in favor of the plebiscite, now
that our registered voters have reached 5,500, is overwhelming;
and I am sure that Your Excellency could not help more
efficiently towards a rapid and permanent solution than by
exercising your powerful influence to remove any difficulty that
may be hindering the execution of the arbitral award.

The 5,500 voters have been registered after complying with the
severe qualification test established in the election regulations and
after thorough examination by the American president of each
registration board. That number of voters qualified under the
award represents an overwhelming proportion of the potential
electorate of this territory; and therefore, even if Peru had not
refused of her own free will to participate in the election, the
plebiscite would confirm the fact that the great majority of the
inhabitants are Chilean at heart. Under the circumstances it seems
to me unjust and unwise to disregard the rights they have acquired
under the award and abandon the plebiscite for any other plan,
however great and lofty it may be.
This matter is entirely in the hands of my Government and it is
for them to decide whatever course they consider best for the
continuing of peace in this part of the world.
Please accept my warmest regards. Augustin Edwards.”
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2187: Telegram
[Document 263]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 24, 1926—3 p.m.
For Lassiter.
1. Your telegram of April 23, 11 a.m., reached me too late
yesterday evening to make possible a reply. This morning my
associates, Mr. Hughes, and I again carefully reviewed situation
in light of your earnest recommendations.
2. We conceive that first duty for all of us is to safeguard and
protect impartial position of this Government and of the
Arbitrator. Even the parties to the controversy themselves, on any
statesmanlike view of their own interests, are bound to regard this
condition as fundamental and indispensable. Firm adherence to
this guiding principle can not possibly entail slightest
embarrassment to anyone, and it would be, we should suppose, in
the highest degree gratifying to you as president of the
Plebiscitary Commission. No matter how we may differ over
details of procedure we can not feel that there ought to be any
difference of opinion on this pivotal point on which our policy
must turn.
3. Through the exercise of good offices, a conscientious and by
no means hopeless effort to adjust the controversy is being made.
Nobody can tell, at present moment, what will be the result. We
are in the middle of the stream and undeniably the situation is
critical. As far as good offices are concerned, the responsibility
rests squarely upon us, and I can assure you that we feel it keenly.
We want and we greatly appreciate your wholehearted

cooperation in seeing this business through; and in fixing
conditions to promote success of the good offices we are obliged
to do the best we can, basing our judgment on all information we
have at our disposal, much of which can not as a practical matter
be weighed and appreciated except at place where the
negotiations converge and are controlled. As far as good offices
and conditions favoring their continuance are concerned, we
consequently accept the entire responsibility.
4. Our considered judgment is that all attempts either to prejudge
the issues which affect the suspension, termination, or eventual
celebration of the plebiscite, or to deal with contingencies which
have not yet arisen, are both unnecessary and dangerous. For the
present, the only safe and proper course is for us to cross each
bridge as we come to it, and to cross it with the utmost caution,
avoiding any step which at this juncture need not be faced.
Precise question before us is whether the present registration
period shall be extended 25 days from and after April 26.
Whatever is done about this extension will, naturally, be
capitalized by both sides for purposes of argument. It seems to us
that on this subject we do not need to concern ourselves with any
idle speculation. The simple test is what course will disturb the
existing situation the least and will least prejudice the normal
progress of good offices; we are convinced that on the whole it
would be most unwise to permit a technical termination of this
vital plebiscitary process, thereby placing a new weapon in
Chile’s hands, closing door to Peru, at least temporarily, and
gratuitously introducing new legal complications which we must
regard as serious. For these reasons we must insist upon request
made in my telegram April 20, 2 p.m.,68 and renewed April 22, 2
p.m.
5. We mean to press this effort to settle by negotiation to the very
limit. Negotiations will not terminate until and unless either Chile
or Peru or both take the responsibility of bringing them to an end.
If good offices should not succeed, then one of three things might
happeitem:

(i) It is conceivable that both parties to the controversy
might go ahead with the plebiscite. In this kaleidoscopic
situation it is impossible to predict what might be exact
position of the contestants at that moment. Of course if
both want plebiscite to continue, your duty will be
plain.
(ii) It is also conceivable that both parties might refuse
to proceed. Should that happen, your duty would
likewise be plain; there would be nothing to do but to
suspend or abandon the plebiscite.
(iii) Chile might insist that registration be completed
and the plebiscite celebrated, with Peru refusing to
participate and perhaps withdrawing. It is in that
contingency, and only in that contingency, that issue of
going through with unilateral plebiscite or some form of
termination 
or 
suspension 
would 
be 
definitely
presented. Several lines of action would then have to be
considered. Possibly your duty would be to make one
last attempt to bring Peru back in by exaction of new
guarantees pledging honor of Chile and by placing
before Peru another opportunity to try out plebiscite
again under guarantees of that nature. Should a
plebiscite be held under such guarantees and they were
to prove ineffectual, the chances of having before us, as
a basis for a finding on the question of frustration,
something more definable and conclusive than we have
now would be increased. On other hand, if Peru refused
to accept these guarantees and withdrew from
plebiscite, the issue would be a unilateral plebiscite or
nothing. At this point we confess to a feeling of
disappointment regarding state of the evidence bearing
upon Chile’s alleged frustration. We have already
stressed importance of having a record on this subject
adequate to sustain any finding that may be made. To
make a flat declaration out of hand with nothing to

point to but sweeping assertions and general opinions
and statements which have been taken in course of ex
parte investigations, strikes us as being altogether
inadequate. An indictment of a sovereign state can not
be drawn in this manner. Chile would clearly be entitled
to a hearing. We are not in a position to determine and it
would not be proper to prejudge action of Arbitrator
who must act ultimately as a judge upon record before
him. It might be necessary for the Arbitrator, in order
that case might be fully heard and his final
determination made as invulnerable as possible to
attack, to order up the evidence, possibly to take
additional evidence, and to provide for an appropriate
hearing. In determining his course the Arbitrator must
reserve complete freedom of action.
KELLOGG
68 Not printed.

723.2515/2218: Telegram
[Document 264]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
ARICA, April 24, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received April 28—10 p.m.69 ]
From Lassiter. In continuation of my telegram April 18, 5 p.m. Deportations
provide typical example of difficulties involved in proving case against
authority controlling territory and of the evidence available. In spite of
difficulties in obtaining proof, deportations have been so numerous that
large amount of evidence is available.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
General Pershing was able to show in January from reports made to our
observers that there had been about 700 deportations and expulsions, of
which about 275 had taken place between rendition of the award and end of
1925. Although there has been no special effort to unearth cases of that sort
since then, about 25 cases have been reported as having taken place since
last December. The probably considerable decrease in this period is due (1)
to fact that the work had already been well done, as is shown by the many
vacant Peruvian homes and homes where, our observers found, only women
were living—American members of two registration boards alone have
reported over 100 vacant houses; and (2) to greater danger of detection with
arrival of American board members and the return, under subpoena, of
Peruvian voters from Chile or Peru. But effect of past deportations can not
be removed without return of the deportees and the freeing of these men
and their families from the fear in which they live.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The 700 cases referred to above (about 300 altogether since the award) have
been brought to the attention of the American delegation in such a way as to
lead the observer or investigator to give credence to the charges. In a
number of cases where formal investigation has been possible, the charge
has been convincingly established as misconduct, as well as charge that
system designed to drive Peruvians from plebiscitary territory was
countenanced by officials. It is astonishing how information acquired later
fits into and corroborates that obtained by first observers.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lassiter
VON TRESCKOW
69 Telegram in three sections.

723.2515/2203: Telegram
[Document 265]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, April 25, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 11 p.m.]
110. I saw Mathieu yesterday morning. I think that if you can keep the good
offices alive it may be possible to work out a plan of settlement more or less
on following lines:
1. Obtain Peru’s consent to cession of entire Province of Arica to
Bolivia.
2. In consideration of restoration of Province of Tacna to Peru,
Peru will consent, as first step to proceedings of your good offices
or as simultaneous or anterior collateral proceeding, to Chile’s
and Bolivia’s making a contingent preliminary agreement on
compensation and economic arrangements.
3. When Chile and Bolivia have reached accord between
themselves, they should report it to you; representatives of
Bolivia, Chile, and Peru should then meet and draft protocols
necessary. I am sure that Bolivia and Chile will grant Tacna free
entry through Arica and will possibly establish regime of
interchange of local products between the two provinces. This
agreement would provide also for the demilitarization of the
Morro of Arica, which might be created an international memorial
to the heroic dead and symbol of peace, under international
sovereignty.
If in your opinion such a solution seems proper and practicable, I have
some hope of obtaining its acceptance very soon and of Chile’s assent to

suspension of the plebiscite, either for definite period if negotiations were
making favorable progress, or during the negotiations and subject to a
resumption of the plebiscitary proceedings whenever a majority of the
Plebiscitary Commission shall so vote in a meeting called by its president.
Authority of the Commission and general arrangement for holding the
plebiscite should be maintained unimpaired.
There is no certainty that Chile would accept foregoing plan; but the
possibility of her accepting it is such, provided Peru is likely to accept, that
I think it would be a wise procedure for you to sound out Ambassador
Cruchaga. If on Tuesday, April 27, or before then, he were to suggest or
even to report this plan to Chilean Government for its consideration, such
action might avert resolution by Chamber of Deputies, on April 28, to
terminate good offices.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COLLIER

723.2515/2183: Telegram
[Document 266]
President Coolidge to the President of Bolivia (Siles)
WASHINGTON, April 26, 1926.
I take pleasure in acknowledging receipt of Your Excellency’s esteemed
message dated April 19, 1926. In reply permit me to direct Your
Excellency’s attention to the fact that my relation to the matter which forms
the subject of Your Excellency’s message is defined by the Protocol of
Arbitration signed at Washington on July 20, 1922, by the representatives of
the Republics of Peru and Chile, whereby certain questions arising out of
the unfulfilled provisions of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon between Peru
and Chile, dated October 20, 1883, were submitted to me as Arbitrator. I
have no other powers or duties than those described in the said Protocol and
in the Act supplementary thereto. The negotiations between Peru and Chile
which are now proceeding at Washington originated in a tender of the good
offices of the United States made by the Secretary of State to the
Governments of Peru and Chile with a view to affording the said
Governments an opportunity for effecting such adjustment as they might
desire to make of the differences between them, outside the terms of the
Protocol and of the Award thereunder made by the Arbitrator. Manifestly
the ensuing negotiations are confined to the two Governments of Peru and
Chile and the Secretary of State advises me that in the absence of any
consent to that end by those Governments he does not consider that he can
appropriately invite any other government or governments to participate
therein.
I take this opportunity of conveying to Your Excellency the assurances of
my distinguished consideration.
CALVIN COOLIDGE

723.2515/2183: Telegram
[Document 267]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 26, 1926—4 p.m.
67. Following message has been sent today by the Arbitrator to President
Siles of Bolivia in reply to the latter’s message of April 19: [Here follows
text of the telegram to the President of Bolivia, supra.]
Above reply has not yet been given to the press, but you may, if you find it
advisable, give its substance informally and confidentially, to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs. In view of importance Chile evidently attaches to this
démarche of Bolivia, and its possibly unfortunate effect, we should be in
position to act quickly if any attempt is made to make us in any way
responsible for Bolivia’s action. I have scrupulously avoided all
communication with Bolivia on subject of this controversy. … Has there
been anything said in your conversations with Bolivian Minister at Santiago
which could justify assertion, should it be made, that we have advised or
instigated rupture of direct negotiations between Chile and Bolivia?
KELLOGG

723.2515/2212: Telegram
[Document 268]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, April 27, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received 5:45 p.m.]
116. Your No. 67, April 26, 4 p.m., last sentence. Nothing that I have said
could be construed as advice or instigation. My few and brief conversations
with the Bolivian Minister here convince me that President Siles’ telegram
to President Coolidge was thought by the former to be a natural, proper, and
timely step for Bolivia to take in view of your alternative proposition of
April 15 and of the repeated assurances given by both Chile and Peru that
Bolivia could have a port on the Pacific. The Bolivian-Chilean situation as
it exists today helps rather than hinders your negotiations, in my opinion.
The repeated public declarations made by Chilean Minister for Foreign
Affairs that Bolivia’s aspirations would receive consideration and that
Chilean-Bolivian conversations were proceeding favorably were intended to
defeat any solution except a plebiscite, first, by winning the support of
Bolivian voters in Arica; next, by causing Bolivia to hold off until Chile had
won Arica and would be in position to name her own terms; and lastly, by
holding in check the Chileans who are demanding that commercial
arrangement be made, immediately under your good offices while Chile has
still at least a claim to the provinces and that it be not delayed until she may
have lost the plebiscite or it has been annulled. Chilean Ambassador’s
annoyance is evidence to me that Chile’s position has been weakened by
Bolivia’s action and that she will have to yield. If you can first get Peru to
accept plan set forth in my No. 110, April 25, I believe that there will be no
difficulty about an agreement being reached by Chile and Peru.
COLLIER

723.2515/2213: Telegram
[Document 269]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, April 27, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received 8:15 p.m.]
117. Today I received visit from the commercial adviser of Chilean Ministry
of Commerce, who is an intimate friend, and is the recognized authority
here on Bolivian commercial relations. … He says that the majority of the
people of influence here really prefer a solution by good offices. I gave no
hint of plan suggested in my No. 110, April 25, 3 p.m.; but I am more
hopeful than ever that if you can obtain Peru’s acceptance you can get
Chile’s. The commercial adviser says that Chile wishes to make her own
negotiations with Bolivia largely as matter of amour propre … and that
Chile would gladly resume direct negotiations because the interviews which
they gave out have increased fear that refusal to negotiate further may mean
loss of all opportunity to do so and may throw Bolivia into close
commercial relations with Argentina and cause her to seek an outlet to the
sea through Buenos Aires. He also said that Edwards and his newspaper El
Mercurio are being almost universally criticized.
COLLIER

723.2515/2210a: Telegram
[Document 270]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 27, 1926—6 p.m.
68. We are advised by Ambassador Cruchaga that he is suggesting to
Mathieu, on his own responsibility, as a basis for settlement the assignment
of Tacna Province to Peru and of Arica Province to Bolivia, with the
understanding that Chile and Peru shall each undertake separately
preliminary negotiations with Bolivia in regard to compensation,
commercial advantages, etc.; any agreements reached in this way to be
embodied in final settlement of negotiations under good offices. Cruchaga
expressed his doubt that this suggestion will be approved, but he will
personally recommend it.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2228: Telegram
[Document 271]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, April 30, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received 2:20 p.m.]
124. Notwithstanding supposed secrecy of Senate’s session, the resolution
proposed by Senator Cariola is published today unofficially but textually.
There are 28 preambles most of which refer to the plebiscitary proceeding
up to date. There are many statements as to the acts of the Arbitrator and his
representative on the Commission with presumptions as to necessary legal
consequences. Among other statements are the following: “Although the
representative of the United States of America on the Commission at one
time said that in his opinion conditions did not permit holding an honest and
correct plebiscite, this opinion must be considered as having disappeared
because he has since intervened in voting the election law to regulate the
plebiscite and afterwards in fixing the dates for registering and voting and
finally because on March 25 he declared his willingness to go on with the
plebiscite and saw no use in delay.” No reference is made to his
reservations and declarations of March 25 and April 26 although they have
been published. Whether you would consider it proper to remind the
Chilean Ambassador of these I do not know. It might do good if he cabled
his Government immediately.
Morning papers say vote will be taken at 7 o’clock tonight on three
resolutions but there is first a chance of postponement. The Cariola
resolution demands cessation of good offices and leaves Minister of Foreign
Affairs with no freedom of negotiation. The substitute resolution of the
Committee on Foreign Affairs leads to same result although approving the
course of Minister of Foreign Affairs up to date. A third resolution
introduced by Senator Urzua champions the fulfillment of the award but
recognizes and respects the power of the President to conduct foreign
negotiations. It is generally thought the committee resolution will pass,
although one Senator has publicly said that on account of division of

opinion it is possible no resolution will be adopted but that the Minister for
Foreign Affairs will have the benefit of the recent Senate discussion as a
guide for his future policy. Mathieu will probably resign.
COLLIER

723.2515/2240½
[Document 272]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs (White)
[WASHINGTON,] May 1, 1926.
The Chilean Ambassador called on the Secretary on Saturday, May 1, at his
request. The Secretary told him that he wished to speak with him very
frankly in view of messages received from Ambassador Collier. The
Ambassador stated that he had had no news whatsoever from Santiago. The
Secretary then read to the Ambassador a portion of the resolution proposed
in the Chilean Senate by Senator Cariola as follows:
“Although the representative of the United States of America on
the Commission at one time said that in his opinion conditions did
not permit holding an honest and correct plebiscite this opinion
must be considered as having disappeared because he has since
intervened in voting the election law to regulate the plebiscite and
afterwards in fixing the dates for registration and voting and
finally because on March 25, he declared his willingness to go on
with the plebiscite and saw no use in delay.”
The Secretary stated that if this was the feeling in Chile he might as well
call their attention at once to the statements made by General Lassiter in
voting for the various resolutions. The Secretary then read to the
Ambassador the statement made by General Lassiter in the meeting of the
Plebiscitary Commission on March 1, when voting affirmatively upon the
resolution approving the notices that registration would start March 15, as
follows:
“The preliminary work of the Commission is now approaching its
close and we are about to begin the actual registration of
prospective voters. In my view this passage from the previous
phase of preparation for the plebiscite to that of actual execution

involves no commitment as to the conditions which now affect or
which in the past have affected the carrying on of a plebiscite.
These conditions must in the future as in the past be under
constant scrutiny and the whole body of information thus gained
must be used in arriving at a judgment of the acceptability of the
result or of the action to be taken.”
The Secretary then read to him General Lassiter’s statement, made in the
meeting of the Commission on March 25, in voting in the negative upon the
Chilean member’s motion asserting that all the requisites prescribed by the
Commission for a free plebiscite had been complied with by the Chilean
Government, as follows:
“In my judgment by no means all of the prerequisites to a fair
plebiscite stated by the Commission have been complied with in
substance, furthermore, the Commission has not sought formally
to restate in its resolutions all the requirements affirmative and
negative laid upon the Chilean authorities by the Opinion and
Award of the Arbitrator moreover, under the Award the
Commission cannot bind itself irrevocably to proceed with
registration and voting according to any particular time schedule.
I am, therefore, constrained to vote and do vote no upon the
Chilean member’s substitute resolution.”
The Secretary finally read to the Ambassador General Lassiter’s statement
in the meeting of March 25, when abstaining from voting on the motion of
the Peruvian member declaring the impracticability of the plebiscite. This
statement was as follows:
“As stated before when voting on the resolution introduced by the
Peruvian member for indefinite postponement, I am prepared to
continue plebiscitary proceedings with a hope that appropriate
safeguards for the plebiscite will be provided and with the
intention of observing conditions and utilizing all information
gathered throughout the plebiscite to formulate a judgment as to
further decisions to be taken. An expression of the conclusions of
the Commission upon plebiscitary conditions is at this moment

not essential or advantageous. I therefore abstain from voting on
the resolution.”
The Secretary stated that it was clear from this that General Lassiter has
reserved his position all the way through and has kept a perfectly free hand
in the matter. The Secretary then read from a telegram from Ambassador
Collier70 in which General Lassiter was reported to have said in the meeting
of April 26, in voting for a prolongation of the registration period that “this
motion has been presented for the purpose of maintaining the status quo. In
adopting it the Commission is not exhausting all its facilities [powers?].
Certain observations made by me in the sessions of March 1, 14, and 25,
relate to this matter.” The Secretary said that right up to the very last
General Lassiter has maintained his position without changing it and it was
entirely wrong for the Chileans to go on any other assumption. The
Secretary of course was not stating what the President as Arbitrator or even
the Commission will do but he was merely pointing out these statements
which apparently had not been taken into consideration in the Chilean
Senate, certainly not by Senator Cariola.
The Secretary then stated that he had received a telegram from Ambassador
Collier70 stating that in a talk which he had had with the President of Chile
on April 28, the President had shown very great irritation because of
General Lassiter’s declaration last above quoted. Ambassador Collier had
reported that the President had said that this was a clear and express
declaration by the representative of the Arbitrator to hold up the juridical
proceedings and in order to force Chile to accept good offices. …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Secretary then read the Ambassador a statement in yesterday’s Evening
Star to the effect that Chile considered that the Department of State had not
had the courage to prevent the commencement of registration and would not
now have the courage to call the election off. The Secretary stated that we
had not yet arrived at the moment to make any declaration but when the
moment has arrived the proper decision will be taken but he did not want
Chile to misunderstand his attitude at all, it was necessary that this should
be made absolutely clear. The Secretary had not attempted to coerce Chile

in any way whatsoever to make an outside settlement through good offices.
The Secretary had been urged to do so by Chile and the Secretary was glad
to do what he could to try to make a settlement that would be equitable to
both parties. The Secretary naturally could not say what the decision of the
Commission would be nor could he tell what attitude the Arbitrator would
take but he must point out to Chile that as far as he personally was
concerned he could not ignore the vast amount of cumulative evidence that
he is receiving which would make it very difficult to consider as valid any
election that might take place now in Arica.
The Secretary stated that as a matter of fact he had brought more pressure to
bear on Peru than he had on Chile in order to bring about a settlement
especially a settlement on the basis of the division of territory. The
Secretary thought that it was legitimate to do this and he had consequently
advised Peru that it was to the interest of all that a proper settlement be
made. The Secretary said that he thought he had only done what was right
in making this statement. He certainly could not be charged with bringing
pressure to bear on Chile to coerce her into an outside settlement that she
did not want. This matter would have to be decided by Chile. If they did not
want an outside settlement well and good. He would be very glad to have
them say so and we will then proceed with the question of whether an
election can be held or not. The Secretary did not desire to pass on this now,
he could not say what the Arbitrator would eventually decide but as he had
said before he must frankly say to the Ambassador that the accumulation of
evidence that is being sent to him from Arica is very strong that Chile has
not acted properly in this matter.
The Ambassador stated that the Secretary was quite right, that the Secretary
had certainly never threatened or brought pressure to bear on him. If he
might venture to say so his feeling had been that if prejudiced at all the
Secretary was prejudiced in favor of Chile. … One thought occurred to him,
namely, that it might be possible for the Secretary to declare in favor of
holding the plebiscite, as that seemed to be their fixed idea in Santiago, and
then have Chile at the same time say that as soon as the plebiscite was over
it would turn the provinces into the Secretary’s hands to be disposed of as
he should think proper. The Secretary stated very definitely that he could
not commit himself in any way to the carrying on of the plebiscite, could

not make any statement at this time which would indicate that he thought
that a plebiscite could and should be held. When the time comes the matter
will be considered on the basis of the evidence submitted and the Secretary
cannot now commit himself to the carrying out of the plebiscite. He stated
that he must again say that the evidence coming to him of conditions in the
provinces were such that he could not ignore it nor in any manner commit
himself with regard to the holding of a plebiscite.
[FRANCIS WHITE]
70 Not printed.
70 Not printed.

723.2515/2249a: Telegram
[Document 273]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 5, 1926—6 p.m.
46. My No. 44, April 15, 8 p.m. Situation at present is as follows: 1. Chile
has accepted division of the territory.
2. Peru has rejected division of the territory.
3. Peru has accepted neutralization of the territory.
4. Chile has not yet replied to neutralization proposal.
5. Peru agrees to give Bolivia outlet to sea in south of Arica Province
provided rest of province be neutralized.
6. Chile has not yet replied to second alternative offer I made on April 15.
7. Chilean Senate has adopted resolution reading in translation as follows:
After hearing the explanation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
the Senate is of the opinion that the plebiscite must be held in
order to safeguard the principle of arbitration and in fulfillment of
the Award rendered by His Excellency the President of the United
States, and acknowledges the Government’s effort to find a
harmonious solution of the problem of Tacna-Arica.72
8. From the above it appears that there is little likelihood that Chile will
accept either of proposals which I made on April 15. In this situation Peru
now has it in her power to bring about settlement by agreeing to division of
the territory. If this proposal is accepted in principle it opens door to many
possible solutions; the territory could be divided between Chile and Peru or

among Chile, Peru, and Bolivia on several bases. It is our understanding
that Chilean Senate’s resolution does not affect my first proposal for
division of the territory. Chile having definitely accepted a division,
however, and not having withdrawn her acceptance, it manifestly would be
most difficult for her to withdraw her acceptance should Peru now accept.
Position Peru has taken in rejecting division of the territory is that she is
unable to accept giving up by her own act a part of what she claims as her
sovereign territory. Should the territory have been lost to her through an
arbitral award or the plebiscite that would be a different matter. Although I
fully appreciate point of view taken by Peru, I feel, nevertheless, that the
present is not a time to insist on considerations which are technical and
more or less theoretical. We are now confronted by what appears to be our
last opportunity to bring about a solution of this controversy of many years’
duration which has not only embittered relations between two leading South
American countries, but has greatly reacted to the detriment of their
economic life and prosperity. Time has come when this matter should be
looked at in broad-minded manner, prejudices and antagonisms forgotten,
and every effort made to dispose finally and definitely of this question. I
feel that it can be done, and in an eminently satisfactory and permanent way
by division of the territory, especially if Bolivia be given a corridor to the
sea at Arica, corridor also to include railway.
Of course, I shall welcome any settlement satisfactory to Chile and Peru,
but the argument which has been advanced against neutralization of Tacna-
Arica is that it would almost inevitably entail rivalry between Chile and
Peru to obtain a dominant position in the neutralized state and it would
probably produce future discord and conflict while a division of the
territory by which a definite line between the two countries is established
would afford the basis for a definite settlement instead of entailing a future
rivalry. It is urged that this would be the case even more should a Bolivian
corridor exist to separate the two. This corridor might include either the
whole of the territory or only a portion of it. Such a solution as this appears
to be most statesmanlike and conducive to a settlement of existing
difficulties and to establishment of friendly relations between Chile and
Peru.

It is my desire, therefore, that at earliest possible moment you speak with
President Leguía; without suggesting any definite settlement, set forth the
above considerations, but do not give him any note or memorandum, in
endeavor to have him accept in principle division of the territory. Time is
running against Peru, for extension of period of registration will soon
expire; it is imperative, therefore, that you immediately urge the President
to accept this solution.
KELLOGG
72 On May 10 the Secretary informed Ambassador Poindexter that the
Chilean Chamber of Deputies had adopted the resolution and requested him
to expedite President Legula’s reply to this telegram (file No.
723.2515/2261).

723.2515/2254: Telegram
[Document 274]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 6, 1926—4 p.m.
For Lassiter. Ambassador Cruchaga informs me that on April 29 Mr. Freyre
wrote to you stating that Peru was abstaining from appointing Peruvian
members of the registration boards as Peruvian voters were abstaining from
registration; that Peru’s abstention from participating in functions of
electoral boards was in response to suggestion from this Government; and
that you had sent Edwards a copy of Freyre’s note.
Please let us know as soon as possible if this is correct. To what suggestion
of this Government does Freyre refer? I have made no suggestion to effect
that Peru should not participate in registration; in fact, I have urged
repeatedly that Peru participate and I presume that you have done likewise
and certainly that you have not suggested that Peruvians should not
participate. Telegraph reply without delay, as I wish to issue denial; and I
think that you should also reply to Freyre’s letter, pointing out that this
Government has never made any such suggestion. It is important that I
know exactly what you communicated to Edwards and also what, in this
connection, you have written or said to Freyre. Freyre’s statement as given
above has caused much unfavorable comment in Chile.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2260: Telegram
[Document 275]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, May 7, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 10:30 p.m.]
141. Inasmuch as the President of Chile in his conversation with me on
April 28 complained that you and Lassiter were both trying to force good
offices upon Chile, I thought it expedient to write a note to the Foreign
Office reminding it that the very first intimation as to good offices was a
request by Chile made on October 23 through Carlos Castro Ruiz, then
Counsellor of Ministry of Foreign Affairs,73 and reiterated and embodied in
a formal memorandum handed to me by Barros Jarpa, then Minister for
Foreign Affairs, on October 27.73 In this note I said to the Minister of
Foreign Affairs that I regretted he had deemed it necessary to keep this offer
so secret that the public and newspapers had formed the impression that the
United States had conceived the idea of good offices and was imposing it
upon Chile against its will and that the newspapers were consequently
creating very bitter feeling against the United States. You will please
understand that my note was to the Foreign Office and not to the press nor
even did it request that the press be informed; moreover it did not express
any opinion whatever concerning future action of Arbitrator or the
Commission but simply reminded the Foreign Office of Chile’s request last
October for good offices and of Edwards’ subsequent advocacy of his plan
and of Chile’s prompt acceptance of both your offers of good offices and of
the plea of the Minister of Foreign Affairs a few days prior to March 24 that
the United States use every effort to make Peru accept good offices.
Late last night the Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs called upon me to say
that this note had produced a wonderful effect which he felt ultimately
might bring about the acceptance of diplomatic settlement. He said that
Mathieu had learned for the first time of Barros Jarpa’s memorandum and
this information would make the former invulnerable against any possible

attacks in Congress. The Under Secretary said that Alessandri was shown
the memorandum of Barros Jarpa yesterday and instantly apologized to
Mathieu for some attacks he had made upon him and declared he was
coming to the Embassy to apologize to me. He came this morning bringing
with him a copy of my note which the Minister of Foreign Affairs had given
him. He … said he had come to express his regret that he had questioned
the motives of the United States; that he had been entirely ignorant of the
memorandum and that he appreciated now that the United States had acted
only at the request of Chile. He also said that Mathieu had admitted to him
yesterday that he (the former) had urged shortly prior to March 25th that the
United States put pressure on Peru to make her accept good offices.
Alessandri said that he still believed in the plebiscite but no longer would
question the purity of your motives in offering good offices.
The Under Secretary showed the note to the President of the Republic who
expressed astonishment but also great relief upon learning that the
unpopular good offices movement was started in time of Barros Borgoña,
Acting President. The Under Secretary said the President wished to publish
the note but he advised against it. It would be a revelation that might break
the opposition to good offices. [Paraphrase.] You may think it proper to
publish text of the memorandum, as the subsequent memorandum of offer
and acceptance have been published here and in Washington. [End
paraphrase.] I shall not give any publicity to the matter at all but I am
confident it will soon leak out … When our motives are no longer
questioned they will listen to your advice.
To illustrate how nothing can be kept secret here, the resolutions and
speeches of the secret sessions of Congress have been published and
newspapers have boasted of this as a scoop. The Under Secretary of State
tells me almost every Senator and Deputy who has spoken has arraigned
Edwards. Although this is prompted by the feeling that at one time he was
ready to abandon the plebiscite and although it indicates the strength of the
present demand for the plebiscite, I think it means eventual disintegration of
the opposition to good offices.
The health of the Minister of Foreign Affairs continues very bad; and
notwithstanding that he seems, upon the whole, to have the confidence of

Congress, he will probably resign as soon as a few things get straightened
out.
COLLIER
73 Not printed.
73 Not printed.

723.2515/2261: Telegram
[Document 276]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LIMA, May 7, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received May 8—12:20 a.m.]
53. Your No. 46, May 5, 6 p.m. As soon as I could I saw President Leguía
today and urged upon him acceptance in principle of proposal to divide the
provinces. He seemed set on knowing beforehand what sort of division was
proposed. I explained carefully to him that that would be matter for
negotiation if opportunity were given by acceptance of the principle, and I
pointed out that by his acceptance in principle the matter would be put up to
Chile. He spoke of fear of revolution in Peru were the Government to agree
to division of the provinces, and of weakness Government would display by
changing its attitude. I said that nothing was more common in governments,
and pointed out that he had announced publicly his willingness to give
Bolivia access to sea. The President finally expressed his personal
willingness to accept proposal in principle and to negotiate on its terms; he
said, however, that consultation with the presidents of the two Houses of
Congress would be necessary, and that tomorrow he would advise me
further. …
POINDEXTER

723.2515/2263: Telegram
[Document 277]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
ARICA, May 7, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received May 8—2:45 p.m.]
From Lassiter. Your telegram May 6, 4 p.m.
1. The following is my reply to your inquiry: The Chilean member wrote
me on April 24th asking when the American and Peruvian members of the
Appeals Board would be appointed. I referred the letter to Freyre and the
pertinent part of Freyre’s reply of April 29 which I transmitted to Edwards
is as followitem:
“That the Peruvian electorate has abstained from registering
pursuant to my Government’s purpose to cooperate in suspending
the plebiscitary proceedings in compliance with a suggestion
from the United States Government until the negotiations initiated
through the good offices of the Secretary of State of the United
States had reached a definite conclusion.”
This represents the attitude which the Peruvian member has consistently
taken since March 27th and I made no comment on it either to him or to
Edwards’ statement.
[Paraphrase]
2. I fear I have not been able in previous cables to make Peru’s attitude
toward registration clear to you. In my telegram March 27, 3 p.m., I asked
you specifically to notify Peru that suggestion for suspension was annulled,
so that there could not be any misunderstanding on her part. The only
replies that I received were that you wanted registration to proceed even if it

were unilateral. You said nothing about urging Peru to register; and it would
have been out of the question, under the circumstances, for me to do so, as
matter was in your hands and not in mine.
3. Ostensible reason that Peru gives for her abstention was your suggestion
for suspension. Underlying reason was that conditions were intolerable. It
was not possible for Commission to act promptly on your suggestion for
suspension which was described in your telegram March 25, 6 p.m.,76 so as
to avoid beginning registration already fixed for March 27, as Chilean
Commissioner refused to waive regular notice of meeting. As Peru had
suspended her participation in the plebiscitary proceedings on March 27,
her reason being, as she gave it, the desire to cooperate in conformity with
your suggestion, it would have been preposterous to expect her to enter
upon registration in middle of period when all her electors would be subject
to challenge while great numbers of those of Chile would have escaped it. I
thought that you understood this situation when you suggested extension of
the registration period by 25 days on ground that existing situation would
be least disturbed. It never occurred to me that you expected that Peru
would commit herself to registration at that late moment without an
effective effort being made to restore the balance between the two
contestants. In voting for the resolution, therefore, I made following
statement, which I supposed conformed to your idea:77
“This resolution has been introduced for the purpose of
preserving the status quo. In adopting it the Commission is not
exhausting its powers. Certain remarks made by me at the
sessions of March 1st, 4th, and 25th are pertinent,”
Remarks referred to in last sentence indicated that conditions compatible
with fair plebiscite had not been attained.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lassiter
VON TRESCKOW

76 See footnote 32, p. 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200].
77 Quoted passage not paraphrased.

723.2515/2268: Telegram
[Document 278]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extracts]
SANTIAGO, May 9, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received May 10—4:25 a.m.78 ]
146. Yesterday I was reliably informed that in the debate in the Chamber of
Deputies a great fight against good offices was being based largely upon
assertions that the United States was trying to force Chile to accept plans of
solution under good offices. This idea has been diligently and universally
promulgated here not only by Alessandri but also by agents in the
employment of the Plebiscitary Commission and by a great number of
Congressmen and public orators and by all Chilean and many Argentine
papers. … For months press and platform have meanly, bitterly, and falsely
calumniated the Arbitrator, yourself, and all our delegation in Arica and
have absolutely misrepresented your purposes and policies, using
caricatures, as well as news and editorial columns. … For these reasons but
especially in the hope that they might be brought by the Minister of Foreign
Affairs to the attention of Congress before its night session, I drafted a new
note dated yesterday79 expressing regret that the erroneous impression as to
our motives had been allowed to permeate the masses and calling attention
to the fact that Chile was the first to suggest and virtually invite good
offices, and I incorporated that part of the memorandum of October 27,
1925, given to me by Barros Jarpa then Minister of Foreign Affairs and
cabled to you on the following day.80 I then gave this new note of yesterday,
May 8, to the press.
The Under Secretary called upon me at 8:30 last night and asked me to
withhold publication of the note for two days until after the termination of
the congressional debate and after your meeting tomorrow with the two
Ambassadors when the Ambassador of Chile, unless his instructions are

changed by a result of yesterday’s revelations, will notify you that Chile
insists upon going on with the plebiscite. The Under Secretary said there
was no objection to immediate publication my note in American papers, but
they would like to keep it out of Argentine and Chilean papers for a couple
of days. The more he laid stress upon this, the more I felt that the note
should be published and published without delay. I declined to comply with
his request that I write and telegraph to the papers withdrawing the note
from publicity. I told him that, in view of the campaign of abuse against the
United States which so far the Ministry had made little effort to stop, I
thought the note should be published at once. I said there had been five
memorandums including this one with regard to good offices; and that,
without previously asking the consent of the Government of the United
States, the Chilean Foreign Office on March 27 gave publicity to your
memorandum of February 16 and to their answer, and you thereupon
published the memorandums exchanged a month or so later and that
therefore there was no violation of confidence or irregularity in publishing
the Chilean memorandum of October 27th which virtually started the
matter. On the contrary one memorandum having been published, ordinarily
all relating to the same matter should be published. I also said that the note
that I had given out could in no way embarrass the present Minister of
Foreign Affairs nor the actual President. For your information I think it will
help them to swing back to their original positions in favor of good offices
from which they have both drifted with the popular tide. I understand that
the Government got the local papers to hold off publication until it could try
to persuade me to withdraw it. I refused to do so saying that it would be
construed as cowardice or possibly a frustrated attempt at misrepresentation
or a diplomatic irregularity and I would not make any such admissions. The
article therefore appears in all Santiago papers this morning and I
understand that the United Press cabled the full text to the United States and
South America.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[Paraphrase.] I sincerely trust you will not disapprove my action in
publishing this note. I am aware how perilous a step it was, but I thought it
necessary to take action before Chilean Congress met. As there was not a
minute to spare I did not telegraph you, but had to assume responsibility,

trusting you to approve the action for its results. … I shall cable you text of
material part of my note. … [End paraphrase.]
COLLIER
78 Telegram in three sections.
79 See telegram No. 147, infra.
80 Telegram not printed.

723.2515/2269: Telegram
[Document 279]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, May 9, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received May 10—3:07 a.m.]
147. The following is text of material parts of the note referred to in my
telegram number 146:81
I had the honor to address to you a note on May 3rd; in which I
referred to the impression which seems to exist in Chile that the
Arbitrator in the Tacna and Arica question has shown a
disposition to abandon his award, and that the Government of the
United States of America is seeking to force Chile, against its
will, to accept a settlement under good offices.
In that note I pointed out how unfortunate in its effects, not only
upon the plebiscitary proceedings and the proceedings under good
offices but also on the general relations of, the people of the
United States and Chile, is this erroneous impression as to the
attitude and motives of the United States. I said this is due to
popular ignorance of facts as to which nation made the first
suggestion of good offices and as to the subsequent development
of that idea; and I brought to Your Excellency’s attention certain
facts which had occurred before the time when Your Excellency
assumed charge of the Ministry over which you so worthily
presided, and also prior to the assumption of the Executive power
by His Excellency the present President of Chile. I will not
trouble you by repeating those facts in this note, but I will ask
Your Excellency to refer to them and consider them as if
embodied herein.
I particularly referred to the memorandum handed to me on
October 27th, 1925, by Señor Barros Jarpa, then Minister for

Foreign Affairs, in which he said among other things: (here was
inserted the original Spanish text of which the English translation
was cabled to you in my 108, October 28, 1925,82 second
paragraph of first section).
This memorandum may be considered the first of the series of
memoranda which were exchanged upon this subject. On March
27, 1926, the Ministry over which you so worthily preside, made
the first publication in this matter by giving to the press the
memorandum of the Secretary of State, which I had the honor of
handing to Your Excellency on February 17th,83 and you also
gave publicity to your answer to that memorandum.84 Thereafter
the Secretary of State gave out memoranda which were
exchanged a month or so later.85
In order to correct the erroneous fomentation [sic] harmful
popular impression to which I have referred, it now seems
desirable that the memorandum of Señor Barros Jarpa of October
27th, which virtually initiated the movement of good offices,
should also be published.
Bearing in mind that this memorandum was written by Señor
Barros Jarpa when Minister of Foreign Affairs, but shortly after
he had returned from Arica where he had spent two months as
assessor to the Chilean delegation, and that it was based in part
upon his observations and experience while in the plebiscitary
region; and also bearing in mind the activity of the Chilean
delegate upon the Plebiscitary Commission, Mr. Augustin
Edwards, in developing and in advocating in the months of
November, December, and January, the creation of an
independent state as the most practicable solution; and bearing in
mind the subsequent prompt acceptance by Chile of the offer of
good offices which was finally made by the Secretary of State in
February and the equally prompt acceptance of his later
memorandum in which the offer was virtually renewed; I feel sure
that Your Excellency will agree with me in my declaration that
instead of good offices having been forced on Chile by the United

States, the Chilean Government was the first to suggest it and to
accept it. Moreover, through responsible officials connected either
with its Plebiscitary Commission or its Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, it advocated and even urged a settlement by means of
good offices at least until the 25th of March, 1926.
Despite many insinuations and intimations (which seemed very
much like implied requests) made in October, November,
December, and January that the United States should offer its
good offices, the Secretary of State invariably replied that he was
unwilling to make the offer but that, if both Chile and Peru
requested it, he would be disposed to consider their request
favorably.
When the offer was finally made in February, it was because the
insinuations and intimations that had been made to the
Government of the United States caused it to believe that both
nations would be disposed to accept the good offices and that
possibly they thought that in this way there might be found a
quicker, a happier, a more satisfactory, and a more permanent
solution of the Tacna-Arica question than by the plebiscite, which
whatever may be its juridical merits, has already shown itself a
means of increasing rather than decreasing, at least temporarily,
racial and national passions and hatred.
I avail myself of this opportunity, et cetera.
COLLIER
81 Supra.
82 Not printed.
83 See telegram No. 10, Feb. 16, to the Ambassador in Chile, p. 298 [Pg. 298
includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159].
84 See telegram No. 22, Feb. 19, from the Ambassador in Chile, p. 305 [Pg.
305 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164].
85 On March 27 the Department of State made public memoranda quoted in
telegrams No. 20, Mar. 11, to the Ambassador in Chile, p. 327 [Pg. 327 is part

of Doc. 182]; No. 36, Mar. 16, from the Ambassador in Chile, p. 332 [Pg. 332
includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]; and No. 30, Mar. 25, to the Ambassador
in Chile, p. 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200].

723.2515/2263: Telegram
[Document 280]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 11, 1926—3 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your telegram May 7, 6 p.m. … Peru has not abstained from
the registration in compliance with any suggestion from the Government of
the United States; instead, she has abstained in face of most emphatic
statements that plebiscitary process, even after acceptance of good offices,
could not be suspended save by agreement of both the parties. There is no
room left for misunderstanding on that subject. Record is clear and I am
anxious that you yourself should not remain under any misapprehension.
Offer of good offices was made in identical terms to both Chile and Peru;
nothing was said about suspension and, therefore, acceptance could not
operate as a suspension. On March 25, after Peru’s acceptance and two days
before registration had begun, I suggested to Governments of both Chile
and Peru that in view of acceptance of good offices they take appropriate
steps to bring about a suspension; obviously no useful purpose would have
been served in asking Chile and Peru to cooperate in this matter if
suspension had already been arranged. On March 261 advised you that it
was impossible to get word from Governments of Chile and Peru in time to
advise you finally about suspension on that day, and suggested that you
arrange for adjournments from day to day.86 In reply to your telegrams
insisting upon termination of the plebiscite I cabled you on March 27, 4
p.m., that only question open for determination was over suspension of
plebiscitary proceedings while the negotiations were going on. I stated that
there was no choice but to continue with the registration, even though, for
the time being, Peru declined to participate. On March 29 I again explained
the situation to both parties and quoted my telegram to Ambassador Collier
to you in my telegram of that date, 7 p.m., and stated that similar analysis
had been sent to Peru. On April 1 (see my telegram that date, 10 a.m.) I
called attention to press reports that Peruvian voters were being removed

from the territory without registering them, and I asked for full report on the
matter. In same telegram I said I had asked Ambassador Velarde and his
counsel why the Peruvian voters were not registered and had received no
reply. In my telegram April 1, 7 p.m., I quoted in full an identic
communication to Chile and Peru in which I submitted a concrete program
for their approval. This program made suspension to depend upon their
accepting in principle a basis of adjustment in the negotiations. I indicated
the acceptance of this program by both Chile and Peru in my telegram April
5, 11 a.m.,87 and stated that as soon as agreement for suspension was
reached, I would advise you. It is quite incomprehensible, on this record,
that Peru should contend that either I or this Government had countenanced,
or advised, or suggested her abstention from registration. It is precisely the
contrary that is true. I do not see how I could possibly have made matter
clearer.
KELLOGG
86 Telegram not printed.
87 Not printed.

723.2515/2276: Telegram
[Document 281]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
LIMA, May 11, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received 11 p.m.88 ]
56. Your No. 46, May 5, 6 p.m. I have just had conference with President
Leguía, who, although he declines to accept expressly a division of the
provinces even in principle, is nevertheless willing to make an arrangement
which would in effect amount to same thing.
The President told me that after a conference with leaders in the
Government, their opinion was unanimous that an express acceptance, even
in principle, of a division of the provinces would lead to serious political
disturbances. … He points out, nevertheless, that he has already agreed to
cession of a portion of Arica to Bolivia and he says that if you will call
attention to that fact, which can not be denied, it in itself amounts to an
agreement such as you propose.
On a map prepared by American cartographers the President pointed out to
me the harbor of Vitor, south of city of Arica, which, he asserts, is better
harbor than Arica, and which he would be willing to cede to Bolivia,
together with corridor to Bolivian frontier, including the Arica-La Paz
railroad. He says that all he desires is to avoid cession of territory occupied
by Peruvian population and the historic fortress of the Morro at Arica. He
explained that Bolivia would agree to the construction of a short piece of
railroad from Vitor to point on Arica railroad a short distance east of city of
Arica. He also said that he would be willing to have Chilean northern
boundary moved from its present line, the Quebrada Camarones, to the
Quebrada Vitor, joining the southern boundary of corridor proposed to be
ceded to Bolivia. I call your attention to President’s repeated statement that

for reasons of internal politics it would be necessary to frame proposal as
cession to Bolivia rather than as division of the territory. …
POINDEXTER
88 Telegram in three sections.

723.2515/2276: Telegram
[Document 282]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 12, 1926—2 p.m.
49. Your No. 56, May 11, 6 p.m. If I understood President Leguía’s
proposal, it is as follows:
1. Give Chile territory south of the Quebrada-Vitor line;
2. Provide corridor for Bolivia southern boundary of which will
be Quebrada-Vitor line and northern boundary of which would
run parallel to and include Arica-La Paz railway from point just to
east of Arica city as far as Bolivian boundary, the corridor
therefor not to include within it Arica city;
3. Give Peru all territory north of corridor as thus defined.
What disposition is thought of for Arica city?
Details of an arrangement along foregoing lines can hardly, at this time, be
worked out in advance. Important thing is to reach a general basis for
negotiations. In view of President Leguía’s proposal, looking at it in its
broad outlines, will he not immediately instruct his Plenipotentiary in
pending negotiations here to accept in principle, as basis of adjustment, plan
of a Bolivian corridor with remaining areas to north and south of it going
respectively to Peru and Chile, leaving all details of boundaries,
compensation, etc., for discussion in the negotiations?
So that there may be no misunderstanding, it would be helpful if President
Leguía could give you a memorandum. It is very important that I have your
reply at the earliest possible moment. I think it extremely doubtful that

Chile could eventually be persuaded to adopt solution by which she would
give up city of Arica to Peru, although she might hand it over to Bolivia or
even consent to have it neutralized. Very likely the Morro could be
neutralized or could be set apart as an international memorial.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2283: Telegram
[Document 283]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
ARICA, May 12, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received May 13—1:55 p.m.]
From Lassiter. This morning Edwards asked me what the situation would be
after May 21. This led to long conversation in which I frankly stated my
position, namely, that I was here to conduct a plebiscite to which I could
certify and which could be accepted by the world; that, in view of situation
in March and the underlying causes for Peru’s abstention from registration,
I could not accept the results of the present unilateral registration and give
my sanction to it; and that, consequently, I thought another effort should be
made to see if we could not arrive at a satisfactory solution of this problem.
I did not go into details. Edwards objected, of course, but he did not say that
he would reject any plan to resume a bilateral plebiscite. He asked me to let
him know as soon as I could what is to be done.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lassiter
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2281: Telegram
[Document 284]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, May 12, 1926—midnight.
[Received May 13—9:57 a.m.]
151. After the publication of my note,89 Barros Jarpa gave out a statement
that his memorandum of October 27th had been drafted to head off a
proceeding in connection with good offices instituted by me before the
American Government without the knowledge of the Chilean Government.
I gave Mathieu a full history of the conversations of the Counsellor of the
Ministry and Barros Jarpa as reported in my cables 102 and 108 of
October,90 and requested that he correct this. He has given to the press the
following statement:
“Official 
communication. 
In 
order 
to 
avoid 
erroneous
interpretations of a statement made to a Santiago paper by the
legal counsellor of this Ministry, Mr. Barros Jarpa, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, sets forth the following facts:
First, that the Ambassador of the United States did not
initiate any negotiation with his Government without
the knowledge of the Chilean Government, but limited
himself to transmitting statements that had been made
to him on October 23 by a high functionary of the
Ministry, in the sense that Chile would gladly accept the
offer of good offices of the American Government in
order to seek a diplomatic settlement of the Tacna-Arica
question.
Secondly, that the Secretary of State in his reply to this
proposition, stated that only at the request of both
parties could he consent to offer his good offices.

Thirdly, that in a long conversation which Ambassador
Collier had on October 27 with Mr. Barros Jarpa, then
Minister for Foreign Affairs, in which the former
informed the latter of the facts referred to in the two
foregoing paragraphs, Mr. Barros Jarpa, after an
exchange of ideas in regard to a possible diplomatic
settlement, handed the Ambassador a memorandum
which stated that the high official who had visited
Ambassador Collier shortly before and to whose
proposition the answer of the Secretary of State refers,
acted in a strictly private and personal form and without
the Ministry having any information with respect
thereto. However, not only in the body of this
memorandum but also in the conversation which
followed, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Barros
Jarpa, declared that the Government would consider
with the best inclination solutions of peace that might
be proposed to it by friendly governments; but that it
was not soliciting this ‘because it did not wish to appear
to be in a position of weakness which did not
correspond to the Chilean position in Tacna-Arica’.
The action of the Government of the United States in offering
their good offices at a later date was considered by the present
Minister for Foreign Affairs and by the Government as the
manifestation of a noble and loftily inspired purpose to seek a
friendly solution of the problem of Tacna-Arica, which the two
interested countries had been unable to reach directly.
During the exercise of these good offices, the Chilean
Government has tried at all times to manifest its good disposition
to find a diplomatic settlement satisfactory to both parties; but it
has taken care that said negotiations would in no way prejudice
the course of the plebiscitary proceedings as provided for in the
award of the President of the United States.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs believes that he complies with an
elemental obligation of justice, and at the same time of wise
foresight, in stating that every public article or utterance made
with the idea of creating doubts as to the correctness of the action
with which the friendly Government of the United States is
proceeding, not only in everything that relates to the pending
arbitration but also in that which relates to the negotiations under
good offices which are being carried on in Washington, would be
unjust and contrary to the appreciation which the Government
feels for that action. Santiago, May 12, 1926.”
While this is not as specific as I would like, yet I think that it clearly shows
your position and the correctness of my action at that time; and everybody
seems to think that it and the memorandum clearly show that the Chilean
Foreign Office last October tried to get us to offer good offices and
refrained from making the request itself merely in order not to appear weak.
Today several influential Senators and Deputies told me the publication had
worked great change of sentiment.
COLLIER
89 See telegram No. 147, May 9, from the Ambassador in Chile, p. 424 [Pg.
424 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279].
90 Neither printed.

723.2515/2294: Telegram
[Document 285]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, May 13, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received May 14–3 p.m.]
From Lassiter. Your telegram May 11, 3 p.m. Essential factors regarding
Peru’s abstention from registration are following:
1. In mid-March plebiscitary conditions were so bad that Peru
insisted registration should not start until Chile had instituted
reforms, and demanded indefinite postponement. As the president
of the Plebiscitary Commission did not believe that indefinite
postponement would accomplish anything and believed that
plebiscite had been frustrated by Chile, he was willing to vote for
motion in that sense.
2. Under these circumstances Department interposed in hope of
obtaining solution by good offices.
3. As result of Department’s interposition, Peru accepted good
offices at last moment. Only other choices left her were complete
withdrawal or registration under grossly unfair conditions.
4. When, on night of March 26, it was ascertained that Chile
would not agree to Department’s suggestion to suspend
registration, there was no legal way by which its commencement
the next morning could be stopped, as one full day’s notice must
be given of a meeting of the Commission, and Chile would not
waive notice.

5. Peruvian Commissioner understood that he was conforming to
request of our Government when he suspended participation in
plebiscitary activities.
6. During day of March 27 I endeavored to get this situation
regularized, but Department insisted that registration, even if
unilateral, must go on.
7. Situation having been prolonged for several days, Chile
succeeded in registering sizeable numbers of voters unchallenged
and after that it was clear that Peru could hardly be expected to
participate in registration until situation could be regularized and
Peru be given opportunity to scrutinize all applicants for
registration on basis of equality with Chileans.
I wholly appreciate technical case which may now be made against Peru,
but taking into consideration circumstances as I have outlined them above, I
do not believe that it lies with us to blame her for abstaining from
registration. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2293: Telegram
[Document 286]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LIMA, May 14, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received 3 p.m.]
58. I have received a memorandum dated May 13, 1926, from President
Leguía which states that, having been advised by me of your proposal to
make use under your good offices of the offer made by Peru to Bolivia of
access to the sea as the formula you propose to use to accomplish your
purpose, the President, in his desire to cooperate with you as he has in the
past and in spite of pain Peru must feel by an arrangement which involves
the mutilation of one of the provinces, will authorize the Peruvian
Ambassador in the United States to accept the following points as a basis of
discussion:
1. The Secretary of State of the United States having submitted
his formula for negotiation, Peru ratifies promise made to Bolivia
to grant her in the plebiscitary territory a corridor to the sea;
2. Chile shall be allotted the territory south of the corridor;
3. Peru shall be allotted the territory north of the corridor.
Memorandum concludes with the statement that as the Peruvian
Ambassador knows what has passed between Peru and Bolivia on this
matter, he can undoubtedly discuss it with you in connection with the
Foreign Office.
POINDEXTER

723.2515/2283: Telegram
[Document 287]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 14, 1926—4 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your telegram May 12, 6 p.m. I fully appreciate your desire to
have outlined as soon as possible a definite program to be pursued from and
following May 21, and I sympathize with it. I must ask you, nevertheless, to
be patient, understanding that decisions on this matter will be
communicated to you at earliest possible moment. Until next week it is
quite impossible to determine what turn affairs may take. At first of week I
hope to have another conference with Mr. Hughes and Mr. Stimson.91
As far as plebiscite is concerned, there are obviously various courses of
action, choice of which is dependent upon precise situation as it may stand
on May 21.
1. It is quite possible that best course might be to permit present
registration period to expire without extending it any further and
without any step being taken for present to fix date of election.
There is no more reason, technically speaking, for fixing date at
this juncture than there has been at any time since the negotiations
began. The plebiscitary activities will simply drift along into
period provided for cancelation of registration; and theory that
unilateral plebiscite may not be sustainable and that extraordinary
measures may eventually become necessary to purge lists as you
have proposed and to return plebiscite to bilateral basis, will not
be either strengthened or weakened by so doing.
2. To attempt resumption of bilateral basis by offering Peru
another opportunity to dispute the existing registrations as well as
to register Peruvian voters and by exacting new guarantees from

Chile is next possibility. It is clear, however, that if this course be
the one chosen it does not necessarily have to start on May 21.
The Plebiscitary Commission has ample power to deal with
matter at any time.
3. It may prove advisable in the end to declare plebiscite entirely
off on ground that plebiscitary solution of whole controversy does
not any longer appear to be practicable. This action can also be
taken at any stage of plebiscite.
 
We are not yet committed to any of these possibilities, and the choice will
have to be made finally on considerations which take into account state of
negotiations as they are then. We feel that we can best serve interests of
Chile and Peru by a patiently exhaustive effort to work out constructive and
permanent settlement. The Governments of both countries disclaim any
intention to break off the registrations. In promoting a settlement, time
continues to be important if not vital factor.
Each party will undoubtedly endeavor to obtain some intimation from you
in regard to your probable course of action. In our view it is highly
important that these efforts shall not succeed. Press reports have already
appeared which indicate that certain features of your recent plans are
known. At this juncture it would be well for you to maintain the strictest
reticence and give no clue to what is in your mind.
KELLOGG
91 Mr. Henry L. Stimson, of New York, former Secretary of War.

723.2515/2251: Telegram
[Document 288]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Extract—Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 15, 1926—noon.
For Lassiter.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
… We are, of course, giving anxious attention to the situation which may
exist if there is abrupt breaking off of negotiations and sole choice
remaining will be between a unilateral plebiscite and termination. I invite
your attention, in this connection, to following form of resolution which
might be appropriate if we come to that point:92
“Whereas the Plebiscitary Commission was duly convened and
held its first meeting at Arica on the 5th day of August, 1925, and
continuously since that date has been actively engaged in
attempting to discharge its duty under the Award;
Whereas 
numerous 
unforeseen 
difficulties 
have 
been
encountered, not only rendering the task a protracted one, but
demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Commission that a
plebiscite of the character contemplated by the Award can not in
fact be celebrated;
Whereas as situation has at length developed in which a vital
phase of the plebiscitary process, namely that of registration, has
been entered and has been advancing for a period of more than
seven weeks in a manner and under conditions which cannot be
regarded as satisfactory to the Commission, to the inhabitants of
the plebiscitary area, or to the contesting Governments;

Whereas in the course of the proceedings partisan feeling and
bitterness have characterized the proceedings to an almost
incredible degree, giving rise to acrimonious charges and counter-
charges affecting the honor and good faith of the contending
parties;
Whereas a patient and conciliatory attitude on the part of the
Commission, evidenced by three successive extensions of the
period of registration, has produced no improvement in the
situation, which has progressively become less and less hopeful
so far as the prospects of holding a free and fair plebiscite are
concerned;
Now, Therefore, the Plebiscitary Commission hereby formulates
and certifies to the Arbitrator for his information and
consideration, and for such action as he may be disposed to take
in the premises, its findings and conclusions as follows:
1. It is the considered judgment of the Plebiscitary
Commission, and it hereby so advises the Arbitrator,
that a free and fair plebiscite, within the spirit and letter
of the Award, is impracticable of accomplishment. This
judgment and advice is predicated upon the experience
and observations of the Commission throughout the
course of the plebiscitary proceedings, and is arrived at
without 
attempting 
to 
assess 
the 
blame 
and
responsibility for such state of affairs to either party.
2. It is the considered judgment of the Plebiscitary
Commission, and it so advises the Arbitrator, that the
further prosecution of the plebiscitary proceedings, in
an effort to make teachnical compliance with the terms
of the Award, would not only be a vain and futile
proceedings, but would in the circumstances aggravate
the bitterness, contribute to the perpetuation of the
controversy, and defeat the main object of the
Arbitration as a whole, which is to produce a lasting

settlement of the differences between Peru and Chile
concerning the provinces of Tacna and Arica.
3. The Plebiscitary Commission hereby directs the
termination of the plebiscitary proceedings forthwith.”
If possible I should like to have your views on above resolution by May 17,
as Mr. Hughes and Mr. Stimson will be in conference with me here then.
Please see that this matter is disclosed to no one but your closest advisers.
KELLOGG
92 Quoted passage not paraphrased.

723.2515/2293: Telegram
[Document 289]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 15, 1926—noon.
50. Your No. 58, May 14, 9 a.m. This morning I called in Ambassador
Velarde, who said he had not yet received instructions. In your interview
with President Leguía did he confirm my understanding of his proposal as I
set it forth in my No. 49, May 12, 2 p.m.? Did President explain what
disposition is thought of for city of Arica? I do not understand what he
means by formula of negotiation: “Peru ratifies promise made to Bolivia to
grant her in the plebiscitary territory a corridor to the sea.” Please cable
reply as soon as possible.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2299: Telegram
[Document 290]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, May 15, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received May 16—10:20 a.m.]
59. Your 50, May 15, noon. Minister for Foreign Affairs has just advised me
that instructions in accordance with the President’s written memorandum
cabled to you my 58, May 14, 9 a.m., were cabled Ambassador Velarde at
7:30 p.m., May 14th. Your understanding of the President’s verbal proposal
for division of the province as stated in your 49 is entirely correct. Under
that plan the city of Arica would be allotted to Peru, that is, all north of the
corridor proposed to be ceded to Bolivia would be Peruvian and all south
would be Chilean. I did not go over this matter in my last interview with the
President and his previous statement on the subject was very clear. The
President means by the “formula of negotiation” simply the general
proposition as proposed by you as a basis of negotiations in your 49, May
12, 2 p.m., namely, that the provinces should be divided by granting to
Bolivia a corridor to the sea with the remaining areas to the north and south
to be allotted Peru and Chile, respectively, leaving all details to be
discussed in the negotiations. The expression “Peru ratifies the promise
made to Bolivia to grant to her in the plebiscitary territory a corridor to the
sea,” I understand to be merely the President’s manner of expressing his
agreement to this portion of your proposition. President Leguía has several
times publicly stated as heretofore reported to the Department, his
willingness to make such an arrangement and now confirms it in the
memorandum referred to and agrees to that as one feature of the basis of
negotiations for a settlement of the problem. As to your “what disposition is
contemplated for the city of Arica,” that this [is] not provided for in the
President’s memorandum but with all other details was left to be settled by
negotiation within the terms of the general agreement. I did suggest to the
President, however, that it might not be possible to secure an agreement for
the return of Arica to Peru but that the neutralization of Arica might be
proposed. While the President did not agree to this, I feel satisfied that

should this proposal be raised in the negotiations the President would be
willing to discuss it. Also proposal to include the city of Arica in the
Bolivian corridor would come within the terms of the President’s
memorandum as a detail if you could have discussion.
POINDEXTER

723.2515/2293: Telegram
[Document 291]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 16, 1926—2 p.m.
80. Through Ambassador Poindexter I have been negotiating directly with
President Leguía to obtain Peru’s consent to division of the territory,
northern part to go to Peru, southern part to Chile, and a central corridor to
Bolivia; details of the boundaries to be arranged during the negotiations. I
am hopeful of success. I had a conference with Chilean Ambassador this
morning, at which time Cruchaga said that he had received instructions
yesterday from Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs stating that latter did
not regard congressional resolutions as ending good offices or negotiations
and that he desired them to continue. Cruchaga was greatly relieved and
spoke very hopefully of an ultimate solution. He said that of course best
solution for Chile, in view of public opinion there, was to have division
made in first instance, giving Tacna to Peru in accordance with present
boundary fixed by Chile, which is line running north of railroad to Bolivian
frontier, and giving all balance of territory to Chile, leaving latter to make
its own arrangement thereafter with Bolivia so that credit for granting
Bolivia access to the sea should be solely Chile’s. Advised Cruchaga that it
was practically impossible to obtain Peru’s consent to this arrangement, but
that we thought we could bring about agreement whereby Chile and Peru
together should provide corridor for Bolivia. Whole point is that for plan to
succeed Peru must share with Chile whatever credit may be gained with
Bolivia through provision of the corridor. Cruchaga said that, while
politically his plan would be best for Chile in future, he realized that there
were political conditions in Peru and he would recommend to Chilean
Government that entire question be settled in one negotiation which will
include not only the Bolivian corridor, but the compensation, territorial or
otherwise, to Chile and Peru, resumption of diplomatic and consular
relations with Peru, a commercial treaty with that country, and the

demilitarization of entire territory. Cruchaga attached importance to these
additional features. He was reminded that time for registration would expire
May 21 and that something would have to be done.
Suggestion was made to him that, if we were going to negotiate on
foregoing basis, either there should be an extension of plebiscitary
proceedings or they should remain in statu quo. I am not unaware that some
time ago you stated that Chile would never give her consent to any
arrangement which would prevent her from making her own exclusive and
independent arrangements with Bolivia about a corridor. Understanding
which I now have with Cruchaga and which he is to recommend to Mathieu
is not in accord with that idea, but I think that Cruchaga understands that to
reach settlement on that basis is quite impossible. We simply can not get
Peru to consent.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2308: Telegram
[Document 292]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, May 17, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received 8:00 p.m.]
From Lassiter. A series of attacks on Peruvians in Arica took place on night
of May 14. Fifteen Peruvians are reported to have been injured. One, a
judge of a Peruvian court who is also member of a registration board here
was dangerously wounded. The report also states that many Peruvian
houses were stoned during the evening. There seems to be no clear reason
why the Chileans should have chosen this time for a general demonstration
against the Peruvians. Today at meeting of Plebiscitary Commission Freyre
protested the outrages vigorously. Edwards frankly deplored what had taken
place, but offered no particular excuses. He stated that some of the Chileans
participating have been arrested. I am investigating the matter as far as I am
able, and I expect to call on Chilean Special Tribunal to act.
This incident is another instance showing the imminent and constant danger
under which the Peruvian inhabitants of the territory are living, the brutality
with which they are treated, and the complete disadvantage at which they
are placed in plebiscitary contest.
Lassiter
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2283 supp.: Telegram
[Document 293]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 17, 1926—8 p.m.
For Lassiter. I have conferred here today with Mr. Hughes and Mr. Stimson.
We are all agreed that fundamental premise of my telegram May 14, 4 p.m.,
is sound; namely, that expiration of registration period on Friday, May 21,
raises no issue which requires action on that date. We are all clearly of the
opinion, on contrary, that all action for present that in any way disturbs
status quo so far as plebiscite is concerned should be avoided. We hope that
it will be unnecessary for you to hold a meeting of Plebiscitary Commission
for any purpose. If a meeting has to be held, however, for some routine
reason unknown to us here, we advise that should either party offer
resolutions adoption of which would alter existing status quo (for example
by fixing date for election or by amending regulations affecting
registrations), they should be laid on the table for future action. That is to
say, the situation should be held exactly where it is, allowing matters to take
their normal course without making any attempt to map out any future
course of action or to forecast important decisions. It is of great importance
that you give no indication what course you might think of taking in any
contingency. Within the last 48 hours the situation in negotiations for
settlement has greatly improved; and, while it is still delicate, we are more
hopeful than we have ever been before of being able to effect a final
settlement. It is not feasible to attempt to convey these developments to you
by telegraph. I can only say that intimations of possible action on
resolutions which have been suggested and have received consideration
must not in any circumstances be given to either one party or the other, as to
do so would, we believe, carry grave risk of misunderstanding, perhaps
would raise false hopes or fears and would tend to change attitude towards
settlement which, for the moment, is as satisfactory as we could expect it to
be. You should keep all these matters entirely to yourself. We have weighed

thoughtfully advantages and disadvantages of policy indicated above for
your guidance, and are entirely convinced that by it best interests of all
concerned will be served.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2293 supp.: Telegram
[Document 294]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 18, 1926—6 p.m.
81. Reference my No. 80, May 16, 2 p.m. Today Ambassador Cruchaga left
with me copy of telegram to him from Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs
which states that the Minister proposes to request as soon as possible the
Government’s approval of plan which I submitted and which Minister
personally accepts. Later portion of telegram, however, indicates serious
misunderstanding of nature of my proposal. Among other things Minister
for Foreign Affairs says that Chile starts from basis that Chile will keep
entire Department of Arica with railroad track within department’s limits,
and that the Bolivian corridor would run between the Chilean and Peruvian
zones. I have explained to Cruchaga that if acceptance of Bolivian corridor
scheme is made subject to condition that territory be divided on basis of
existing Chilean provincial boundaries, Peru taking Tacna and Arica going
to Chile, it will be impossible both to obtain Peru’s acceptance and to
continue with negotiations. I have pointed out that provincial boundaries do
not have anything to do with matter; that proposal is simply one in general
terms which calls for a Bolivian corridor, boundaries to be defined later in
the negotiations, upon understanding that after corridor is delimited by
agreement the areas lying north and south of it shall be allotted to Peru and
Chile, respectively.
Every attempt to get Peru to agree in advance to division of territory, as
such, between her and Chile will prove futile. The condition thus sought to
be imposed is, moreover, quite unnecessary for protection of Chile, for no
corridor can be fixed in subsequent negotiations without agreement of both
countries and Chile runs no risk, therefore, of having the railroad
automatically allotted to Peru as result of general acceptance of basis of
adjustment which I have proposed.

Cruchaga says that he fell into error in quoting my proposal and is
telegraphing again to Mathieu. Above is for your information should
Mathieu discuss matter with you.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2332a: Telegram
[Document 295]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 21, 1926—5 p.m.
83. Today’s morning papers carry Associated Press despatch from Santiago
which states that well-informed quarters are of opinion that Chile will not
accept the agreement in principle for division of Tacna-Arica among Chile,
Peru, and Bolivia; also, that patriotic organizations are launching new
movement to compel Government of Chile to terminate negotiations here
and to insist on plebiscite. If this press report is accurate forecast of Chile’s
attitude at this juncture, situation will immediately assume exceedingly
grave aspect. I must say to you frankly that cumulative effect of my
experience in attempting to obtain satisfactory definition of Chile’s position
in negotiations, since April 15, particularly, is most disappointing; it is
becoming increasingly difficult to resist conclusion that Chile does not
intend to do anything but to force the issue on the plebiscite. I fail to discern
any reliable indication that she now means to do more than to give lip
service to the attempt to reach a settlement by negotiation. Recent
communications which have come to me through Ambassador Cruchaga,
together with certain dilatory tactics which are strongly suggestive of a
determination to exhaust patience of the United States and to precipitate
collapse of negotiations without assuming the direct responsibility for
breaking them off but also to obtain if that be possible presumed technical
advantages in regard to the plebiscite, have created most painful impression
here. Intimation has been put forward many times that with expiration today
of period for registration. Chile will contend that door has been closed as
far as that stage of plebiscitary process is concerned, and that henceforth
Plebiscitary Commission will have neither the duty nor the power to do
anything but to proceed with election.

I think that it should be clearly understood once for all that if negotiations
come to naught, the plebiscite will be dealt with in manner and spirit which
will not fail to keep in view the basic consideration of the plebiscite;
namely, that it must be a free and fair one. There will be no splitting of
hairs, and technical considerations, such as have been mentioned, will not
be allowed to block way to just result. I have no right to speak for the
Arbitrator, of course, for he can express an opinion only when a question
comes before him upon a proper record; I have no doubt, however, on the
point that the powers of the Commission and its control over the process
which has been committed to its charge are plenary, and that until that
process has been carried through to completion the Commission’s powers
are ample to do whatever may be necessary to promote a fair and free
election. It is for this reason that I have attached not the slightest
importance to the expiration of the registration period which has heretofore
been fixed. The Plebiscitary Commission can at any time, if it deems
proper, revise or amend its regulations, reopen registration, or even cancel
registration lists and start in all over again if it desires. It can also suspend
the plebiscitary process for as long as it pleases, and can in last resort
declare plebiscite frustrated or impracticable. If the road to settlement
through negotiation should be finally blocked, the power to deal with
plebiscite can not, therefore, be held to have been diminished or impaired
either by any lapse of time or by the technical completion of any phase of
the proceedings. Neither Chile nor Peru can assume that the problems
which, in that contingency, would arise will not be faced with all the
courage that is required to do exact justice. Chile can not fall into any more
lamentable error in this emergency than to mistake patience for weakness.
In present stage of negotiations with Peru ready to go forward either on
basis of permanent neutralization or on basis of Bolivian corridor outlined
in my No. 80, May 16, 2 p.m., it seems incomprehensible that Chile should
put herself deliberately in the indefensible position of wrecking the good
offices, and then falling back upon the plebiscite with the risks attending it,
which I have frankly endeavored to point out.

Unless you perceive strong reasons to the contrary, I wish you to seek an
interview at once with Minister for Foreign Affairs, and state to him orally
the substance of this message. I do not think that it would be wise to make
this statement in such a way as to entail necessity for leaving with him a
written memorandum on the matter.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2339a: Telegram
[Document 296]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 22, 1926—2 p.m.
84. Yesterday in late afternoon the First Secretary of Chilean Embassy, in
absence of Chilean Ambassador, delivered to me the two messages, dated
May 20, from the Minister for Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Cruchaga,
which follow:93
“No. 89. First. The formula suggested by the Secretary of State is
so undetermined that it would be tantamount to give a step into
the void. We cannot infer from it what we would really be
transferring neither what we would be keeping. A plan for the
division must be concrete and defined in order to be considered.
We do not overlook the fact that the acceptance in principle is the
virtual abandonment of the operation of the Arbitral Award, and it
cannot be ignored that such a result has been and is the aim of
Peru. Let the Secretary of State suppose that there is an
acceptance in principle and that when the moment comes of
fixing the dividing line—which will be the way of really
accomplishing the equitable division—an attempt is made to
relegate Chile to the Vitor line, for instance, with the
abandonment of Arica and of the Railroad. The division would
then be equitable for every one else but Chile. The division, let
me repeat it again, must be defined as a fundamental starting
point. Details of any other character, directed to insure future
peace and tranquillity, can be agreed upon once that fundamental
point has been established, without the determination of which we
could not give our consent to the plan suggested.

Second. As I advanced to you in previous telegrams, precisely
with the purpose of avoiding misunderstandings at the outset of
the good offices, our sacrifices could not go beyond the cession of
the Department of Tacna, Chile to keep the Department of Arica
with the entire route of the Railroad. To abandon it to Peru, or to
Bolivia, as a whole or in part, is beyond any possible concession
from our part, because the Department of Arica is Chilean in its
population and in its interests of every type, and its transfer to a
different sovereignty would be an unjustice to our nationals and a
source of difficulties for the acquirer, and a sure and permanent
cause of conflicts between these countries. It does not seem
judicious to give origin to such a state of affairs when what we
are really looking for is the strengthening of peace and good
relations.
Third. You must insist in the disadvantages of having Bolivia
made a Party to this transaction, as we have been pointing out
with entire sincerity and in a desire to avoid the complications
which will surely arise. This is a question between Chile and Peru
and its solution, by means of a compromise, would be simple on
the proposed basis of the division of the territory. I think it is
possible for me to anticipate the impression that the definitive
ratification of the agreement would find no obstacle and could,
therefor, be rapidly attained, thus bringing to an almost immediate
close this longstanding and dangerous controversy.
Neither one of the two countries has any question pending with
Bolivia. This nation has resuscitated now an aspiration or an
interest which was freely abandoned on her own initiative, in the
Treaty of 1904.94 She wishes us to satisfy it and far from
opposing her desires by quoting that comparatively recent Treaty,
we would be ready to meet them taking into consideration our
own interests, among which the paramount one is that of good
and cordial neighbourly relations. Once we have settled with
Peru, on terms which will insure us peace, it is well understood
that for a country like ours it is an elemental international policy
not to leave outstanding a situation that, however it may be, we

could remedy, so much more if we consider the strong bonds of
interests created by the Treaty of 1904 between Chile and Bolivia.
We wish to be understood and that some trust be placed on us or,
at least, that we be credited with the ability to judge, by ourselves,
our own interests, which are not directed to create sources of
conflict, but, to the contrary, as we demonstrated when, without
avoiding sacrifices, we successfully settled other neighbourly
controversies.
In brief. We would accept the basis of the division in the general
terms just pointed out, with the hope of securing the approval of
the proper constitutional bodies.”
“No. 90. In order to further concrete the ideas set forth in my
telegram No. 89 I wish to add:
a) We accept the division of the territory following the
present inter-departmental boundaries, Chile thus
remaining in possession of the Railroad’s route.
b) If it were insisted upon, we would give Bolivia a
corridor with the aforementioned boundary line as an
axis.
c) In order to avoid the possibility of the corridor
covering the route of the Railroad, its width would be
restricted or else it would be completed by Peru, the
latter being compensated by Chile in other sections
along the length of the same corridor.”
True significance of this maneuver can be appreciated by referring to
following facts:
1. Total area of the disputed territory is approximately 10,000
square miles. At date of Treaty of Ancon, Province of Tacna
comprised approximately half the total area. Since then Chile has
twice readjusted the boundaries of the departments, formerly

Peruvian provinces, until at present time Tacna comprises less
than one-third total area.
2. From outset of the present negotiations, Chile has formally and
informally contended for a division of Tacna-Arica as possible
basis of settlement without intimating exactly what her idea of
equitable division was.
3. On April 6 I suggested to the Peruvian and Chilean
Plenipotentiaries that they accept in principle an equitable
division in general terms.
4. On the same day Peru declined to accept this basis, referring to
her consistent refusals of similar proposals in the past. At the
same meeting Chile assented to proposal for division, but stated
that formula would have to be more concrete before she could
regard it as sufficient basis to warrant suspension of plebiscitary
proceedings.
5. On April 15 I made my alternative suggestion for neutralization
or transfer of the territory to a third power. Neutralization was
promptly accepted by Peru. Chile has made no reply to either
alternative of my proposal.
6. During this time there have been informal discussions which
have brought into foreground idea of a Bolivian corridor; I have
proposed, informally, to both Chile and Peru a modification of my
proposal of April 15, as outlined in my No. 80, May 16, 2 p.m.
Peru has agreed to accept this modification. The two Chilean
telegrams, Nos. 89 and 90, quoted above, constitute Chile’s
response. They throw much needed light upon Chilean position.
7. It appears now that Chilean Government’s conception of a
division of territory is nothing more or less than allocation of the
departments with their present boundaries; Peru to have Tacna;
Chile to retain Arica. The corridor idea receives only specious
recognition, for it is obvious that a corridor located north of and
including neither the Arica-La Paz railroad nor the port of Arica

would be mere strip of land which could not serve Bolivia in any
true sense as an outlet to the sea. Such a corridor would run to no
port or to any place at which a port could be built, and it is
unthinkable that any of the interested parties would consider
construction of railway parallel to existing railroad in order to
make this ribbon of land serve purpose of corridor for Bolivia’s
traffic; we may, therefore, dismiss the corridor as purely illusory.
Reduced to lowest terms, this latest Chilean proposal, after five
weeks’ delay, is a reiteration of her earlier demand, thinly
disguised, for the entire Department of Arica with its present
boundaries. …
8. … Chile insists that she have at least two-thirds of territory in
dispute and that she make her own terms with Bolivia on latter’s
access to sea. As long as Chile maintains this attitude, I shall be
powerless to effect any settlement.
9. I called Ambassador Cruchaga in to see me this morning and
discussed matter fully with him. Cruchaga asserts that he
recommended strongly to Chilean Government the basis I laid
down in my No. 80, but that both his efforts and those of Minister
for Foreign Affairs have failed. He also stated that at next meeting
of the Plenipotentiaries he will be bound, under his present
instructions, to submit proposal embodied in telegrams Nos. 89
and 90, quoted above, from Chilean Foreign Office, and that if it
is rejected, he intends to maintain silence, in this way refusing to
take responsibility for breaking off negotiations. Meeting of
Plenipotentiaries will probably be held Monday afternoon, May
24. If it is Chile’s last word that we have now, the record will be
made accordingly. If you have any suggestions to make, your
telegram should reach me not later than morning of the 24th.
KELLOGG
93 Texts of messages not paraphrased.
94 Foreign Relations , 1905, p. 104.

723.2515/2354b: Telegram
[Document 297]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
WASHINGTON, May 26, 1926—10 p.m.
93. Please seek immediately an interview with the Minister of Foreign
Affairs and read to him the following communication from the Secretary of
State, at the same time leaving a copy.95
“I deem it my duty at this time to bring to the attention of Your
Excellency the following considerations suggested by the two
messages delivered to me textually on May 21 last by the Chilean
Ambassador.
First. The pending negotiations, which are an adjustment of the
differences between Chile and Peru concerning the provinces of
Tacna and Arica, were engaged as the result of a voluntary
acceptance by both parties in March last of a tender of good
offices by the United States. The tender was made only after the
receipt of unmistakable intimations from both sides that an
attempt at adjustment by this means would be welcomed by them.
In this connection it is proper for me to remind you that the
suggestion of a settlement by methods other than the holding of
the plebiscite was first advanced by the Government of Chile as
early as October 13, 1925, when Señor Matte, then Minister of
Foreign Affairs, requested the American Ambassador at Santiago
to transmit to me the instructions which had been telegraphed by
Señor Matte on September 30 to Señor Augustin Edwards, the
Chilean Delegate on the Plebiscitary Commission at Arica.96
These instructions authorized Señor Edwards to carry on direct
negotiations 
for 
a 
diplomatic 
settlement, 
if 
possible,
simultaneously with the plebiscitary proceedings, and specifically
stated that, if necessary, these negotiations should include a
consideration of the aspirations of Bolivia. It further appeared

from the instructions that they were a résumé of the opinion of the
Chilean Government formulated after conversations with Señor
Edwards upon the occasion of his visit to Santiago in September,
1925. Señor Matte in his conversation of October 13 with the
American Ambassador advised the latter verbally that the
instructions had been adopted after consultation with President
Alessandri. Again, on October 23 the subject of a diplomatic
settlement was raised with the American Ambassador at Santiago
by Señor Carlos Castro Ruiz, then Counsellor to the Minister of
Foreign Affairs, who sought an interview with the Ambassador
and stated that, while the Government had not yet taken a definite
decision, it was the general desire of all members of the Cabinet
that a solution be reached by diplomatic methods, including some
measures to satisfy the aspirations of Bolivia. Señor Ruiz urged
the Ambassador to ask his Government to offer its good offices,
and to urge acceptance thereof by Peru. On October 26 I
instructed the American Ambassador97 that any suggestion of an
effort to settle otherwise than by a plebiscite must originate with
the parties to the dispute, and I submitted certain inquiries
intended to elicit more accurate information concerning the
Chilean proposal. On the following day, October 27, the
substance of my instructions and inquiries was conveyed by the
Ambassador to Señor Barros Jarpa, then Minister of Fomento,
who handed the Ambassador a memorandum which, among other
things, stated:
‘We would not refuse to treat with Peru as to the
possibility of a diplomatic solution of the problem if it
were proposed to us by a government which would
exercise its good offices; but we will avoid taking any
initiative in such a matter because we do not desire to
appear in a position of weakness since that does not
correspond with the position that we hold in Tacna
Arica.
There ensued upon this occasion an oral conversation in which
details of a possible settlement were discussed. The Ambassador

reported to me at this time his conviction that Chile desired the
United States to offer its good offices, but did not herself wish to
make a formal request to that end lest it be construed as a sign of
weakness in the plebiscitary campaign. On October 31 I replied to
the American Ambassador98 stating that if the two countries felt
that some method of settlement other than the plebiscite might
furnish a more satisfactory solution than the plebiscite, and that if
they later showed a desire to have the good offices of the United
States, there might be a chance to render them a great service in
bringing them into accord in this matter, and if there was a
reasonable chance of success, I might then be disposed to act.
These views were thereafter communicated by the Ambassador to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs. Subsequently Señor Edwards at
Arica, in various conversations with members of the American
Delegation, including the Secretary General of the Commission,
expressed the opinion that the plebiscite would not prove a
satisfactory solution, and advanced the suggestion that the
territory be erected into a neutralized state. Señor Edwards
developed his plan in some detail and advocated it in numerous
conversations with the Secretary General of the Commission, and
with General Pershing; and immediately prior to General
Pershing’s departure, toward the end of January, Señor Edwards
explained the plan in detail to General Pershing, upon the
understanding that the latter was to bring it to my attention. The
prompt acceptance in February by Your Excellency of the tender
of good offices, which I eventually made, was a natural and
proper fulfillment of the expectations created by these formal and
informal expressions of Chilean attitude toward good offices
covering a period of four months, running from the end of
September, 1925, until the end of January, 1926. I take occasion
to mention here, without going further into detail, the foregoing
events because I regarded them as showing the desire of Chile
both to seek and to avail herself of every opportunity to promote a
diplomatic settlement through the exercise of the good offices of
the United States.

Second. As soon as the negotiations began it became my duty, in
the capacity of friendly mediator, to explore the various avenues
of possible adjustment and to place before the parties such
constructive suggestions as might hold out any reasonable
promise of agreement. Your Excellency will recall that on April 6
I first suggested the general basis of division of territory. This was
accepted by Chile with the reservation that it would have to be
made more concrete before Chile could regard it as a justification
for suspending the plebiscitary proceedings, which was rejected,
however, by Peru. Accordingly, on April 15 I made to the
Plenipotentiaries an alternative suggestion for neutralization or
transfer of the territory to a third power. Peru promptly accepted
neutralization. Chile has not replied to either branch of the
suggestion. In these circumstances there ensued informal
discussions which brought into the foreground a modification of
the second branch of the pending suggestion, namely, the idea of
a Bolivian corridor. This idea was expressed in substance as
follows:
(a) That a corridor be provided for Bolivia from the Bolivian
boundary to the Pacific Ocean; (b) that the territory north of this
corridor be assigned to Peru; (c) that the territory south of this
corridor be assigned to Chile; all of the details, including
boundary, compensation arrangements with Bolivia and other
matters, such as treaty of amity and commerce between Peru and
Chile, resumption of diplomatic relations and other details to be
discussed as a part of this general proposition.
Peru has agreed to accept as a basis for negotiation this proposal;
so that as matters stand Peru has accepted both branches of the
pending proposal, the first in its original form, and the second as
modified in the course of the informal discussions which I have
held separately with both parties.
Third. Passing now to the messages of Your Excellency, which
were communicated to me on May 21, I find it there stated, in
language which scarcely admits of misunderstanding, that Chile

demands the whole Department of Arica according to the
boundaries as last fixed by Chile and that the sole concession
which Chile would be willing to make to the principle of a
Bolivian corridor would be limited to the assignment for that
purpose of a narrow strip of territory running along the extreme
northern boundary of Arica, as now defined, such strip not in any
event to encroach upon the line of the Arica-La Paz railroad. In
the second of Your Excellency’s messages it is stated that Chile
would, if insisted upon, provide a corridor with the
aforementioned boundary line as an axis and that in order to avoid
the possibility of the corridor encroaching upon the route of the
railroad its width would either be restricted or be completed by
Peru from the territory assigned to it, the latter being compensated
by Chile and other sections along the length of the same corridor.
I have not failed to note that under this proposed arrangement the
corridor idea would receive a formal recognition, but only to the
extent of creating a corridor located north of and not including the
railroad or port of Arica which would be a mere ribbon of land
running to no port and not capable of serving in any true sense as
a Bolivian outlet to the Pacific, unless the existing railroad were
paralleled by the construction of a new line within the corridor
and by some means a port could be constructed at the same point
where the corridor touches the sea, both of which projects hardly
come within the range of practical consideration. I have also not
failed to note that the evident purpose of Chile in submitting this
proposal would be to secure at least two thirds of the territory in
dispute, including every practical location for a Bolivian corridor,
so that Chile might be in the position to make her own terms later
with Bolivia, quite outside the negotiations and without reference
to Peru. I have endeavored in the past to point out to the Chilean
Ambassador that if the idea of a Bolivian corridor has any force
or merit as a formula for facilitating the adjustment of these
differences between Peru and Chile, neither Government can
reasonably expect the other to drive an independent bargain with
Bolivia for a corridor within the disputed area. Such a corridor
must represent a joint sacrifice of aspirations and whatever credit
may arise from the agreement should be shared between them. I

can see no other way. An attentive study of Your Excellency’s
statement of the Chilean position, therefore, leads me to assess it
simply as a reiteration of the demand for a distribution of the two
provinces according to their present boundaries, Tacna to Peru
and Arica to Chile—a proposal of such a character that I am
unable to conclude that its acceptance can be considered as within
the range of reasonable expectation. Speaking with the utmost
frankness, as I feel that I can to Your Excellency without risk of
misunderstanding, I can not believe that in renewing the
suggestion at this juncture Chile seriously contemplates the
possibility of its acceptance, and I am bound to view Your
Excellency’s communication on the subject with the keenest
disappointment. It is apparent that if negotiations are to continue
it must be upon a basis which holds promise of an adjustment of
the controversy and that an attitude of either party which would
deny that hope would frustrate the purpose of good offices. I am
extremely reluctant to conclude that Chile really desires to
precipitate the final collapse of all effort for conciliation and yet it
is difficult for me to reconcile this last definition of Chilean
attitude with fidelity to the ideal of harmonious and peaceful
settlement as described earlier in this memorandum. In that spirit
of friendly cooperation and mutual confidence which should form
national policies as it does personal relations, such as Your
Excellency’s and mine, I earnestly invite Your Excellency’s
careful consideration to the question whether the Chilean attitude
can not be modified and brought into conformity with ideas
which would avoid a collapse of all effort for adjustment, and
make it possible for both countries to enter upon an era of amity
and mutual good will.
I am sending this statement of my views in the earnest hope that
Your Excellency’s response may be of such a nature as to permit
the continuance of my good offices.”
KELLOGG

95 Department’s telegram No. 92, May 26, 9 p.m., not printed, instructed the
Ambassador not to act until he had received telegram No. 93 and telegram
No. 94, p. 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299].
96 Not printed.
97 Instruction not printed.
98 See telegram, Oct. 31, 1925, 2 p.m., to the consul at Arica and footnote
73, Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 409.

723.2515/2351: Telegram
[Document 298]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, May 26, 1926—10 p.m.
[Received May 27—6:38 a.m.2 ]
From Lassiter.
1. Conditions in the province are becoming increasingly unsatisfactory.
Instances of violence at Tacna reported today by American personnel there,
similar to that at Arica on May 14, are outlined below: On May 22 a
Chilean electoral official stated openly in presence of two Americans of my
staff that the Chileans no longer felt themselves obliged to respect the
guarantees for Peruvians and that in near future there would be numerous
disturbances. Later events reflect accuracy of this forecast. That afternoon
an automobile in which a member of the Peruvian legal staff and a member
of my staff were riding was fired upon on the public road near Tacna by a
man in a building where an armed guard is maintained by a Chilean
political society to restrict freedom of travel. The evening of the same day
two Peruvians were assaulted on streets of Tacna by some ten Chileans, one
of whom is alleged to be a sergeant in the Chilean Army. A member of my
staff later inspected the wounded men. On the afternoon of May 23, three
Chileans in the uniform of a local political organization forcibly entered a
Peruvian house in Tacna and insulted the inmates, two of whom attempted
to complain to the local American representative. On their return they were
assaulted and stoned. A member of my staff was a witness to the stoning.
The same house was repeatedly molested during the night, although the
police were aware of the earlier attack made on it. On the evening of May
24 incidents of evidently organized lawlessness took place. Peruvians were
stoned in the park, and later a member of my staff saw Chileans stoning
Peruvian houses in the same locality with no interference from police. Later
a Peruvian was set upon by a large band of Chileans and severely beaten;

attempting to flee, he was fired at; a member of my staff heard the shots and
later inspected the man’s injuries. The victim stated that he had appealed for
protection to a policeman who refused to escort him to a place of safety.
Still later in the same evening another Peruvian was assaulted, apparently
without provocation, and badly injured; he, too, was examined by a member
of my staff. Victim alleged that a policeman arrived as he was fleeing from
pursuit by his assailants, but arrested none of them. Details have not arrived
of other assaults reported as having taken place same evening.
Incidents reported elsewhere include one of stone thrown through glass
door of Peruvian house in Arica, witnessed by member of my staff. … On
May 10 an American electoral official in Pachia was insulted and threatened
with a revolver by an intoxicated man in presence of local carabineers,
Chilean electoral officials, and others. All Chilean witnesses later denied
being present at any such incident. On May 20 the judge of the Special
Tribunal sentenced a Peruvian to three years for engaging in street fight at
Tacna with Chileans whom he alleges assaulted him as he was passing.
Peruvian used no weapon except his fists. The judge is the same one who
punished no one for the mob attacks on Peruvians at Tacna on January 6.
2. I have detailed the above incidents, as they are illustrative of the
conditions which now obtain here. Everything points to an attempt on the
part of Chilean authorities to force action of some kind, and I can not
continue to maintain attitude of mere inaction towards the plebiscite.
Situation might develop here which would not only be prejudicial to the
negotiations but also to our prestige and to the interests of the three
countries involved. In absence of any clearly defined statement of policy,
my position is very embarrassing. In my effort to maintain status quo I am
unable to deal adequately with serious situations arising. Nothing is to be
gained, I am sure, by attempting to resume plebiscite. I should like to have
your views as soon as possible on policy I am to follow. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW
2 Telegram in two sections.

723.2515/2354c: Telegram
[Document 299]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 26, 1926—11 p.m.
94. … Lassiter has heard that Edwards will soon demand a meeting of the
Plebiscitary Commission and a vote on motion to fix election date. He has
also been informed that relations between Chileans and Americans are
growing more and more strained and that Chileans are calling attention to
cost of maintaining our large delegation and that they are saying that we
must either complete the plebiscite or go.
State substance of foregoing to Minister for Foreign Affairs and point out to
him inadvisability of attempt on part of Government of Chile to force issue
on continuance of plebiscite. Without presuming to give any indication of
what decision would ultimately be reached on matter, you can indicate that
you are unable to see any advantage that can possibly accrue to Chile from
insisting upon an immediate decision.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2351: Telegram
[Document 300]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 27, 1926—6 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your telegram May 26, 10 p.m. Please continue to send in
reports as detailed as possible covering all incidents such as you have
reported. Mr. Stimson and Mr. Dennis3 are working continuously on this
matter; early next week they expect to be able to make a complete report
based on all data available here. We all appreciate fully the difficulties and
embarrassments of your position as well as the dangers which are inherent
in the local situation and at earliest possible moment I shall give you
decisions on policy. Please rest assured that all phases of the problem are
receiving most earnest and active attention.
KELLOGG
3 William C. Dennis, formerly at Arica as general legal adviser to the
president of the Plebiscitary Commission.

723.2515/2369: Telegram
[Document 301]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
SANTIAGO, May 28, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received 11 p.m.]
179. Unfortunately your 944 arrived too late for me to present the
memorandum of 935 to the Chilean Government until after the Cabinet
meeting. I had an hour’s conversation with the Minister for Foreign Affairs
at his house last night, where he is quite sick with the grippe and where the
Cabinet meeting was held. He was reluctant to tell me much about it but
said that the decision was that no corridor could be given which would
include any part of railway. …
[Paraphrase.] Mathieu suggested that Chile might offer a corridor north of
the railway widening out at the sea so as to include the northern part of the
city of Arica, but with understanding that Bolivia would continue to use
existing Arica-La Paz railway. I pointed out to him that this was no genuine
offer and that it was altogether inconsistent with your memorandum, which
I read to him and then gave him. Often I feel that Mathieu has as little
desire to settle the Bolivian question in the present proceedings as his
colleagues have had, yet he told me that he and Cruchaga and the
Government generally now believe that resolution of the Arbitrator
declaring the plebiscite impossible because of fraud to be the alternative to
good offices. The Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs, to whom I also read
the memorandum, says that chief obstacle is that populace still thinks that
plebiscite is going to be won. … [End paraphrase.]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COLLIER

4 Ante, p. 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299].
5 Ante, p. 444 [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297].

723.2515/2380a: Telegram
[Document 302]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 29, 1926—4 p.m.
98. Time for registration having expired and time for appeals expiring
tomorrow, the Chileans are making demands to proceed with the election.
Lassiter is insisting that he no longer has any excuse to hold matter up, and
must make definite decision very soon. We have been examining the
evidence in the case with greatest care and have employed Mr. Henry L.
Stimson, of New York, a former Secretary of War, to examine the entire
record and to give us his opinion from a wholly unbiased point of view.
Next we are to have a conference with him, Mr. Dennis, and Mr. Hughes.
From what we know of record, I agree with you that any unilateral election
under existing conditions would be so tainted with fraud that for the
Arbitrator to sustain it would be a scandal. I am very doubtful that General
Lassiter, even were I to insist, would hold such an election, and I believe
that he will insist on declaring whole plebiscite off in one way or another,
and will hold Chile directly responsible.
I have no right to issue orders to Lassiter; but that is what I think he will do.
It is my opinion that this outcome can be prevented only by the prompt
decision of Chile to make some concession which will permit a settlement
and to agree to suspension of plebiscite and withdrawal of costly
delegations and personnel.
 
I regret what appears to be inevitable outcome: but I have gone as far as
possible, consistent with honor of this Government and the duty to hold fair
plebiscite under Arbitrator’s Award, in trying to protect both Chile and Peru
from development of situation so disastrous to the real interests of both. I

am unable to see how I can maintain status quo much longer, but I should
be glad to have your suggestions.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2380: Telegram
[Document 303]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extracts]
SANTIAGO, May 30, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received May 31—2:42 a.m.7 ]
182. [Paraphrase.] Department’s No. 98, May 29, 4 p.m. Revelations of last
two months convince me that it would be disgraceful to approve plebiscite.
…
I am fully aware of all difficulties in way of obtaining a diplomatic solution,
but I believe that one can be brought about before June 15, provided you
and I make the statements to which I have referred in previous telegrams.
To this end I think a delay is eminently worth while. Success will be a great
triumph; while a failure, even though not our fault, will shatter our prestige
in Latin America … I sincerely hope you will hold out for about three
weeks more. I have invited half a dozen intimate influential friends, who
wish strongly to see a diplomatic settlement, to call on me today. A large
and increasing number of Chileans dread thought of breaking off good
offices.
One thing, however, which I think absolutely essential, if you will pardon
my temerity in suggesting it, is that you give out a statement to the press
saying, in effect, that if good offices are now broken off and the plebiscite is
thereafter renewed and held to be impracticable, good offices cannot be
renewed because Chile, by preventing a correct plebiscite, would have lost
all means under the Treaty of Ancon to acquire definitive sovereignty. … I
am aware of the boldness of that statement … but at this moment boldness
is absolutely essential. … [End paraphrase.]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The general manager of Grace and Company has called on me twice with
regard to great diminutions in the consumption of nitrate of soda in the
United States during last year, due to increasing use of substitutes and
synthetic nitrate of soda. He is convinced that this increased use of
substitutes is due to two causes: (1) American desire to get nitrate of soda at
lower prices; and (2) the belief of the United States that it ought not to
remain dependent for an article necessary in peace and indispensable in war
upon a source of supply in a remote country which will not earnestly strive
to settle a dispute with a neighboring nation which has long caused
severance of diplomatic relations and on various occasions mobilization of
troops, and which is now provoking in both countries a marked increase in
military preparation and which at any moment may result in a war that will
interrupt the shipment of nitrate.
[Paraphrase.] I believe that the general manager of W. R. Grace and
Company is quite correct in his deductions, fears, and facts, particularly
should the Plebiscitary Commission declare that a plebiscite was
impracticable and should Chile then insist on remaining in control of the
province, as she undoubtedly would. The general manager went on to say
that if the Secretary of Commerce would give out an interview in which he
intimated that [end paraphrase] the reestablishment of cordial friendship
between Chile and Peru would increase the export commerce of both by
removing the fears of importers of nations that the source of supply might
be cut off, such interview would have enormous effect here at this moment
when the nitrate business is depressed and the Government and the business
world is alarmed as to national revenue and business conditions.
[Paraphrase.] I believe that the general manager is correct in saying that
such an interview given out by the Secretary of Commerce would have the
excellent effect of causing the Nitrate Producers Association to set a much
lower price for the coming year at its meeting in June, and it would also be
a most powerful influence in bringing about a diplomatic settlement of the
difficulties.
The Chileans are influenced more by a peril to their nitrate trade than by
anything else. It would be much more effective, however, if such an
interview were given out by the Secretary of Commerce rather than by the
Secretary of State and presented purely as a commercial proposition. I

discussed this matter yesterday with the commercial attaché and told him
that if such an interview were given out it would have to be carefully
phrased in order to avoid being construed as a threat. I believe that it should
express the desire for an increase of commerce in nitrates and also that this
would be brought about by a reconciliation of all the South American
nations. I also told the commercial attaché that the interview should be so
worded as to avoid anything that might possibly be construed as a war
scare; although, for your confidential information, I believe that war is by
no means an impossibility and, should it occur, it would endanger our
supply of nitrate and seriously cripple our cotton growers. [End
paraphrase.]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COLLIER
7 Telegram in three sections.

723.2515/2382: Telegram
[Document 304]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 1, 1926—noon.
For Lassiter. I have just received Mr. Stimson’s report8 and have arranged
final conference with him and Mr. Hughes here Thursday for purpose of
making definite decisions. If you are unable to avoid having a meeting of
Plebiscitary Commission before Saturday, please postpone consideration of
any resolutions which may be offered and take a brief adjournment.
KELLOGG
8 The report referred to is apparently the original one dated May 28, 1926.
In this and the revised report dated June 3, 1926 (neither printed), Henry L.
Stimson reviewed the evidence submitted to him by the Department of State
and stated that he had come to the following conclusions:
“1. That a fair plebiscite within the definition made by the
Arbitrator cannot now be held in the Province of Tacna.
“2. That the responsibility for this situation rests not only upon
the local authorities of that Province but ultimately upon the
National Government of Chile.
“3. In respect to the question of whether further guarantees should
be demanded from the Government of Chile and a further attempt
made to hold a fair plebiscite, I hesitate to express an opinion
upon what is a question of policy for the Department. It is,
however, perhaps proper to record the impression which has been
made upon my mind by my reading of this evidence in respect to

the practical working of the former guarantees in such a
population as exists in this Province. From that aspect,
considering the light which these records throw upon the political
inexperience of this people—who have not had an election for
forty years and therefore have no training whatever in the
assertion of electoral rights; the docile character of the Peruvian
farmer; the inaccessible valleys in which many of them live; the
thorough foundation in intimidation which has been laid; the
organization and character of the rural police and carbineers as
well as the habitual attitude of the people to such officials—it has
become my settled conviction that to attempt to produce a fair
election by any further demand for guarantees, short of a
complete reorganization of the local administration of law and
order, under neutral authority, would only result in failure.” (File
No. 723.2515/2364½.)

723.2515/2380: Telegram
[Document 305]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 1, 1926—1 p.m.
99. Your No. 182, May 30, 5 p.m.
1. All factors required for dealing with whole problem in some
definite way now seem to be before us.
(a) We have received reasonably complete reports
covering actual conditions affecting plebiscite. These
reports have been carefully reviewed and analyzed here.
Mr. Stimson’s conclusions accord entirely with views
you and General Lassiter have expressed. … Among
persons who are in position to form unbiased opinion
on facts, I have not been able to find any difference of
opinion. Conclusion on issue of frustration is
unanimous, outside Chilean circles.
(b) Respective positions of Chile and Peru on subject of
settlement by negotiation have now been defined with
practical certainty. Peru will accept neutralization or a
bona fide Bolivian-corridor solution, and would
possibly agree to transfer of entire disputed territory to
Bolivia on terms to be arranged. On other hand Chile
has indicated that she will not consider any solution
which does not look to a division of the territory by
which the bulk would be assigned to her, comprising
everything that could be utilized for a corridor; thus she
would be left free to make her own bargain with
Bolivia. This attitude, which has been firmly

maintained, absolutely blocks road to a negotiated
settlement.
(c) Plebiscitary process has reached stage where it must
be dealt with decisively. General Lassiter can no longer
pursue Fabian policy without gravest consequences. He
is insisting daily, with a justification which I cannot
deny, that final program be outlined at once. His
position has come to be virtually impossible. Action on
his part is a matter of days, not of weeks. It must be
realized that General Lassiter, as chairman of the
Plebiscitary 
Commission, 
has 
his 
own 
heavy
responsibilities. I do not have right to dictate to him.
There are some things which I can not conscientiously
ask him to do, and there are some things which it is
probable that he would refuse to do if I made the
request. General Lassiter has shown utmost patience
and a disposition to cooperate, but I am bound to
recognize that there is limit beyond which he cannot go;
he has just about arrived at that limit.
2. It is amid these circumstances that you file an urgent plea for at
least three weeks’ additional time and you request me to issue
pronouncements which are boldly calculated to influence public
opinion in Chile and thus to force modification of Government
attitude. I can guarantee nothing as far as time is concerned. It is
my honest guess that final crisis at Arica cannot be delayed
beyond this week and it may come any moment. Edwards has
already notified General Lassiter that he proposes to press issue
for determination during present week. Undoubtedly he is acting
under instructions. In matter of public statements, I am obliged to
enforce distinction between statements of fact that you are to
issue 
for 
purpose 
of 
correcting 
misunderstanding 
or
misrepresentation of acts of this Government, and statements the
only justification for which is to bring indirect pressure to bear on
Government of Chile. The authorized statement which you issued
to the press on May 319 falls within first category. I am not

disposed to go further, and I feel strongly that to go over the head
of the Chilean Government and appeal to Chilean public is
procedure which cannot be defended no matter how desirable end
sought may be. I am inclined, however, to approve your
suggestion with reference to Secretary Hoover, and I shall take up
matter with him at once.
3. There is only one way whereby Chile can avoid disastrous
consequences otherwise inevitable, and that is (1) by instructing
Edwards to arrange with General Lassiter to hold up issue on
plebiscite, and then (2) by modifying her intransigent attitude in
the negotiations here in Washington. The Government of Chile
will have to take both these measures quickly or it will have to
accept full responsibility for consequences.
4. A message just received from General Lassiter10 states that
Edwards has requested meeting of Plebiscitary Commission at
earliest possible moment to fix date of election.
KELLOGG
9 Not printed. Ambassador Collier was authorized to issue a personal
statement on the declarations made between Sept. 1925 and May 1926 by
the Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Under Secretary which
expressed a desire for settlement outside the plebiscite.
10 Telegram of May 31, 10 p.m.; not printed.

723.2515/2384: Telegram
[Document 306]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
ARICA, June 1, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received 10:50 p.m.11 ]
From Lassiter. I have asked my legal advisers to prepare draft of a
termination resolution, as there is very serious doubt of possibility of
passing resolution contained in your telegram of May 15, noon, and as it
can not be said to meet requirements of case. Text of prepared draft
resolution follows and I think it should be passed at once:12
“1. Whereas under award of the Arbitrator in the Tacna-
Arica arbitration the plebiscitary territory remains
during the plebiscitary period subject to Chilean law
and authority;
2. Whereas the correlative obligation rests upon Chile
to govern the territory so as not to frustrate the purpose
for which a plebiscite was prescribed but to create and
maintain suitable conditions therefor;
3. Whereas said obligation has not been discharged; and
4. Whereas in the light of 10 months’ experience and
observation and of all the information before it, the
Commission has reached the settled conviction not only
that there has been no material progress towards
establishing suitable plebiscitary conditions, but that
none is in prospect;

Therefore, it is resolved by the Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-
Arica arbitration:
Section 1, that, owing to the causes hereinbefore
recited, the free and fair plebiscite required by the
award cannot be carried out;
Section 2, that all proceedings looking to the holding of
the plebiscite are hereby terminated, provided, however,
that the powers of the Commission shall remain
unimpaired until the measures formulated or to be
formulated for liquidating and closing the affairs of the
Commission and for depositing with the Arbitrator the
records 
of 
the 
Commission 
shall 
have 
been
accomplished.”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In accordance with Edwards’ request, a meeting of the Commission will
take place June 5 (Saturday), 4 p.m., to consider motion he has made to fix
date of election. I intend to suggest that his motion shall lie on table as
pending business to be considered at Commission’s next meeting. I am
unable to foretell what Chilean reaction will be, but the indications are that
aggressive attitude is being contemplated so as to force us to act on
plebiscite. I am informed that the Chilean members of the registration
boards have withdrawn until day of election is fixed, and rumors are
floating about that we would be asked to leave if we will not act. Situation
both for Peruvians and for ourselves is becoming more and more tense. If
you do not think that negotiations at Washington would be affected
unfavorably, it would be very desirable to move resolution quoted above at
meeting of Commission on Saturday. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW
11 Telegram in two sections.
12 Quoted passage not paraphrased.

723.2515/2389a: Telegram
[Document 307]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 2, 1926—4 p.m.
102. Ambassador Cruchaga called today to say that he had received a
telegram last night from his Government stating that it would answer my
memorandum13 today. … I told Ambassador frankly that unless there was
some prospect of a settlement and a request by Chile to hold the matter up
in Arica, I felt I could not request Lassiter to postpone decision further; that
he would be allowed to go ahead and dispose of plebiscite as he thought
best; and that, in my opinion, he would declare the plebiscite off.
Cruchaga said that he recommended to Chilean Government that they
concede a Bolivian corridor including the railway, but of course he does not
know what reply will be made to this proposition.
KELLOGG
13 See telegram No. 93, May 26, to the Ambassador in Chile, p. 444 [Pg. 444
includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297].

723.2515/2389: Telegram
[Document 308]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, June 2, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received June 3—6:51 a.m.]
188. The Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs offered me late last night, for
transmission to you, his telegram of instructions to Cruchaga. I intimated
that as it was addressed to the Ambassador it should be sent direct to him,
thus avoiding delay and possible errors of translation. The Under Secretary
accepted my suggestion, but at noon today he told me that the telegram was
in process of being coded but would soon be sent. He then gave me copy of
which following is résumé: It answers memorandum telegraphed in your
No. 93, May 26, 10 p.m., and appears to have been drafted with idea of
being transmitted through me in order to call attention to what Foreign
Office regards as an irregularity in answering Cruchaga’s notes through me;
it states that study of origin of good offices shows they could lead to
nothing practical, and that Chile’s acceptance of offer of good offices is
proof of her desire to find equitable settlement, but that no obligation is
thereby created to accept any proposition that may be submitted; it then
refers to your account of your efforts to find acceptable formula and quotes
at length the Foreign Office telegram of April 4 to Cruchaga in which long
argument was made against suspension of plebiscite and against creation of
an independent state but willingness was expressed to accept division along
present departmental boundaries, Chile to retain Arica and the railway, etc.;
telegram states supposition that Cruchaga has fully acquainted you with
these ideas. There is brief reference to alternative proposition of April 15
and to the proposed modification, viz, the corridor plan; and says that you
misjudge Chile’s purposes. It discusses next your criticism of proposition
for a corridor lying north of railway and your statement that this proposition
shows intention to make impossible a solution by good offices; this
supposition, it is stated, is remote from Chilean thoughts. Bolivia’s right to

intervene in negotiations is again denied. Note goes on to say that your
proposal to give Tacna to Peru and the most important part of Arica to
Bolivia is in no way equitable as it would take both the cities of Arica and
Tacna and the railway from Chile, leaving her only a strip of almost barren
desert. Note concludes with expression of desire to arrive at equitable
solution which would not be one depriving Chile in substantial measure of
rights given to it by Treaty of Ancon, by the award, and by manifest desire
of great majority of people of the territory.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
COLLIER

723.2515/2401a: Telegram
[Document 309]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 3, 1926—5 p.m.
For Lassiter. This morning I held a conference attended by Mr. Hughes, Mr.
Stimson, Assistant Secretary Olds, Mr. Dennis, and Mr. White, the Chief of
the Division of Latin American Affairs. We arrived at the following
conclusions and recommendations: (1) In our opinion, form of resolution
you propose in your telegram June 1, 5 p.m., should be modified to read as
follows:14
“The Plebiscitary Commission, in the exercise of its duties and
functions under the Award, hereby formulates and declares its
findings and conclusions as follows:
1. Pursuant to the terms of the Treaty of Ancon, the
plebiscitary territory has remained, and still remains,
subject to Chilean laws and authority. In these
circumstances, the creation and maintenance of
conditions proper and necessary for the holding of a
free and fair plebiscite, as required by the Treaty and
the Award, constituted an obligation resting upon Chile.
This obligation has not been discharged, and the
Commission finds as a fact that the failure of Chile in
this regard has frustrated the efforts of the Commission
to hold the plebiscite as contemplated by the Award,
and 
has 
rendered 
its 
task 
impracticable 
of
accomplishment.
2. As the result of its experience and observations
throughout the course of the plebiscitary proceedings,

the Commission has the settled conviction that the
further prosecution of the plebiscitary proceedings, in
an effort to hold the plebiscite as contemplated by the
Award, would be futile. The Commission can not ignore
its paramount duty under the Award to hold only a free
and fair plebiscite, as contemplated by the Treaty and
the Award, and not to hold a plebiscite which would not
be in accord with the intent of the Treaty and the Award.
The Plebiscitary Commission accordingly decides upon the
grounds above stated:
First. That a free and fair plebiscite, as required by the
Award is impracticable of accomplishment.
Second. That the plebiscitary proceedings be, and they
are, hereby terminated, subject, however, to the
formulation and execution of such measures as may be
required for the proper liquidation of the affairs of the
Commission and the transmission of its records and
final report to the Arbitrator.”
(2) Text quoted above has been seen and approved by General Pershing.
When time comes to present it, you should offer it on your own initiative
without previously notifying or consulting either Freyre or Edwards.
(3) You must choose precise time for introduction of resolution with utmost
care to see that such action, looking as it does to definite termination of the
plebiscite, is taken only under circumstances which render it inevitable by
reason of Chile’s attitude in forcing the issue. Much depends, in this respect
upon what Chile may do within next three or four days. I have been advised
that a new note is on way here from Santiago, and text of it may be received
later today. There is always bare possibility that Chile may come forward at
last minute with proposal entitled to consideration, and that Edwards may
receive instructions not to force issue on plebiscite for time being. We do
not feel that you can afford to declare plebiscite terminated in face of any
new proposals by Chile which hold out any real prospect of settlement. But
if nothing develops to alter present status and we continue to confront

situation wherein Chile demands decision on plebiscite and at same time
maintains intransigent position in the negotiations, there will be no reason
for you to delay your action further.
(4) As I understand Commission’s practice and procedure, any resolution
that Edwards may offer on Saturday must go over until next meeting if
objection is made to its immediate consideration by any member of the
Commission, and in your telegram of June 1, 5 p.m., you state that you
intend to let the motion lie on table as unfinished business to be considered
at next meeting. This procedure will afford me the opportunity to deal with
the few contingencies that remain and to telegraph you finally that way is
clear to introduce resolution quoted above under (1). I assume that a second
brief adjournment could be taken if required by circumstances, but I doubt
that it will be necessary to take one. Whatever happens, I must rely upon
you to await this final word from me before you introduce this resolution,
making no communication meanwhile on the subject to either party.
(5) If on Saturday Edwards should attempt to spread on record a statement
of his position on plebiscite, either by speech or otherwise, it may be
advisable for you to make brief rejoinder. I do not think it would be wise for
you to enter upon elaborately detailed discussion for this purpose. It should
be sufficient were you to challenge his statements wherever you feel you
could do it appropriately, declaring that position he is taking is not
supported by record before Commission. If he should deny Commission’s
power to do anything but fix date for election and proceed with plebiscite,
you should dissent.
(6) I assume you are taking and will take all proper precautions in every
eventuality for complete protection of personnel, including those in
outlying districts, calling them in, if necessary. No measures should be
overlooked to eliminate risk of unfortunate and embarrassing incidents.
KELLOGG
14 Quoted passage not paraphrased.

723.2515/2392: Telegram
[Document 310]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 3, 1926—7 p.m.
103. We are unable to obtain issue of desired statement from Secretary of
Commerce, which you suggested in your No. 182, May 30, 5 p.m. Mr.
Hoover tells us that although the gross exports of nitrates from Chile have
decreased, imports of nitrates from Chile into the United States have
increased yearly, and for the first four months this year are larger than for
same period in 1925; that it is true that decrease in export of Chilean
nitrates is undoubtedly due to German synthetic process; that experiments
are being made in the United States with plants at Niagara Falls but that no
plant for production of nitrates has yet been built, although if price is not
reduced there probably will be.
It seems that all Mr. Hoover could say is that there is prospect, if price of
nitrates is kept up, that plants will be built in this country. He is loath to
make any statement at this time, for one reason and another, and I do not
see how he could issue any statement that would be helpful.
This afternoon I received the Chilean note,15 which corresponds to your
summary.16 I understand from Cruchaga that Chilean Government refuses
to instruct Edwards to postpone. After consulting with all parties here, I
think it improbable that Lassiter can delay final action at Arica. He will
probably act Saturday, or at latest Monday or Tuesday. I am to have a
meeting of Chilean and Peruvian plenipotentiaries tomorrow morning but I
do not see any prospect of their coming to an agreement.
KELLOGG

15 Not found in Department files.
16 See telegram No. 188, June 2, from the Ambassador in Chile, p. 458 [Pg.
458 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308].

723.2515/2432½
[Document 311]
Minutes of Meeting of the Plenipotentiaries, Under the Extension
of Good Offices of the Secretary of State, June 4, 1926
June 4, 1926
[Extract]
The Secretary opened the meeting in the Tacna-Arica negotiations at 10:30
a.m., on June 4. All the persons who attended the previous meetings were
present and in addition Mr. Wade Ellis, counsel for Peru.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Secretary stated that negotiations were getting nowhere by his putting
up proposals only to be rejected categorically by first one and then the other
of the parties. However, the Secretary was going to suggest a basis of
discussion to see if he could get an intimation from either that this proposal
or a modification thereof would be acceptable. The Secretary stated that in
making this proposal it should not be thought that he had withdrawn the
proposals already made. The proposals already made by him were still open
should they be acceptable later to the parties. The Secretary then read his
proposal as follows:
“The Secretary of State has the honor to refer to the proposal
made by him to the Plenipotentiaries of Peru and Chile on April
15, 1926, reading as follows:
‘The Secretary of State has the honor to suggest that in
the interest of international peace and a cordial
rapprochement between the parties they consider the
advisability of a mutual and joint sacrifice whereby
either

‘(1) the territory of Tacna and Arica shall be
constituted 
a 
neutralized 
state, 
either
independent or under the protectorate of
South American States, as may be agreed, or
‘(2) the provinces of Tacna and Arica shall be
transferred 
(upon 
an 
apportionment 
of
equitable compensation, and appropriate
economic arrangements, to be agreed upon) to
a South American State not a party to these
negotiations.
‘As neither party is willing to surrender the territory in
question to the other, and as the proposal for a division
of the territory between them has been rejected, the
remaining opportunity for a solution of the longstanding
controversy would appear to be found in one of the
suggestions above made or in a modification thereof if
such is deemed to be advisable.’
“Without withdrawing any of the proposals already made by him,
the Secretary now desires to suggest as an additional proposal to
the Plenipotentiaries of the two Governments concerned the
following modification of Part 2 of said proposal:
‘That both Governments accept in principle as a basis
of adjustment of their differences concerning the
provinces of Tacna and Arica, reserving all details for
consideration in the course of the ensuing negotiations:
‘(a) The delimitation of a corridor extending
from the Bolivian frontier to the Pacific
Ocean, said corridor to be transferred to
Bolivia upon the apportionment of equitable
compensation, 
appropriate 
economic
arrangements and such other terms and
conditions as may be agreed upon between
Chile and Peru.

‘(b) All territory in the disputed area lying to
the north of the northern boundary of the
corridor so delimited to be and become a part
of Peru.
‘(c) All territory in the disputed area lying to
the south of the southern boundary of the
corridor so delimited to be and become a part
of Chile.
‘(d) The foregoing territorial dispositions to
be effected with due regard for the principle
of just compensation for public improvements
and 
all 
other 
matters 
as 
to 
which
compensation may be deemed appropriate or
necessary.
‘(e) No government not now a party to these
negotiations to be admitted to participation
therein, except by agreement between Peru
and Chile.’”
The Peruvian Ambassador stated that the formula proposed was acceptable.
Peru, he said, desired to facilitate good offices and to arrive at a settlement
agreeable to both to terminate a situation which is equally inconvenient to
both. Peru finds this proposal acceptable and considers it opens the way for
discussions to bring about a settlement.
The Chilean Ambassador stated that he would desire the Secretary to make
the proposal more concrete and not in such general terms. The parties do
not know what they are turning over to Bolivia, what are the boundaries of
the territory so turned over nor what goes to Chile nor what to Peru. True it
is that the details are reserved for further negotiations. He desired to inquire
however what is a corridor? This is not a detail. What does the Secretary
mean by a corridor and what does Bolivia mean by a corridor as it would be
useless for Peru and Chile to agree if Bolivia does not. Chile, he said,
cannot accept the proposal in the form presented because it is not definite
and clear but vague.

The Secretary stated that he realized of course that if any corridor was to be
transferred under any arrangement with Bolivia the arrangement must be
arrived at and defined. The Secretary’s suggestion was merely a basis for
discussion. He hoped that both parties would say that they would consider it
and state how they would be willing to divide the territory and make a
corridor. The Secretary repeated that it was impossible to arrive anywhere
by rejections and he inquired whether either party had any suggestion or
statement as to what it will do so that negotiations may be carried on. The
Secretary then inquired of the Peruvian Ambassador if he had any
suggestions to make.
 
The Peruvian Ambassador replied in the negative. He stated that Peru had
accepted the Secretary’s proposal as made as according to the Secretary’s
statement it was a proposal in principle and not a proposal in detail. The
Ambassador was not prepared to discuss the details but accepted the
proposal as made in principle. He felt that the Secretary’s statement opens
the way for negotiations.
The Chilean Ambassador replied that he had no suggestion to make. It is, he
said, a question of judgment as to the best way to arrive at a settlement. A
vague suggestion of a corridor to Bolivia the limits of which are not
established is not in Chile’s opinion the right way to make a settlement.
Chile hopes that the Secretary after the meeting can make a more definite
proposal.
The Secretary replied that he would be willing to do so if he knew what
Chile and Peru would agree to but there is no use in making proposals of
division or of a corridor unless he has some idea what will be agreed to. As
to Bolivia the Secretary stated that he had made it plain that unless both
parties wanted Bolivia included the Secretary will not discuss the matter
with Bolivia. To do so there must be an agreement on this point first
between Chile and Peru.
The Secretary stated that if each party would give to the Secretary
personally any definite suggestions as to what they will consider that he
would make a suggestion in greater detail.

The Chilean Ambassador stated that in the logical order of ideas, as Peru
has accepted in principle the suggestion of the Secretary, it would be Peru’s
part to make a suggestion.
The Peruvian Ambassador replied that to do this it would be necessary for
Chile to give the proposal the same acceptance that Peru had given and so
have a starting point for discussion. He added that he felt that proposals
should be made by both and not by one only.
The Secretary stated that he considered this reply technical rather than
meritorious. He did not understand that Chile had rejected a corridor but
wanted more details regarding it and he inquired whether both would
submit to the Secretary their ideas in detail as to a corridor, the part to go to
Peru and the part to go to Chile, et cetera. If they will do so he will do his
best to try to harmonize the views of the two parties.
The Chilean Ambassador stated that he would cable his Government
regarding the situation and would advise the Secretary as soon as possible
of his Government’s definite position in the matter. The Peruvian
Ambassador made the same reply.
The Secretary then inquired whether the two parties wished to continue the
good offices. The Peruvian Ambassador replied in the affirmative and stated
that he would make all possible personal efforts to arrive at a satisfactory
solution. The Chilean Ambassador made the same reply.
The Secretary then stated that the negotiations had been going on for two
months or more and the plebiscite also going on. If anything was to be done
in Washington it must be done soon. A meeting had been called in Arica for
four o’clock Saturday afternoon. The Secretary did not know whether they
would press for a definite determination at that time or not. He understood
that under the rules the question might go over if objected to. He wanted to
urge both parties however to try to come together in agreement. From his
private conversations with both Ambassadors he did not think they were far
apart and he hoped that they would reach an agreement.
The Secretary then inquired whether there were any suggestions as to the
next meeting and inquired whether the following day, Saturday, June 5,

would be satisfactory. The Chilean Ambassador said that that would be
impossible, there would not be time to receive a reply to his cable. The
Peruvian Ambassador was of the same opinion. The Secretary suggested
Monday morning, the Peruvian Ambassador 3:30 Monday afternoon which
the Chilean Ambassador agreed to. The meeting was then adjourned until
3:30 Monday, June 7.
FRANCIS WHITE17
17 Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs.

723.2515/2406a: Telegram
[Document 312]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 4, 1926—6 p.m.
For Lassiter. Peruvian and Chilean Ambassadors met with me this morning
and a further basis of settlement was formally submitted and discussed.
Basis was accepted in principle by Peru but was objected to by Chile as not
yet concrete enough. Both parties then undertook to communicate with their
respective Governments so as to elicit definite suggestions on the matter.
Both parties affirmed desire to continue the negotiations. Today I also
received urgent request from Collier18 for postponement of action in Arica
for week or little longer in order to give time for influences at Santiago in
favor of settlement by Chile to become effective. Political situation in Chile
is very complicated; and, though Government may not be in position to
instruct Edwards to withdraw his motion at Saturday’s meeting of
Commission, there are nevertheless some reasons for believing that Chile
would not seriously object to reasonable postponement of any further action
by Plebiscitary Commission in regard to plebiscite. In light of these
conditions please avoid action on Saturday. Take an adjournment and
inform me fully about Edwards’ proposals and attitude. I have adjourned
meeting of the Peruvian and Chilean Plenipotentiaries here until Monday
afternoon.
KELLOGG
18 Telegram No. 193, June 4, noon; not printed.

723.2515/2406: Telegram
[Document 313]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, June 4, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received June 5—12:11 a.m.]
From Lassiter.
(1) Your telegram June 3, 5 p.m. Unless Edwards’ attitude at
meeting Saturday is such as to force me to take action, I shall
arrange for his pending motion to lie over to an adjourned
meeting Monday afternoon. I do not think that situation here
warrants attempting any further delay. I hope you will be able to
make your final communication to me before Monday morning.
(2) After passage of termination resolution Edwards will
doubtless appeal. Several days will be required to certify appeal
and to dispose of other business of Commission, but after that is
over I am sure that neither Edwards nor Freyre will be willing to
remain here during period of the appeal, and the Commission will
have to adjourn to meet at some future date. I shall arrange to get
American personnel out of the territory as quickly as possible
after passage of the resolution. Secretary General Stabler will take
Commission records to Washington and I shall direct my legal
advisers to proceed there with American delegation’s files. I shall
return to the Canal Zone unless you desire otherwise. Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2406: Telegram
[Document 314]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 5, 1926.
For Lassiter. I assume that your telegram of June 4, 8 p.m., was sent before
you had received my telegram June 4, 6 p.m. This morning I have received
renewed urgent appeals from Collier19 for one week’s, or if possible, ten
days’ time. He report that sentiment is rapidly developing at Santiago in
favor of diplomatic settlement; and that, although for political reasons the
Chilean Government dares not instruct Edwards to withdraw his request for
a meeting today, he has been told informally that the Government’s
influence will be exerted in every way to minimize popular criticism if a
postponement is taken. In view of this critical situation it would be most
unwise to burn any bridges next Monday by introducing resolution that was
quoted in my telegram June 3, 5 p.m. Please arrange to keep matters in
abeyance even if you have to vote against Edwards’ motion fixing election
date, assigning some technical reason. Point of whole matter is that the final
action terminating plebiscite, when and if taken, must be in circumstances
such as to leave least possible room for complaint by either party that either
you or we have precipitated it while the parties are actively negotiating and
actually formulating definite proposals for a settlement. We can not afford
to be put in position of closing door on a last chance of arrangement.
KELLOGG
19 Telegram No. 196, June 4, 11 p.m.; not printed.

723.2515/2408: Telegram
[Document 315]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, June 6, 1926—noon.
[Received 8:09 p.m.20 ]
197. Announcement appears in press that you have given Chile only until
Monday to come to decision, and that Chilean Government has asked to be
given until Wednesday. I hasten to say that while delay should not be
permitted, they should have until Wednesday at least if they express desire
for it. For us to fix too short time limit will be regarded as pressure and will
arouse stubborn response. Conditions here, moreover, necessitate consulting
not only Foreign Affairs Committees of both Senate and Deputies but also
the presidents of all eight political parties. Today and tomorrow will be
devoted to that effort. A successor must also be found for Mathieu, who at
present is greatest obstacle as he opposes corridor plan and asserts that he
wishes to cede both provinces to Bolivia. Everyone else has abandoned this
plan, for reliable information has it that the Minister of War announced in
Cabinet session that cession of Arica would result immediately in
revolution.
Bolivian Minister has just called on me and requested me to telegraph you
that, in his opinion, Bolivia would not be content with a corridor. I told him
that I would not telegraph you; that you had not conversed on matter with
Bolivian Minister: at Washington as both the litigation and the good offices
were restricted to Chile and Peru; and that to admit Bolivia would destroy
legal structure now existing and would undermine the good offices.
Minister told me he had good reason for belief that Peru would sell both
provinces to Bolivia and that this was thought to be best solution by many
prominent Chileans. I replied that that statement was good up to 4 or 5 days
ago, but that everyone had abandoned idea since Minister of War’s
statement previously referred to. I said that my opinion was that Bolivia’s

only chance ever to get an outlet to the sea was the acceptance of the
present proposition. Minister left me apparently well satisfied and
convinced of truth of what I had said. …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
There is no certainty your proposition will be accepted, but chances are that
four-fifths of intelligent people approve it. The Government’s hesitancy is
chiefly due to fear of revolution and to activities of Edwards’ followers. It
must have a little time. Remember that less than month ago both Senate and
Deputies were practically unanimous in demanding termination of good
offices. I believe that now a majority of both chambers would approve your
plan if Government were to recommend it.
COLLIER
20 Telegram in two sections.

723.2515/2408: Telegram
[Document 316]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 7, 1926—11 a.m.
105. Your No. 197, June 6, noon. General Lassiter reports21 that at
Plebiscitary Commission’s meeting on Saturday, Edwards pressed earnestly
for definite and immediate action to fix date of election, discontinue
registration appeals, close registration books, and assign columns to Chile
and Peru on the ballot, as required by Commission’s regulations. The
Commission neither acted nor voted upon Edwards’ resolutions or upon
question of postponement, but as matter of personal courtesy to Lassiter a
postponement was arranged until June 9, Wednesday, on which date
Lassiter states that he will be compelled to act. Wednesday he intends to
introduce a resolution as substitute for Edwards’ resolutions, and unless
Edwards makes request that action on Lassiter’s resolution go over until
another meeting, Lassiter’s resolution will be passed Wednesday. At
Saturday’s meeting Edwards began proceedings with what Lassiter
describes as specious and dangerous address in which he censured
Peruvians for noncooperation and insincerity and criticized Americans for
inconsistency and dilatoriness.22 He also gave notice that he intended to
publish this address. Lassiter called attention to fact that the settled practice
of the Commission forbade publication; and Edwards stated that his duty
required him at least to transmit the address to his Government and that it
was altogether likely that the Chilean Government would publish it within a
few days.
From the above sketch of situation at Arica you will see that Chile is
precipitating action through her official representative. If Chilean
Government needs more time it is simple matter for that Government to
instruct its Commissioner accordingly. I know of no other way to prevent
final action on next Wednesday. This is third time within last few weeks that

Edwards has submitted motion to Commission to fix election date, and now
he is insistently demanding action under circumstances which give the
president of the Plebiscitary Commission no excuse for further delay.
Ambassador Cruchaga reported to me last evening that he had received
instructions from his Government to request postponement until Thursday
of meeting of the Plenipotentiaries which is scheduled for this afternoon. …
Request to postpone today’s meeting here until Thursday was evidently
made with full knowledge that decision in Arica was to be taken on
Wednesday. Chile apparently has no intention of negotiating for a
settlement. At meeting of Plenipotentiaries here on June 4 (Friday) I
obtained Chile’s formal rejection of my two general propositions: (1)
neutralization, (2) conveyance of entire territory to a third party. I also
obtained Peru’s acceptance in principle of corridor to Bolivia, territory
north of corridor to go to Peru and territory south of corridor to go to Chile,
without defining limits. Cruchaga declined to accept in principle, as
boundaries were not sufficiently defined, and also declined to make any
other proposition. Both Peruvian and Chilean Plenipotentiaries agreed to
consult their respective Governments and to present more specific
propositions on Monday; both specifically affirmed their desire to continue
negotiations. I have but slight hope that I can get Peru to accept any
proposition that will be presented.
At Ambassador Cruchaga’s request I had two and a half hour conference
with ex-President Alessandri, who asseverated that no settlement of any
kind could ever be put through Chilean Congress. When I explained in
detail that the proposition of good offices was suggested by Chile even to
details of settlement, Alessandri admitted it and said he had been unaware
of it until you had communicated facts to Foreign Office. I then showed him
Chilean Government’s last notes which I understood had been sent with
authority of Cabinet. He expressed much amazement and said that even that
settlement could never be put through Congress. … I said that it was for
General Lassiter in the first instance to make any decision as to what should
be done; that of course it could come to the Arbitrator by appeal; and that
all information I had received from Pershing, Lassiter, and their advisers
made it seem impossible that they could hold a unilateral election. I called
his attention to 16 separate assaults and outrages committed on Peruvians

since May 14. Alessandri attempted no defense but said he believed they
grew out of exuberance of Chilean population over their apparent victory.
He suggested that election be allowed to proceed and that Arbitrator
consider its fairness on appeal. I said that if conditions were inadequate for
fair election I did not see how Lassiter could afford to hold it and that it
seemed impossible from all reports I had received that Lassiter would hold
such an election. Alessandri said that he thought it was better for this
Government to decide matter at once one way or other, even if it declared
election to be impossible, rather than allow matter to drag along further. He
did not say, as Cruchaga has done, that there was danger of revolution. It
appears to be impossible to get any support from him for a diplomatic
settlement.
I do not know whether I can obtain Peru’s approval of plan you suggested
in your No. 18623 and subsequent messages, but I am very doubtful that
Chile will make such a proposition and I feel that it is practically impossible
for me to obtain Peru’s approval to arrangements that merely give her Tacna
Province on present boundaries and no corridor to Bolivia except to north
of the railroad.
I am beginning to believe that Chile never intended to accept any solution
whatever except plebiscite. I regret situation more than I can tell. For
months I have struggled to prevent decision by Commission such as is now
impending.
KELLOGG
21 Telegram of June 5, 12 p.m.; not printed.
22 Text of statement printed in El Arbitraje de Tacna y Arica, tomo segundo,
p. 646 (minutes of the 35th session).
23 Not printed. The plan suggested was for a division on existing
departmental boundaries with possibly some indemnification to Peru for the
land of the old Province of Tacna which had been incorporated in the
Department of Arica by Chile (file No. 723.2515/2387).

723.2515/2414: Telegram
[Document 317]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, June 7, 1926—11 p.m.
[Received June 8—7:08 a.m.]
200. Upon receipt of your 105 I went at 7 o’clock this evening to the
Foreign Office. The Under Secretary was with the President in the meeting
of notables to consider Chile’s decision. The session is likely to last several
hours. I then went to house of Mathieu who, despite his statement to me the
other day that he had resigned, attended the Cabinet meeting today and was
in the Ministry most of the day. Upon my arrival at his house I was told he
had gone to bed exhausted and could not see me.
I saw the editor in chief of Diario Ilustrado and Carlos Aldunate Solar24
and told them of your feeling that Lassiter’s resolution could not be
postponed beyond Wednesday if the Government did not instruct Edwards
to move a postponement. They feel the propriety of this but fear the
Government’s weakness. It has pledged itself to the plebiscite so many
times that it hardly dares to change front entirely all at once,
notwithstanding that consistency and even evident sincerity require it. If
Chile makes a proposition tomorrow I will at once see the President
directly, [beginning paraphrase] and also influential friends of his, and shall
argue that courtesy requires that if they ask the mediator to support a
proposition, they should give him reasonable length of time to obtain its
acceptance by the other party. …
If Government of Chile announces tomorrow that it has made a proposition,
quite a sensation will be created. It may not feel able to declare publicly that
it has consented to postponement at Arica, but if it gets through tomorrow
satisfactorily, as I think it will, it will be able to make public declaration in
day or so. I am making every possible effort to get them to make
postponement now. We ought not to allow ourselves to be stampeded at
Arica as long as there is chance here. Majority of those who have worked

for good offices are still hopeful. I hope most earnestly that Lassiter, even
against Edwards’ wish, will vote to postpone for a week, for you will need
that much time to present to Peruvian Government any proposition Chile
may make. There has been great change here, especially in Congress, since
Alessandri’s departure. [End paraphrase.]
COLLIER
24 Former president of Chilean Senate and member of the Chilean
delegation to the conference at Washington, 1922, between Chile and Peru;
see Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, pp. 447 ff.

723.2515/2412: Telegram
[Document 318]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 8, 1926—11 a.m.
For Lassiter. Ambassador Collier reports25 that important conferences of
President and Cabinet with members of Foreign Affairs Committees of both
Houses of Chilean Congress and heads of all political parties are being held
at Santiago in an effort to agree upon some basis of settlement for
submission to Plenipotentiaries in Washington for consideration. Collier
reports that it is stated these conferences can not be concluded in time to
submit results here until Thursday. Ambassador Cruchaga on instructions
from Chilean Government asked me Sunday evening to postpone the
meeting of the Plenipotentiaries set for Monday until Thursday. I declined,
but held a meeting yesterday afternoon at which Cruchaga presented
telegram from Chilean Government requesting a postponement. The next
meeting of the Plenipotentiaries will be held Wednesday morning, but it is
to be doubted if full report of action at Santiago will be available at that
time although Cruchaga has requested definite word by tonight.
You will observe that Chile is asking for delay in negotiations here at same
time that Edwards is demanding immediate action in Arica. I have forcibly
pointed out inconsistency of such a course and yesterday Cruchaga
volunteered to telegraph Chilean Government to urge that appropriate
instructions be given Edwards to agree to further postponement of some
sort in Arica. Ambassador Collier is also dealing with matter directly with
Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs. It is evident that Chilean policy is
both unsettled and inconsistent as result of factional differences within the
Government and the Congress; and under these conditions Edwards will,
perhaps, continue to follow his own course without interference.

While at this moment I can not regard prospects of settlement as bright, and
while Chilean attitude at Arica and in Washington gives little
encouragement at this juncture to idea that Chile is seeking real solution of
problem in good faith, I think that it must be recognized by all of us that
there is conflict of opinion on question in Chile and that Collier’s appeal for
time to allow matter to be fought out at Santiago can not be wholly ignored.
Final record should leave no room for assertion to be made that we have
closed door at very moment when parties are making serious effort
constructively to adjust their differences. If resolution quoted in my
telegram of June 3, 5 p.m., is so introduced, preliminary record should show
clearly that Chilean member of Commission has flatly refused all further
delay and has precipitated final action by Commission on the plebiscite.
In regard to procedure at meeting of Commission on Wednesday, I make
following suggestions:
(1) It seems advisable that facts and conclusions set forth in
Edwards’ speech last Saturday before Commission should receive
some comment from you if you have not yet made any. It will not
be necessary to make long or detailed statement. Only point is,
that these facts and conclusions, with which I understand you do
not at all agree, should not be allowed to stand unchallenged on
the record. Yesterday Ambassador Cruchaga handed me copy of
Edwards’ speech,26 and fact that it has been telegraphed here
points significantly to intention to give it out shortly for wide
publicity.
(2) If on Wednesday Edwards maintains his uncompromising
attitude and insists on a decision, I do not see why you should not
say that you are advised that negotiations in Washington are going
ahead at request of both Chile and Peru; that Chile, in particular,
has shown intention to submit to the Plenipotentiaries some
definite proposal of settlement and has requested few days’ delay
for that purpose; and that in these circumstances Peru and Chile
should carefully consider whether their best interests would not
be served by this brief delay and thus avoid for a few days the
creation of a new situation. It is my idea that this suggestion

should be framed in such a way as to place responsibility squarely
upon the disputing parties, and especially upon Chilean member
of the Commission, to say that despite critical state of
negotiations Chile insists upon action by Commission.
(3) After having exhausted every reasonable expedient to obtain
postponement and having fixed responsibility as indicated under
(2) above, introduction of your resolution would then appear to be
inevitable. You will appreciate that introduction of resolution,
even though Chilean Commissioner then requests time to consult
his Government before acting upon it, will be practically
equivalent to its passage as far as public is concerned. I should be
pleased if events took such a course as to permit introduction of
resolution to go over until another meeting, but Edwards may
force action and it is important to see that record is plain if he
does force it.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
KELLOGG
25 Telegram No. 199, June 7, 1 a.m.; not printed.
26 Printed in El Arbitrage de Tacna y Arica, tomo segundo, p. 646.

723.2515/2415: Telegram
[Document 319]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
SANTIAGO, June 8, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received 3:10 p.m.]
201. After a talk with the Under Secretary and consideration of the action of
last night’s meeting of notables, I consider a diplomatic solution hopeless
and feel that Lassiter ought not to delay a moment longer.
The element here which fails to appreciate the seriousness of a solution
condemning Chile for electoral frauds rallied all the jingoists and succeeded
in overcoming the great number of influential persons who wanted a
diplomatic settlement. For instance, the Mercurio has a headline today
running across the page “Only the sons of the heroes are worthy of guarding
the sepulchre of the martyrs,” and subheading “This is the voice of the
Chileans who with their blood bought Tacna and Arica.”
There was unquestionably a set-back yesterday to those who were working
for a diplomatic settlement, a sort of mysterious slump. …
I keenly regret that we are not to have the satisfaction of bringing Chile and
Peru into better relations and personally am confident that Chile has yielded
to influence which has brought about results that I think will be disastrous
for her; but you and I certainly have both worked and endured in order to
aid Chile, and I think our Government at least will have the satisfaction of
having kept faith and that Lassiter’s resolution will be a new declaration of
our high standing of honor which must be kept unimpaired if we are to have
any influence in Latin America or the rest of the world or if we are to
maintain our own self-respect.
COLLIER

723.2515/2412 supp.: Telegram
[Document 320]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 5, 1926—7 p.m.
For Lassiter. Ambassador Cruchaga called this afternoon to submit concrete
proposal for settlement which emanates from conference held yesterday in
Santiago.27 I told him that only way to gain time for consideration of any
new proposals was through modification of Edwards’ attitude in Arica; if
Edwards persisted in demanding immediate decision, a new situation would
be created which might be exceedingly unfavorable to continuance of
negotiations here. Ambassador said that present state of public opinion in
Chile made it impossible to obtain instructions to Edwards directing him to
agree to a postponement, and that likewise it would be impossible for
Edwards to make motion for postponement. On other hand Cruchaga feels
that under present circumstances Edwards might think passive attitude on
his part to be feasible; that is to say, a postponement or adjournment of
further proceedings in the plebiscitary territory might be brought about on
your motion or on that of Freyre with Edwards either not voting or voting
contra. I have reason for believing that Edwards will be urged at once not to
oppose any move for maintenance of status quo in plebiscitary proceedings,
provided way to do this can be found that does not ask any affirmative
action by Edwards.
I suggest that you talk this matter over with the Chilean Commissioner
before tomorrow’s meeting and see if arrangement for further adjournment
can not be effected. Here is situation: From Chilean point of view Edwards
can not afford to have it said that he has agreed to a postponement; it is not
necessary to ask him to do so; all that he is required to do is for him to
cease for the time being to force issue on plebiscite; and he can even vote
against a motion for postponement or adjournment in order to keep his own
record straight.

As I pointed out in my earlier message to you today, your resolution should
not be introduced until and unless issue is crowded to that point by Edwards
and no other course is left open to you. I am counting upon you to exercise
utmost discretion, introducing your resolution only through absolute
necessity. A great deal may depend upon a few days’ delay.
KELLOGG
27 See telegram No. 107, June 9, 6 p.m., to the Ambassador in Chile, p. 475
[Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322].

723.2515/2415: Telegram
[Document 321]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 8, 1926—11 p.m.
For Lassiter. My telegram June 8, 7 p.m. After further reflection and
consideration of latest advices from Santiago, I am disposed to allow you to
use your own judgment and proceed with introduction of your resolution
unless Edwards relieves you of embarrassment by consenting to maintain
status quo for such further period as may be agreed upon. Of course we are
anxious to save every possible chance for settlement by negotiation. It is
only because Ambassador Cruchaga insists that such a chance exists that we
have urged you to find some way for a further postponement, but we do not
wish you to construe these messages as a direction to you to postpone it in
face of further protests from Chilean Commissioner.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2415: Telegram
[Document 322]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 9, 1926—6 p.m.
107. Since your No. 201, June 8, 1 p.m., was received I have had
conference with Ambassador Cruchaga and have also held meeting of the
Plenipotentiaries this morning. Late yesterday afternoon Cruchaga
presented to me Chile’s specific proposals based on conclusions reached at
meeting in Santiago, and this morning laid same proposals before meeting
of the Plenipotentiaries.
 
Substance of proposals is that Chile reiterates her preference for fulfillment
of Arbitrator’s award; then follows this by expression of willingness to
divide territory, present Department of Tacna to go to Peru and present
Department of Arica to go to Chile; third proposition is that of a Bolivian
corridor four kilometers wide extending from Bolivian boundary to village
of Palos on the Pacific Ocean, this corridor to follow present boundary
between Departments of Tacna and Arica so that one-half of the corridor
strip would be on each side of it. A proviso is added that at no point shall
corridor approach the line of the Arica-La Paz railroad nearer than 10
kilometers. Ambassador Velarde made no reply except to say that he would
submit these proposals to Peruvian Government. Meeting then adjourned
subject to call of Secretary of State.
Lassiter has full authority to handle situation in his decretion at this
afternoon’s meeting of Plebiscitary Commission; I do not doubt that he will
give Chilean Commissioner full opportunity to consent to further
postponement, but if latter insists upon forcing issue then fate of plebiscite
will be met and decided as far as the Commission is concerned.

I shall be glad to have you report any additional information you may
obtain on conclusions reached at meeting of notables in Santiago on
Monday. I should be especially interested to know if these conclusions were
influenced by any representations or recommendations that may have been
made from here by Alessandri. It should be understood, in this connection,
that Alessandri’s talk with me last Friday was at his request, made through
Ambassador Cruchaga. I have reported substance of interview in my No.
105, June 7, 11 a.m., to you. If Alessandri made any recommendation based
upon his conversation with me, it could not in any conceivable way have
encouraged Chilean Government to take decisions it reached on Monday,
except by deliberate misrepresentation of the facts. I did not in slightest
manner encourage idea that if negotiations failed and Chile insisted on
plebiscite that the plebiscite would go through; the tenor of my remarks was
precisely the opposite.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2428: Telegram
[Document 323]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, June 9, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received 10:40 p.m.]
From Lassiter. At meeting of the Plebiscitary Commission this afternoon I
made a statement indicating desirability of postponing definite action today.
Edwards replied with definite and specific statement that Chilean
Government insisted on immediate action.
Freyre and I both read statements28 replying to Edwards’ statement at last
meeting. I expressed my views on the dominating factors that had affected
the plebiscite.
I then introduced resolution for termination. Edwards said that he did not
think Commission possessed right to terminate plebiscite, and that he
wished to refer matter to Chilean Government. He requested delay for this
purpose, which was granted. I presume that he will be able to act by day
after tomorrow. Freyre made no comment and said that he was ready to vote
now.
Commission agreed that no publicity should be given today’s proceedings;
but it is practically certain that Chileans will publish essential facts. I
commented on publication of Edwards’ statement made at last previous
meeting; he said Senate had asked for a copy and he could not control
matter. If his statement should be published in the United States, I think that
my statement, too, should be published.
Lassiter
VON TRESCKOW

28 Printed in El Arbitrate de Tacna y Arica, tomo segundo, pp. 756 and 762.

723.2515/2428: Telegram
[Document 324]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 10, 1926—10 a.m.
108. Lassiter reports29 that he saw Edwards before meeting of Plebiscitary
Commission yesterday afternoon, called his attention to state of
negotiations for settlement, and made suggestion that it might be desirable
to postpone for short period further definite action by Commission on
Edwards’ pending motion to fix date of election. Edwards replied that he
knew nothing of what was going on in Santiago about good offices and that
his instructions were to pay no attention to good offices, but to press and to
continue to press for vote on his motion and to appeal if that motion were
voted down. As late as 10 o’clock, June 8, Edwards continued, he had
received cable instruction telling him to press for a vote. His attitude was
wholly opposed to any delay or postponement.
Later at the meeting of the Commission Edwards made definite, specific
statement that Chilean Government insisted on immediate action. Lassiter
thereupon introduced following resolution:
[Here follows text of resolution quoted in the Secretary’s telegram of June
3, 5 p.m., to the consul at Arica, printed on page 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of
Doc. 308 and Doc. 309].]
Upon introduction of this resolution Edwards stated that he did not think
Commission possessed right to terminate plebiscite; he said that he wished
to refer matter to his Government and requested a delay for that purpose,
which was granted. Lassiter thinks that final action may be taken by
tomorrow.

Commission agreed that no publicity should be given to its proceedings
yesterday. I am informing you of foregoing facts so that you may be fully
prepared and ready to take any necessary action should Chile give publicity.
Please report at once all developments.
KELLOGG
29 Telegram of June 9, 4 p.m.; not printed.

723.2515/2428: Telegram
[Document 325]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 11, 1926—9 a.m.
For Lassiter. Resolution which you have offered has aroused very bitter
feeling in Chilean Embassy here. They feel that it is unwarranted public
indictment of Chile and that honor will require her to break off negotiations
and possibly to break off relations with the United States. If Chilean
Commissioner proposes any possible solution or any compromise
arrangement by which passage of resolution would be avoided, please try to
adjourn action and cable us immediately.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2434: Telegram
[Document 326]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, June 11, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received 3:40 p.m.]
From Lassiter. Your telegram June 11, 9 a.m. It might not be amiss to
intimate to Ambassador Cruchaga that if Chilean Commissioner will
propose suspension of all plebiscitary activities during period of good
offices and will likewise propose postponement of Commission’s action on
motions to consummate as well as on motions to terminate the plebiscite,
the resolution which embodies such proposals will receive my support.
Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2434: Telegram
[Document 327]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 11, 1926—6 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your telegram June 11, 2 p.m. I doubt wisdom of imposing any
conditions specifically mentioning good offices. I suggest that if Edwards
wishes it, you indicate your willingness to hold plebiscitary activities in
abeyance and to defer action on all pending motions, including your own
resolution for terminating the plebiscite, until the further order of the
Commission. I shall take first convenient moment to convey this intimation
to Ambassador Cruchaga.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2436: Telegram
[Document 328]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
ARICA, June 11, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received June 12—12:10 a.m.]
From Lassiter. Referring to termination resolution now before Plebiscitary
Commission, Chile will probably take one of the three courses following:
1. Vote against resolution; then, after affirmative vote by
Commission, take an appeal to the Arbitrator.
2. Announce unreserved acceptance of good offices and propose
suspension of all plebiscitary activities including action on
termination resolution now pending.
3. Withdraw from participation in proceedings of Commission
and of its agencies.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
If Chile elects first course, her appeal will be certified or transmitted to
Arbitrator by cable. As I indicated in my telegram of June 11, 2 p.m., if
Chile proposes suspension of plebiscitary activities during further
negotiations under good offices, I believe that this proposal should be
accepted. Should she elect the third course, the Commission should adopt
the termination resolution.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lassiter
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2437: Telegram
[Document 329]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Extract—Paraphrase]
ARICA, June 12, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received 1:55 p.m.]
From Lassiter. Your telegram June 11, 6 p.m. This morning I received an
official note from Edwards in which he states that he has received
instructions from Chilean Government and requests me to call a meeting of
Plebiscitary Commission at earliest possible moment within the 24-hour
period provided for in the rules of procedure of the Commission.
Accordingly, I am calling a meeting for June 14 (Monday) at 11 a.m.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lassiter
VON TRESCKOW

723.2515/2436: Telegram
[Document 330]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 12, 1926—1 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your telegram June 11, 7 p.m.
1. In contingency of Chile’s withdrawal from further participation in
proceedings of Commission and of its agencies, your program would be
slightly simplified. I assume that termination would be adopted and that no
appeal would be taken on the record by either Chile or Peru.
2. If Chile continues to participate, then the alternative proposals are
termination or suspension. If there is to be (a) indefinite suspension or (b)
suspension for definite period, it is my understanding that it will be because
Chile asks for and agrees to it. You indicate that in that event you will vote
for suspension. I suppose that chance of an appeal by Peru, in such a
situation, would be remote. On other hand if no arrangement for suspension
is made and your resolution for termination is adopted, Chile, presumably,
will appeal; if she does not, whole matter may be regarded as ended. If
Chile does appeal, practice prevailing in previous appeals will apply.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7. On further consideration I have decided not to take at present the step
indicated in last sentence, my telegram June 11, 6 p.m.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2438: Telegram
[Document 331]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, June 12, 1926—midnight.
[Received June 13—5:32 a.m.]
From Lassiter. Department’s June 12, 1 p.m. The indications are that Chile
will withdraw on ground that Commission has no legal right to terminate
plebiscite. In that event there will not be any appeal. From your cable am I
to understand that no further action will be required of Plebiscitary
Commission and that it should adjourn sine die? Does not Arbitrator intend
to express his approval or disapproval of Commission’s action, and is no
final statement to be made of result of proceedings?
If Arbitrator does intend to act, then I should think that full statement of
entire history of case together with supporting documents would have to be
prepared for his use, and for this purpose the records and the personnel
needed to work up the case would have to be sent to Washington. I had
thought that the men whom I would send in charge of the delegation’s
records could do this work. Assuredly, if any report worthy of the name is
wanted, it will have to be prepared in Washington as personnel could not do
it here; but if Arbitrator does not intend to pass on matter, then presumably
it will be enough merely to send minutes and other documents of
Commission and records of delegation in care of secretary general to
Washington, for all personnel, including Commissioners, will cease to
function.
Some months will be required for the disbursing officer to close his
accounts and someone will have to audit and approve them and see that
funds on hand are properly distributed. Please cable me at once, as it is
indispensable that I know your views on foregoing before Monday
morning. Lassiter.

Von Trescxow

723.2515/2437: Telegram
[Document 332]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 13, 1926—11 a.m.
For Lassiter. Your telegram June 12, 11 a.m. If Edwards comes forward at
meeting tomorrow with any suggestion which can possibly be construed as
bona fide effort to bring about reasonable adjustment of plebiscitary
difficulty without at same time forcing you to take extreme measure
represented by your termination resolution, please endeavor to take an
adjournment and then cable me.
 
Should he launch any attack upon you, or the Arbitrator, or the United
States, you should reply for the Commission and transmit to us immediately
what he has said. If he makes public his speech of June 5 or any remarks
that he will make tomorrow, then your replies should receive like publicity.
Keep us fully and promptly informed.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2438: Telegram
[Document 333]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 13, 1926—8 p.m.
For Lassiter. Your June 12, 12 p.m.
1. If Edwards demands that you withdraw your termination
resolution and, when you refuse, formally records Chile’s
withdrawal from further participation in plebiscitary proceedings,
I think three things should be donitem:
(1) You should certify to the Arbitrator the fact of
Chile’s withdrawal;
(2) You should postpone action on all pending motions,
including termination resolution;
(3) You should suspend all plebiscitary proceedings
until further order of Plebiscitary Commission.
2. If Chile does not withdraw, and the termination resolution is
voted on and adopted, decision of Commission will presumably
stand as final unless appeal is taken. In absence of appeal, the
Commission will have only to formulate and approve its final
report to Arbitrator, transmitting with it Commission’s official
records. It occurs to me that you and the secretary general might
have delegated to you by the Commission the duty of preparing
and submitting the report. If an appeal be taken from adoption of
the termination resolution, however, the record on appeal should
be certified in accordance with practice in past appeals, and in

that event Commission certainly could not adjourn sine die, but
should take adjournment subject to call of its president.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2447: Telegram
[Document 334]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, June 14, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received June 15—8:45 a.m.]
From Lassiter. At meeting of the Plebiscitary Commission today Edwards
read a statement the whole purpose of which was to substantiate his
position that Commission did not have legal right to pass resolution
terminating the proceedings. His statement is a long, unsound argument
which may impress those who are wholly unacquainted with the
[situation?]. It was not, however, particularly offensive in tone. He refused
to take any part in the vote on motion to terminate, saying that his attitude
was one of nonparticipation.
Freyre read a short statement and gave his vote in the affirmative.
I read a long statement which I am having cabled to you,30 and then voted
in the affirmative and the motion to terminate the plebiscitary proceedings
was carried.
I then attempted to have considered the liquidation of the Commission’s
affairs. Edwards immediately announced, by direction of his Government,
that he was now the only legal member of the Plebiscitary Commission;
that he did not recognize Freyre and me, as our action in his opinion was
wholly illegal and had separated us from the Commission; and that it would
be necessary for the Arbitrator and Peru to appoint new members. I asked
him to elaborate his idea and to explain what it meant. He said that it meant
simply that Freyre and I had voted ourselves out of the Commission.
I told him I refused to recognize any such attitude; the Commission, I said,
was still in being for purpose of liquidating its affairs and remained in being

until final adjournment. I then proposed two resolutions for the division of
property and audit of funds; resolutions were adopted by majority vote,
Edwards in regard to each making the claim that he did not recognize any
further resolution passed by the Commission. He agreed later to collaborate
informally with the committees who were to look after these matters.
Freyre took the same position that I took; and as far as this meeting was
concerned, Edwards’ attitude was merely ignored. I inquired if he intended
to obstruct action of majority of Commission, or to take any other positive
stand. He intimated that he did not; but when he was pressed to say what his
attitude really was and what it was he proposed to do, he said he would
have to consider that at a later date. When I asked why he did not take an
appeal he said that he could not appeal because Commission’s action was a
nullity.
I adjourned the Commission to meet Wednesday at 11 a.m. There was no
particular ill-feeling manifested, and at end of meeting Edwards conversed
with me in a jocular manner. He told me that his dramatic move had been
suggested by Mr. Lansing in Washington.31
At 5 o’clock full publicity was given to action taken by Commission.
Statement I had cabled to you June 9, 11 p.m., the text of the termination
resolution, and the statements made today by Freyre, Edwards, and me were
given out.
I propose to close affairs of Commission and to have personnel leave here
on boat sailing June 20. I do not know whether Edwards will offer any
objection to shipment of records, but I intend to ship them unless he does
object.32 Lassiter.
VON TRESCKOW
30 Not printed; for text, see Plebiscitary Commission, Press Release, No. 29,
June 14, 1926. This statement was made available to the press by the
Department of State when received by cable from Arica.
31 Robert Lansing, Secretary of State, June 23, 1915, to Feb. 13, 1920, and
counsel for Chile during negotiations under good offices.

32 By a resolution of June 16, 1926, the Plebiscitary Commission authorized
transfer of its records to Washington and the release of personnel (file No.
723.2515/2465).

723.2515/3617
[Document 335]
The Chilean Plenipotentiary (Cruchaga) to the Secretary of State
[Translation32a ]
The Chilean Government, in an endeavour to evidence its willingness to
settle the existing controversy with Peru regarding the fulfillment of Article
3 of the Treaty of Ancón, a dispute submitted to the Arbitration of His
Excellency The President of the United States and which was decided by
the Award rendered March 4, 1925, accepted the tender made by the
Government of the United States of its good offices to procure a direct
adjustment of the question.
From the outset my Government represented the fact that its acceptance of
such a praiseworthy initiative did not imply its consent to a suspension of
the plebiscitary proceedings, which were to proceed along the course
established by the Award and in the Resolutions of the Plebiscitary
Commission appointed to execute the Arbitral decision.
This intelligence given by Chile to its acceptance of the tender of good
offices was expressly admitted by the Honorable The Secretary of State
and, also, by the Peruvian Government, the latter having participated, under
such an understanding, in the negotiations carried on within the good
offices.
The meetings of the Plenipotentiaries of Chile and Peru were inaugurated in
Washington, upon such a criterion and under the auspices of the Honorable
The Secretary of State, and, meantime, the plebiscitary proceedings were
parallelly carried onward in Arica. While the suggestions formulated by the
Honorable The Secretary of State or by the Parties, were discussed in
Washington, the Commission at Arica in fulfillment of the Electoral
Regulations, proceeded with the registration of voters, extended the period
granted therefor and set in operation the rules enacted to bring about the
holding of the popular vote.

 
The situation was perfectly clear: the Award had directed that a plebiscite
should be held, and the good offices were intended to find a direct
settlement independent from the former. If the good offices did not bring
about any results, there remained, immovable, the plebiscitary solution
stipulated by the Arbitr[at]or. If the good offices reached a direct
adjustment, the plebiscite would then be inapplicable.
This parallelism of proceedings has been broken through the unexpected
Resolution introduced by the Member representing the Arbitrator and which
was adopted by the majority of the Plebiscitary Commission.
Said Resolution has declared that the plebiscite prescribed by the High
Judge is impracticable; namely, it has repealed the Award wherein it was
established that a plebiscite was practicable, which ordered its holding, that
organized the agency entrusted with its execution and which reserved to the
Arbitrator at Law the right to void the results of the ballot, once it had been
held, if there happened to be grounds of intimidation, fraud or bribery.
The plebiscitary line having thus been erased by the Plebiscitary
Commission, the line of the good offices, which ran parallel to it has, in
fact, been also erased. The good offices were accepted with the
understanding—shared by all the parties thereto—that the plebiscitary
proceedings were to continue in the form and along the course indicated by
the Award; we trod the path of the good offices with the sincere desire of
reaching a speedy solution which could eliminate the inevitable and
vexatious difficulties brought forth by the electoral process; but we always
had the assurance that, if those good offices did not attain the looked for
success, the plebiscitary solution still remained pending and in full force;
with the acceptance of the good offices new hopes of ending the question
were unfolded without there being any abandonment of the plebiscitary
solution ordered by such a High Judge as the President of the United States,
after a careful study of the bulky antecedents exhibited by both parties, in a
lengthy and well founded Award, which has been deservedly extolled by the
principal jurists of the world at large; the good offices were accepted and
the solution set forth in the Award was kept alive, under which conditions

both parties entered into them on an equal footing for the discussions which
were to arise therefrom.
In declaring the plebiscite impracticable, a finding being based on
antecedents which were not communicated to the accused Party, the
aforesaid parallelism disappears and, therefore, I have been instructed by
my Government to bring to an end the negotiations under the good
office[s].
 
I am especially pleased to convey the sincere thanks of the Chilean
Government for the constant and disinterested services which have been
lent, to the cause of harmony and concord among American countries, by
the Honorable The Secretary of State, whose intelligent efforts were set into
action without attaining the desired results due to the fact that the
Resolution of the majority of the Plebiscitary Commission brought about
the premature end of the negotiations in which he was so nobly engaged.
WASHINGTON , June 18, 1926.
32a Made in the Chilean Embassy.

Renewal of good offices by the United
States in regard to the Tacna-Arica
controversy and rejection by Peru of
the proposed settlement32b
32b See also section dealing with plebiscite, supra.
[336] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile
(Collier)
Washington, June 25, 1926—noon.
723.2515/2497a: Telegram
[337] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, June 26, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 8:00 p.m.]
723.2515/2499: Telegram
[338] The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
Rome, July 8, 1926—5 p.m. [Received 9:10 p.m.]
723.2515/2521: Telegram
[339] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
Washington, July 26, 1926—5 p.m.

723.2515/2543: Telegram
[340] The Chargé in Chile (Engert) to the Secretary of State
Santiago, October 6, 1926—9 a.m. [Received 8:20 p.m.]
723.2515/2646: Telegram
[341] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, October 8, 1926—6 p.m.
723.2515/2652a: Telegram
[342] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Chile (Engert)
Washington, October 9, 1926—1 p.m.
723.2515/2646: Telegram
[343] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, October 11, 1926—11 a.m. [Received 9:30 p.m.]
723.2515/2654: Telegram
[344] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, October 13, 1926—4 p.m.
723.2515/2654: Telegram
[345] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, October 16, 1926—4 p.m. [Received October 17—5:42 p.m.]

723.2515/2661: Telegram
[346] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs (Stabler)
[Washington,] October 19, 1926.
723.2515/2678½
[347] The Peruvian Embassy to the Department of State
Washington , November 3, 1926.
723.2515/2689
[348] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs (Stabler)
[Washington,] November 4, 1926.
723.2515/2682½
[349] The Peruvian Embassy to the Department of State
Washington , November 6, 1926.
723.2515/2690
[350] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, November 30, 1926—1 a.m.
723.2515/2713a: Telegram
[351] The Chargé in Chile (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Santiago, November 30, 1926—1 p.m. [Received 7:20 p.m.]
723.2515/2715: Telegram
[352] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, November 30, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 6:00 p.m.]
723.2515/2716: Telegram
[353] The Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell) to the Secretary of State
La Paz, December 3, 1926—8 a.m. [Received 1:40 p.m.]
723.2515/2741: Telegram
[354] Memorandum of the Chilean Government
December 4, 1926.
723.2515/2833½
[355] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, December 7, 1926—8 p.m.
723.2515/2777a: Telegram
[356] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Jay), the
Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan), and the Minister in Uruguay (Grant-
Smith)
Washington, December 7, 1926—8 p.m.
723.2515/2729: Circular telegram

[357] The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
Montevideo, December 9, 1926—9 a.m. [Received 11 a.m.]
723.2515/2782: Telegram
[358] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
Rio de Janeiro, December 9, 1926—11 a.m. [Received 11:55 a.m.]
723.2515/2783: Telegram
[359] The Ambassador in Argentina (Jay) to the Secretary of State
Buenos Aires, December 9, 1926—8 p.m. [Received 11:30 p.m.]
723.2515/2786: Telegram
[360] The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde)
Washington , December 11, 1926.
723.2515/2749
[361] The Ambassador in Argentina (Jay) to the Secretary of State
Buenos Aires, December 15, 1926—1 p.m. [Received 4:30 p.m.]
723.2515/2802: Telegram
[362] Memorandum of the Peruvian Government
Lima , January 12, 1927.
723.2515/2853

723.2515/2497a: Telegram
[Document 336]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile
(Collier)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 25, 1926—noon.
113. During absence of the Secretary of State for a few days, Ambassador
Cruchaga called at the Department yesterday afternoon to seek an interview
with Assistant Secretary Olds. He made what appears to be an interesting
and significant démarche, by virtually requesting that diplomatic
negotiations be resumed. First he inquired whether we had become “tired”
of the Tacna-Arica problem and if we meant to drop it. He was given the
assurance that the good offices of this Government remained available at all
times and that the parties could count upon our cooperation in the
promotion of a settlement as long as any hope for a settlement existed. The
Ambassador then proceeded to declare, in substance, that present situation
could not be allowed to run on; that it was absurd to think that this problem
admitted of no solution; that the recent circulars published by Chile and
Peru33 indicated clearly necessity of a negotiated settlement and that the
best sentiment in Chile is now overwhelmingly in favor of settlement of
that sort; that within past few days he had received urgent personal
telegrams from President Figueroa, from Minister for Foreign Affairs, from
12 Senators, and from as many leading members of Chamber of Deputies,
asking that he do all he can to effect a solution; … that Mathieu intends to
remain as Minister for Foreign Affairs until a settlement is made; that time
has come for the Secretary of State to formulate and bring forth proposal for
final settlement of whole problem; and that it is his (Cruchaga’s) belief that
Chile will now accept whatever the Secretary may propose. When Chile’s
formal withdrawal from the recent negotiations was referred to, the
Ambassador suggested that a meeting be brought about by inviting the
Chilean and Peruvian representatives to the Department in their capacity as

Ambassadors, not as Plenipotentiaries in the negotiations. Cruchaga said
that he would attend such a meeting without hesitation if asked to come as
Ambassador. He laid great stress on Chile’s deplorable position before the
world in the face of General Lassiter’s condemnation. The Ambassador
appeared to assume that as soon as the record arrives in Washington,
Arbitrator might be expected to deal with it; he further assumed that
conclusion reached in termination resolution of June 14 would be affirmed
by Arbitrator, but he argued that it was not necessary for Arbitrator to go
beyond a simple affirmation of that decision and that he could pass over and
not deal with question of where blame for failure of plebiscite lay. Cruchaga
expressed hope that Arbitrator’s affirmation along these lines might take
place simultaneously with a constructive settlement of entire problem.
The Ambassador said nothing in this conversation to indicate that he was
not acting in pursuance of instructions. It is of importance that we ascertain
immediately whether Government of Chile really means business by this
démarche, or whether it is merely an attempt to resume the same futile
discussions in which we were engaged for the past 3 months. It would be
very unfortunate if we were to make another beginning at this time unless
we were fairly certain of being able to reach a successful conclusion.
Instead, it might be better to wait awhile. Will public opinion in Chile, at
this juncture, support a settlement? Please understand that we are quite
ready to go ahead at any moment if Chile and Peru desire and if conditions
are favorable, and that the good offices of this Government are always
available. Please investigate at once and advise us fully.
GREW
33 Chilean and Peruvian circulars not printed.

723.2515/2499: Telegram
[Document 337]
The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, June 26, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 8:00 p.m.]
222. Accompanied by First Secretary of Embassy Engert, I called on
President Figueroa and the Minister for Foreign Affairs today at noon and
practically read to them a paraphrase of your No. 113, June 25, noon. They
neither asserted that Ambassador Cruchaga had exceeded his instructions
nor did they disavow any declaration he had made.
 
I said that as Chile has broken off good offices I felt that if it was her wish
that they be resumed the Chilean Government ought to place before you a
definite proposition which the Congress would be sure to ratify. I also said
that I felt, personally, that it was for them to suggest good offices in hope of
inducing Arbitrator to postpone any consideration which he ought to give to
the termination resolution of June 14 or in hope that he would refrain from
fixing the responsibility. President Figueroa and Mathieu both said that they
would have to have some time to ascertain the sort of settlement which
public opinion would approve. I admitted this much, but maintained that
request for good offices could not be used to delay action by Arbitrator. I
think that the Government is worried by the situation and may possibly take
some action; but I feel that we should be very watchful in matter of offering
a renewal of good offices.
In leaving the President’s office we met several Ministers going in,
evidently for a Cabinet meeting.
COLLIER

723.2515/2521: Telegram
[Document 338]
The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ROME, July 8, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received 9:10 p.m.]
76. Señor Villegas, the Chilean Ambassador to Italy, who has just returned
from Chile, has shown me a telegram to him from the Chilean Minister for
Foreign Affairs which states that the Government of Chile has settled upon
a solution of the Tacna-Arica question by which the territory in dispute will
be ceded to Bolivia with compensation which will shortly be negotiated.
The difficulty in arriving at this solution will be to obtain a similar
disposition on part of Peru; and Villegas was asked to inform me with view
to obtaining my interest in this solution, the failure of which would create a
dangerous situation.34 Telegram concluded with statement that Chile
desired and needed peace.
In reply to Ambassador Villegas’ request for my advice, I said that I thought
the matter should be taken up without further delay. I stated in addition as
my personal opinion that proposal of the Government of Chile should be
clear and definite and that I believed the Secretary of State would not refuse
to continue his efforts to reach a satisfactory settlement. Ambassador
Villegas is telegraphing Chilean Government recommending that
Department of State be approached with the proposition outlined above.
FLETCHER
34 Mr. Fletcher had been Minister to Chile from 1909–1914, and
Ambassador from 1914–1916; he had also been chairman of the delegation
of the United States to the 5th International Conference of American States
held at Santiago, Chile, in 1923.

723.2515/2543: Telegram
[Document 339]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, July 26, 1926—5 p.m.
60. Should Ambassador Villegas again approach you in regard to the matter
which you have reported to the Department, you are informed that Chile
broke off negotiations immediately after General Lassiter’s decision on
June 14; the Chilean Government thereupon undertook, without either my
knowledge or approval, separate negotiations with Bolivia. Later on I was
advised of these negotiations by the Chilean Ambassador here, but within
last few days I have learned that these Chilean-Bolivian negotiations have
broken down. I have in the meantime been informed that Peru has not
undertaken any separate negotiations with Bolivia, but that Government of
Peru is ready to resume negotiations under my good offices. The Chilean
Ambassador has strongly indicated his Government’s desire to resume
negotiations under good offices, but no definite official step has been taken
yet. Last week the Bolivian Minister notified me that his Government
would not make any separate arrangement with Chile, but held view that
solution would have to be reached through cooperation of Chile and Peru
with Bolivia under the good offices of the United States. There is where
matter stands for the present. …
KELLOGG

723.2515/2646: Telegram
[Document 340]
The Chargé in Chile (Engert) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, October 6, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received 8:20 p.m.]
285. The Minister for Foreign Affairs said he wished to speak to me with
utter frankness in reference to Tacna-Arica, as he felt that nothing could be
gained by mincing matters. He said he had never been as discouraged as he
is now after so many weeks of fruitless conversations at Washington. He
was most grateful to you for all you have done and he said that if it were a
matter of dealing with you alone an accord would have been reached long
ago; but he feared that you underestimated the adamant and unbending
attitude of the other contending party. Whether rightly or not, Peru felt that
she had been completely vindicated and as long as strong expressions of
Peru’s moral triumph continued to emanate from the highest official
personages there was little hope that Peru would accept a reasonable
solution. …
The Minister dwelt upon his sincere personal desire, which, he said, was
shared by entire Chilean Government, to show most conciliatory spirit
possible short of accepting humiliating conditions. Although the fact that all
his efforts had so far been unavailing was a great disappointment to him, he
had not yet given up hope; but he thought that it was essential that you
convey a pointed hint to Lima that it still lay within Arbitrator’s power to
reverse Peru’s present advantage.
The Minister concluded by inviting me seriously to go over his entire
correspondence and that of his predecessor, Mr. Mathieu, with Chilean
Ambassador at Washington since last June and to point out to him anything
which I thought to be unfair or unreasonable and to make any other
observations I might wish to make. I declined to do so, of course, on ground

that I had only recently familiarized myself with this involved problem and
that in consequence I should hardly be in position to make suggestions of
value. I do think, however, that if you should desire information on
Cruchaga’s instructions or reports at any given moment during the
negotiations I could, perhaps, take advantage of the Minister’s offer to
extent of asking specific questions without giving, necessarily, origin of the
inquiry.
ENGERT

723.2515/2652a: Telegram
[Document 341]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 8, 1926—6 p.m.
72. Early in July the Ambassadors of Chile and Peru indicated their
willingness and desire to go on with negotiations for settlement of the
Tacna-Arica dispute. Ambassador Velarde and his counsel have several
times expressed their desire to settle matter and both Chile and Peru have
stated that they would consider any proposition which the Secretary of State
of the United States would make. On August 27 Ambassador Velarde called
on the Secretary and informed him that the Government of Peru would, he
felt certain, gladly consider any proposal made by the Secretary looking
toward a settlement of the question. The Secretary requested the
Ambassador to confirm this as coming directly from the Government of
Peru. On September 2 the Ambassador did so, and stated that his
Government would be willing to consider any proposal made by the
Secretary and would accept any proposition for a settlement of the question
which did not injure feelings of population of cities of Tacna and Arica.
Since then the Secretary has held informal conversations with Ambassador
Cruchaga and Ambassador Velarde and their advisers with aim of
developing a formula which both would accept. The Chilean representatives
have stated that no settlement would be acceptable to Chile which removed
city of Arica from her sovereignty, and the Peruvian representatives have
stated that no settlement would be acceptable to Peru which left Arica in
hands of Chile. Compromises have been suggested to both about a corridor
to Bolivia which should include Arica-La Paz railroad and port rights and I
have reason to believe that suggestions I have made have been telegraphed
to President Leguía. I set forth one of these suggestions in detail to Mr.
Ellis, the Peruvian counsel, over a month ago but have not yet been able to

get any authoritative response or suggestion from the Peruvian
representatives in Washington.
The Peruvian Ambassador appears unwilling to accept any responsibility of
any kind and will act only as intermediary for transmission of
communications to and from his Government. The legal adviser, Dr.
Salomón, has not been to Department except on few occasions; and,
although he has stated that he desires to see a settlement reached, he has
offered no practical suggestions and has not contributed vigorously toward
bringing one about. Mr. Ellis, who attended some of the conferences
between the Plenipotentiaries, has conferred with me on numerous
occasions and appears to believe in a settlement but seems to be unable to
obtain any authority for discussion of a basis for arrangement except upon
the indefinite terms which Peru has expressed.
I think that President Leguía is taking position that Peru has not only won
moral victory but that the president of the Plebiscitary Commission has held
that Chile has frustrated the plebiscite and that Peru, therefore, has legal
grounds for laying claim to entire territory. On October 5 I informed
Ambassador Velarde, Dr. Salomón, and Mr. Ellis that such an assumption
was, in my opinion, wholly erroneous, and that even if General Lassiter’s
findings were eventually approved by the Arbitrator, the parties would be
left simply where they were before the plebiscite and would be subject to
negotiations for a settlement. Whether or not the Arbitrator will hand down
a decision is not yet known, and, should he hand down a decision what it
would be is not known. Arbitrator is at liberty on his own motion to take
into consideration all matters which are connected with the Tacna-Arica
award and to discuss frankly and freely whatever is connected with the
plebiscite. He may modify decision, change it entirely and order an
election, or take such action as he deems equitable.
Although Peru has frequently expressed willingness and desire to settle
question, she has shown every indication of desire to delay the negotiations
indefinitely. Question of settlement of Tacna-Arica dispute is one which
interests not Chile and Peru alone, but every one of countries of Western
Hemisphere; if it is left unsettled, the peace of South America can never
really be assured; and, as world attention has been focused on question for

number of years, it may be considered a test question whether two great
American nations, such as Chile and Peru, do or do not really desire to
reconcile their differences in a practical and lasting manner for the best
interests of the peace of the Western Hemisphere. The Chilean Government
or the Peruvian Government would unquestionably place itself in a most
disadvantageous and untenable position before world should either the one
or the other decline to accept a proposal for settlement which is to best
interests of continental peace, which impartial judges deem a fair and
equitable solution of the matter, and which would appeal most decidedly to
the unprejudiced judgment of the entire Western Hemisphere.
If no practical suggestions are put forward for an equitable and lasting
solution in which cool counsel prevails and wherein idea for promotion of
peace of the American continent takes place of purely selfish and
sentimental desire, it would then without doubt become the Secretary’s
distinct duty, as he has been advised officially by the Governments of both
Chile and Peru that they would consider any proposal he would make, to
formulate and to present to both Governments a final and conclusive
proposal.
You will please take earliest opportunity available to see President Leguía
in purely personal manner and, in light of what I have stated above,
endeavor to obtain from him statement on whether or not he wishes speedy
and practical termination of Tacna-Arica question. I have informed both
Ambassador Velarde and Dr. Salomón and Mr. Ellis as well that I do not
feel I am at liberty to delay this question much longer.
You are instructed to confer orally with President Leguía and to leave no
memorandum or aide-mémoire of substance of your remarks. What you say
I must leave largely to your discretion. What I have done is to outline
general situation. This is an occasion, however, in which a very emphatic
statement must be made in order to reveal clearly consequences entailed by
policy of delay or unwillingness to reach settlement of this matter along
equitable and practical lines.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2646: Telegram
[Document 342]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Chile (Engert)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 9, 1926—1 p.m.
137. Your No. 285, October 6, 9 a.m. I have duly noted the remarks made to
you by the Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs, and I approve your action
in declining to review the Foreign Office correspondence to which you
referred. The advantage of your being in position to make inquiries of the
Foreign Office, should it be thought advisable to do so, will not, however,
be lost sight of. You may seek suitable moment to convey to Minister
Huneeus in purely personal manner the following ideas: (1) that you are
convinced that the Secretary of State wishes most earnestly to see early
settlement of Tacna-Arica question on basis both practical and equitable
which both Chile and Peru can honorably accept; (2) that the Secretary of
State has undoubtedly made manifest this desire by continuance of his
efforts for settlement of question notwithstanding note of June 18 from
Chilean Ambassador terminating on part of Chile participation in direct
negotiations; (3) that the Secretary of State has been holding conferences
separately with Ambassador Cruchaga and Mr. Claro35 and with
Ambassador Velarde and his counsel from time to time and is exerting
every effort that lies within his power to find a common ground for
settlement. You may add that the success or failure of arriving at a lasting
and practical conclusion to this matter rests entirely with Chile and Peru;
and that although you are convinced that the Secretary of State will
continue to assist in the attempt to find a formula for settlement of the
question, he reserves, as is natural, the right to use his best judgment on
whether or not he will make a proposal to the two parties and also on
formulation of the terms of proposal should he see fit to make it.
You may state further your conviction that a settlement of the question of
Tacna-Arica is one which concerns not Chile and Peru alone but that it is

one which interests all the nations of the Western Hemisphere and that the
attention of the world is focused on question of whether or not two great
American nations like Chile and Peru really desire to reach a lasting
settlement of this protracted dispute along lines which are practical and
equitable and in which calm counsel and reasoned judgment take the place
of wholly selfish and sentimental desires.
Department wishes you to make a report by cable upon following points,
without making specific inquiries of any particular persons: (1) the
governmental and public opinion at this juncture on a settlement of Tacna-
Arica question based on division of the territory, the Department of Tacna to
be allotted Peru, a corridor including the Arica-La Paz railway to be allotted
Bolivia, and the Department of Arica including Arica city to be allotted
Chile with a leased strip in Arica including railroad to go to Bolivia along
the lines of the Fiume plan;36 (2) “neutralization”, so-called, or the creation
of a Free State; (3) sale of the disputed territory to Bolivia if that country
could obtain the funds necessary; (4) your opinion of reaction in Chile to
proposal along lines of (1), Chile to agree to lease entire city and port of
Arica to Bolivia, upon signing an agreement with Peru, instead of only a
small strip in the city.
KELLOGG
35 Samuel Claro Lastarria, Chilean agent in Washington in the Tacna-Arica
arbitration.
36 See article 4 of the Treaty of Rapallo, Nov. 12, 1920, between Italy and
the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, and the agreement of Jan.
27, 1924, signed at Rome between the same powers, dividing the Fiume
territory between them.

723.2515/2654: Telegram
[Document 343]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LIMA, October 11, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received 9:30 p.m.]
86. Your No. 72, October 8, 6 p.m. I shall carry out your instructions
promptly, but I beg leave, as an aid in presenting matter to President, to ask
if it is possible for you to inform me regarding terms you proposed to Ellis;
also the approximate terms of settlement which would be acceptable to
Chile, or which would be at least open to discussion by her as preliminary
basis of agreement. In talking with President I would be greatly aided by
having some reliable information on Chile’s attitude toward settlement and
if possible what basis of settlement she would consider. For example, would
a money indemnity to be paid, perhaps jointly by Bolivia and Peru, or
reciprocal trade, tariff equalization, or peace compact have any effect in
matter? I have impression that Peru would agree immediately to
neutralization of Tacna-Arica, or even to Chile’s retention Arica Province
provided that Arica city itself were neutralized; or as possible alternative,
that Arica city be included in corridor to Bolivia, and that Tacna Province
be returned to Peru. I am not aware, of course, what would be the attitude of
Chile to either of these propositions. On the general question of whether or
not President wishes a speedy and practical termination of question, he has
already said that he does and I surmise that he would say so again. The
difficulty seems to lie in finding the practical and definite terms.
 
Also I should like to have your consideration and advice of effect of
pressing question of Tacna-Arica again at this moment when question of
ratification of boundary treaty with Colombia37 is at critical stage of
consideration by Congress and President. I am informed that the latter is

bringing strong influence to bear to have treaty ratified and that some
members of the Congress have, accordingly, changed their positions. A
favorable report upon the treaty is now being prepared by the Joint
Committee on Foreign Relations. Within about a month a vote may be
reached, I believe, on this matter, and the question arises in my mind on
advisability of centering our purpose on the Government for ratification of
this treaty, at least until present session of Congress has been given fair
opportunity to act upon it. If favorable action is taken on this Peruvian-
Colombian boundary treaty, the effect would be, probably, to create a more
favorable tendency towards settlement with Chile. On other hand, if
Congress should either fail to act or should act adversely on treaty we
would be in a position to insist more vigorously on a settlement with Chile,
in view of connection the United States has with the matter and of the many
assurances Peru has given.
I am submitting these observations merely for your consideration. If you
prefer that I confer at once with President on Tacna-Arica matter, as
instructed, please cable me.
POINDEXTER
37 See pp. 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367] ff.

723.2515/2654: Telegram
[Document 344]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 13, 1926—4 p.m.
74. Your No. 86, October 11, 11 a.m. All points set forth in your telegram
have been most carefully considered. Even though importance is realized of
situation touching ratification of Peruvian-Colombian boundary treaty
which this Government is most anxious to see Peru ratify, Department feels
that delay just now in the Tacna-Arica negotiations would be very
detrimental. I feel that I must ask you to take up with President Leguía, as
soon as possible, matter contained in my No. 72, October 8, 6 p.m. I am
relying upon your utmost tact and discretion, looking toward avoiding any
complications over ratification of Peruvian-Colombian boundary treaty.
Referring to your request for information on terms proposed to Ellis, it must
be pointed out that no definite proposal has been made either to Cruchaga
or to Velarde or to their respective legal advisers. In the conversations I
have had with both parties, certain very general plans have been advanced,
and I have asked Ellis confidentially to obtain President Leguía’s views or
possible suggestions regarding a very tentative plan which is as follows:
Give Department of Tacna to Peru, together with city of Tacna
and all territory to a line drawn . . . . . kilometers to north and
west of railroad.
Give Department of Arica to Chile, together with city of Arica
from point drawn . . . . . kilometers south and east of railroad; a
corridor . . . . . kilometers wide including Arica-La Paz railroad
from Bolivian frontier to point on seacoast about 3 kilometers
north of city of Arica to be given Bolivia; the Arica-La Paz
railroad to be made over into a limited liability company, the

shares to be owned by Chile and Bolivia, Peru to purchase from
each a certain number of shares should she desire to do so; the
railroad to be managed by a foreign corporation which will have
control of stock either by purchase or by agreement; Bolivia,
Chile, and Peru to be given a free port and terminal facilities; no
one of the three countries to enjoy any discrimination in rates or
tariffs of the railroad; the same three countries to enter into a
customs agreement; Chile to lease the terminal facilities and
docks to the railroad company; Chile also to lease to Bolivia a
strip of territory in city of Arica on outskirts of city along the
water front, after manner of Fiume plan, this strip of territory to
run from a point on the water front at end of street known as Dos
de Mayo and extending one block east on same street, thence
continuing north and east along and including the Arica-La Paz
railroad tracks to southern boundary of so-called Bolivian
corridor north of the Chinchorro railroad shops, the railway yards,
buildings and stations in Arica, and right to use the new railway
wharf. By these means Bolivia would have for her own use joined
to the corridor a strip of territory on the waterfront of the city
whereon she could erect customhouses and other public buildings
she might wish to build. The entire territory would be
demilitarized and Bolivia, Chile, and Peru would withdraw their
military forces to a point to be agreed upon behind their
respective frontiers. There would be an agreement protecting the
water rights of the three countries. An international monument to
commemorate the establishment between the three countries
would be erected on the Morro; and Chile and Peru would enter
into general treaties of friendship and commerce.
Whether or not Chile would accept such a plan as has been outlined above
it is impossible to say, but I have been induced to think by indications from
the Chilean representatives in Washington that they might recommend it to
their Government. I did not, of course, advise either Ambassador Velarde or
Mr. Ellis that I had had any indications in this connection from the
Chileans. The idea of “neutralization,” by which is meant creation of new
and independent self-governing state, seems to be meeting with
considerable opposition in Chile at present; there are also certain practical

objections to it, for example, form of government, revenues, and meeting of
Bolivian aspirations, as meeting of Bolivian aspirations by splitting the new
state through grant of corridor to Bolivia seems impossible.
If you have any suggestions to make in this connection I should be glad to
receive them, as well as any suggestions you may have to make on possible
sale by Chile and Peru under joint agreement of all their rights in the
disputed territory to Bolivia, also your ideas of compensation Bolivia
should accord for the territory and outlet to seacoast. In stating your opinion
on these two matters I particularly do not wish you to discuss them with
anyone at the present time. I feel that you should be in a position to reflect
the general opinion of President and the country without further inquiries or
study being necessary.
KELLOGG

723.2515/2661: Telegram
[Document 345]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, October 16, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received October 17—5:42 p.m.38 ]
87. [Paraphrase.] Your telegrams Nos. 72, October 8, 6 p.m., and 74,
October 13, 4 p.m. I have talked personally and intimately with President
Leguía and have explained the vital importance of a settlement of the
Tacna-Arica question to all American countries, especially to Peru and
Chile. I asked him if he could not, speaking frankly and personally, suggest
some practical way out. The President agreed with me on importance of a
settlement and said that he thought it could be brought about. The difficulty,
he said, was the disposition of the city of Arica; that this involved a matter
of sentiment for Peru and that cession of the city to Chile would create
sharp and dangerous situation in Peru. He did not say, but I think he feels,
that cession of Arica City would lead to overthrow of his Government and
that the state of chaos which would then ensue in Peru would entail loss of
what has been gained during his administration for the economic
development and the material progress of his country.
The President said that he felt that Peru would be willing to accept
neutralization, or nationalization, of the provinces immediately, whatever it
might be called. During our conversation he asked me what I understood by
“internationalization.” I said that it might be interpreted in more than one
way but that I should use the word to mean the establishment of an
independent government for the provinces under the joint protection, either
express or implied, of all the other republics of South America. I said that
some question had been raised about the expenses of such a government as
had been sketched, and also about danger of other countries secretly
influencing or manipulating the provinces. The President replied that he
was unable to see how there would be opportunity for influence of that
nature to be exerted if the provinces were demilitarized. He said that once
the present military control were lifted, the provinces would then assert

themselves and that under influence of South American public good will
there would be no difficulty about the government’s local administration.
The government’s local expenses, he said, would be small; they could be
met, in part, no doubt, by the payment of some revenue by Bolivia as an
exchange for certain port facilities, and the local expenses would be
adequately taken care of by the regular port dues, which would be greatly
increased under independent administration.
The President stated that when the provinces were freed Tacna Province
would again become agriculturally productive, as it had been formerly, and
that its products would find a ready market. This production had decreased
greatly under present regime but would reappear once the provinces were
independent. I myself perceive no insurmountable difficulties in way of
such internationalization; in some respects it would be happiest solution. I
explained to President, however, that no matter how attractive such a
program might be, practical difficulties existed which might be
insurmountable in view of Chile’s refusal to accept that sort of plan.
President Leguía intimated that he was willing to enter into a compact of
peace, of demilitarization of the provinces, and trade or tariff reciprocity,
but from way he spoke of that feature of the matter it did not seem as
though he regarded it as of paramount importance. He suggested that an
international memorial should be made of the Morro, and he repeated that,
in spite of his earnest desire to see question settled, it would not be possible
to obtain consent of Peruvian people to assignment of city of Arica to Chile.
[End paraphrase.]
I urged the President, in view of the paramount importance of the matter
and of his profound knowledge of the situation, to give it his most earnest
attention and give me the benefit of any suggestions which might occur to
him as a basis of a practical settlement. He said that he would most gladly
do so at once and after thinking it over for a few days would call me to talk
it over with him again and added that he thought that we might work out
some settlement of the problem.
[Paraphrase.] In reply to your inquiry about amount Bolivia ought to pay for
a free port at Arica and possession of, or at least use of, a railroad corridor
to the Pacific, that is matter which necessarily must be subject to more or

less arbitrary assessment. The fact that Bolivia is completely hemmed in,
the vital advantage to her of access to the coast and the paramount interest
that Bolivia feels in obtaining that access, I feel she should pay not less than
$15,000,000 gold, this amount to be acquired by a loan with terms of
interest and amortization which would make it financially possible. The
distribution of the immediate proceeds would be made to Chile and Peru by
you in such way as to promote settlement of the problem most effectively.
One essential feature in effecting a settlement is to get in touch with
someone who can speak with final authority for Chile as President Leguía
speaks for Peru. If direct and preferably personal communication could be
had with such a representative of Chile, and also of Bolivia, arrangement
could possibly be made. If properly presented, the advantages to Chile of a
commercial compact with Peru might be very persuasive.
President Leguía said that it appears as if some features of Tacna-Arica
question had been overlooked, and added that railroad from Arica to La Paz
passes through Tarata which has already been allotted to Peru by the
Arbitrator. [End paraphrase.]
POINDEXTER
38 Telegram in two sections.

723.2515/2678½
[Document 346]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs (Stabler)
[WASHINGTON,] October 19, 1926.
Mr. Charles Evans Hughes made the following suggestions to the Secretary
of State, Mr. Olds and Mr. Stabler this morning in regard to a tentative plan
for drafting a proposal to Chile and Peru for the sale of the provinces of
Tacna and Arica to Bolivia:
1. That the Republic of Peru and the Republic of Chile
simultaneously cede all rights which they claim to the ownership
of the provinces of Tacna and Arica in perpetuity to Bolivia for
such, compensation as shall be determined later which shall be
paid by the Republic of Bolivia to the Republic of Peru and the
Republic of Chile.
2. That the Republics of Chile, Peru and Bolivia agree to
determine the sum which shall be paid to Chile and Peru by
Bolivia for the cession of their rights to the above-mentioned
territory and the Secretary of State to offer his good offices to the
three countries to aid them in determining the amounts to be paid.
3. Should the three countries not be able to reach an agreement as
to the amount of money to be paid by Bolivia for the territory
they hereby agree to leave the determination of the amount to the
Secretary of State of the United States, his decision to be binding
and final.
4. Chile and Peru shall agree to reach a settlement between
themselves as to the apportionment of the funds paid by Bolivia
for the provinces.

5. The Secretary of State hereby undertakes to offer his good
offices to assist Chile and Peru in the division of the sum paid for
the provinces should the Departments of Chile and Peru not be
able to arrive at a settlement.
STABLER

723.2515/2689
[Document 347]
The Peruvian Embassy to the Department of State
[Translation]
MEMORANDUM
Since the initiation of the good offices for the settlement of the Tacna-Arica
question, the Government of Peru has endeavored to cooperate towards the
realization of the friendly purposes of the Government of the United States,
expressing its willingness to make all sacrifices compatible with the
interests in dispute, including that of the legal advantage created by the
conduct of Chile in frustrating the plebiscite as admitted in the opinion of
the American advisers to the Plebiscitary Commission.
The present aspirations of Peru, reduced to a minimum in deference to the
American Government, are not less than the recovery of the two principal
cities in the plebiscitary territory, this being the only way of freeing
Peruvians from the oppression of which they are victims under Chilean
authorities, and of permitting those Peruvians who have been expelled to
return to their abandoned homes, and to recover their property confiscated
for no reason except that they were Peruvians. The aspiration of Peru thus
restricted gives evidence of a willingness to effectively support the desire of
the American Government to reach without delay a satisfactory agreement,
and to facilitate in a definite way the solution of the question.
That the city of Tacna and the port of Arica are the principal centers of
Peruvian population is a fact already recognized in the information gathered
by the American delegation, and the argument that at the present time there
are in the port of Arica a greater number of Chilean inhabitants cannot
avail, for the reason that most of the Peruvians have been expelled and are
now scattered in different provinces of Peru in greater number than the
population imported by Chile. If Arica is not returned to Peru the country to
which it may be transferred on receiving a city whose greatest majority is

Peruvian, with patriotic sentiments deeply rooted, would find itself
confronted from the beginning with the problem of irredentism in its new
sovereignty and a situation similar to the one now existing.
This moderation on the part of Peru concerning the revindication of her
territorial rights, in view of the responsibility of Chile for the failure of the
plebiscite, is a circumstance that the American Government should not
disregard, particularly since the sacrifices to which Peru consents permit the
aspirations of the two other countries, which now appear to be involved, to
be satisfied. In reality, even if Peru recovers the city, port and “morro” of
Arica, Bolivia and Chile could enjoy the same situation and advantages
they would have if either of them should acquire Arica, for the question
would be simply one of locating the port on a very good bay existing but six
miles south of Arica, which answers all requirements for a commercial port,
and establishing there the terminal of the Arica-La Paz railway. Under such
conditions Bolivia would have her independent outlet to the sea, and Chile
would continue to enjoy the advantages foreseen in the construction of the
Arica-La Paz railway, as well as the mineral wealth contained in the portion
of the province of Arica retained, which wealth in itself alone is worth
much more than all the rest of the plebiscitary territory.
It would appear that the realization of all aspirations being facilitated in this
way by Peru, no serious objection can be found to the restitution of Arica,
especially when the fact is considered that all this adjustment rests upon a
distribution of Peruvian territory.
It must also be kept in mind that the mere return of the province of Tacna to
Peru has been on many occasions, and even recently, a voluntary offer of
Chile, and this when the moral result of Chile’s responsibility for the non-
fulfillment of the award of President Coolidge was not yet a factor in the
situation. The Government of the United States, being well acquainted with
all the facts, and knowing the full magnitude of Chile’s culpability in the
present status, cannot, in right or justice, now propose to Peru as her only
reparation and vindication, the same settlement which Chile has already
offered with her own interest and aggrandizement in view, and at a time
when Chile had not yet been confronted with the overwhelming accusations

which General Pershing and General Lassiter, as presidents of the
Plebiscitary Commission, were forced to present against her.
The city, port and “morro” of Arica together with the province of Tacna,
constitute 
an 
inseparable 
entity, 
geographically, 
politically 
and
commercially. Between Tacna and Arica there is no natural barrier which
could serve as a boundary; the frontier line would be completely open,
giving rise to dangerous complications and making impossible the pursuit
and capture of malefactors and the repression of smuggling. Furthermore,
the province of Tacna, deprived of its only natural and long-existing access
to the sea, would become a land-locked province, and not only would Tacna
suffer such irreparable damage but also Tarata, whose complete return to
Peru was ordered by President Coolidge in his award, which up to the
present time has been only in part carried out. Thus, in order to rescue
Bolivia from the isolation in which she was placed by Chile, there would be
presented the spectacle of righting the wrong at the expense of a victim
which also suffered the abuse of mutilation; and decreeing furthermore that
the territories recovered by Peru should remain forever cut off from the
world, their commerce blocked and the inhabitants of Arica (expelled
because their patriotic sentiments could not be suppressed) forced to suffer
indefinitely, if they returned to their homes under the control of authorities
who would make them feel the oppression of conquest.
The solution which should be given to this problem, although inspired by
reasons of equity, must not fail to be founded in justice, for only thus can
the solution have a respectable and permanent character. Anything else will
only inflame, rather than extinguish, the animosities which Chile’s conduct
has provoked. It would be a grave mistake to assume that the mere division
in more or less equal portions of territory could be a satisfactory settlement.
This can only be reached by bearing always in mind certain considerations
which no statesman can safely overlook, because nothing brings more
serious consequences than the sacrifice of inhabitants to the principle of
mere compensation in territory, and the disregard of the feelings of a
population, as here, clearly expressed against Chilean domination.
The Government of Peru make this final statement: she desires, in all
sincerity, to settle this controversy, and will cooperate in every way possible

to that end. There is only one reservation upon which she must unalterably
insist: she cannot accept, or consider, any proposal which would give to
another power the city, port and “morro” of Arica. Any other solution Peru
is ready to consider.
WASHINGTON , November 3, 1926.

723.2515/2682½
[Document 348]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Latin American
Affairs (Stabler)
[WASHINGTON,] November 4, 1926.
The Peruvian Ambassador accompanied by Mr. Wade Ellis and the
Secretary of the Embassy, Mr. Prada, called on the Secretary of State by
appointment today. The Assistant Secretary of State Olds and Mr. Stabler
were also present. The Ambassador stated that he had come to see the
Secretary, pursuant to instructions from his Government, to present to him a
memorandum39 which was a statement of the position of Peru with respect
to the suggestions, which had been conveyed by the Secretary of State,
regarding a possible proposal for a settlement of the Tacna-Arica question,
to Mr. Ellis, the Peruvian Counsel, and to the Ambassador himself. The
Ambassador further stated that he had been instructed to say to the
Secretary of State that the Peruvian Government made the following
suggestion for a settlement of the controversy:
The territory north of a line running from the Cerro de Parinacota
to the head of the Azapa Valley and extending along the southern
border of the Azapa Valley to a point on the seacoast south of the
city of Arica to go to Peru; a corridor to be given to Bolivia south
of this line and which might be connected by a spur to the Arica-
La Paz Railroad. All the territory south of this territory to be
given to Chile.
The Ambassador explained that Peru desired to give Bolivia a corridor but
that the city of Arica, the port and the Morro must remain in Peruvian
hands.
The Secretary of State then read aloud the English translation of the
memorandum presented by the Ambassador and called attention to the first
paragraph in which reference is made to the Legal Advisers to the American

delegation to the Plebiscitary Commission and stated that he did not know
of any such opinion expressed by them and if such opinion was expressed it
was not that of the Arbitrator or of the United States he was sure. The
Secretary then stated that he understood the memorandum to be a definite
setting forth of the fact that Peru would make no practical suggestion for the
settlement of the matter and insisted upon having possession of both the
towns of Tacna and Arica. He said that if this were the case it would seem
useless to carry on further conversations with the Peruvian Ambassador;
that he felt that it would be necessary for him to make a proposal of his own
which could be taken or rejected by the two Governments as they saw fit;
that it appeared impossible to reach any solution of the matter if the
Peruvian Government was not willing to look at the matter from common
sense and a practical standpoint. The Secretary further said that it was the
first intimation which had been made that Peru insisted on Arica being
turned over to Peru alone. The Ambassador then tried to point out that he
meant to convey this same idea in his conversation with Mr. Stabler on
September 4.40 After this discussion as to the general tenor of the
memorandum presented by the Ambassador in which Mr. Ellis interjected
several remarks, apparently in the desire to better his client’s position
before the Secretary, the Secretary stated that the preliminary verbal
statement of the Ambassador suggesting a line to the south of the Azapa
Valley as a southern boundary of the Peruvian part of the province was
entirely out of the question and was nothing but a slight modification of
Peru’s original proposal for a line and a port to Bolivia at Vitor and that it
could not be considered at all. The Ambassador stated that as the Secretary
had indicated that suggestions from Peru would be in order he had now
complied with his instructions and had presented the suggestions which his
Government desired to make. The Secretary reiterated his statement that he
now felt that it would be necessary for him to make a definite proposal and
that he was considering doing this.
STABLER
39 Supra.
40 N. B. The Peruvian Ambassador stated to Mr. Stabler, Sept. 4, 1926, that
Peru would be glad to consider any proposal the Secretary of State might

wish to make. J. H. S. [Marginal note on original. ]

723.2515/2690
[Document 349]
The Peruvian Embassy to the Department of State
[Translation]
MEMORANDUM
With reference to the Memorandum of November 3, and in confirmation
and in addition to the statements made by the Peruvian Ambassador to the
Secretary of State during the conference of the 4th instant, the Government
of Peru desires to make clear that her declaration that she cannot accept nor
consider any proposal which would give to another power the city, port and
“morro” of Arica, does not exclude the possibility of a settlement
contemplating the concession to Bolivia of a corridor to the sea in the
disputed territory; does not modify her acceptance of the proposal of total
neutralization of the territory made by the Secretary of State, nor change the
readiness of the Peruvian Government to consider any other solution not
inconsistent with the afore-mentioned reservation contained in the
Memorandum of November 3, respecting the city, port and “morro” of
Arica.
WASHINGTON , November 6, 1926.

723.2515/2713a: Telegram
[Document 350]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)41
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, November 30, 1926—1 a.m.
84. Immediately upon receipt of this message you are directed to deliver
textually to President of Peru and to Minister for Foreign Affairs the
memorandum quoted below. You will state at the same time that I am
handing copies of it to the Chilean Ambassador and to the Peruvian
Ambassador at this capital on or about noon, November 30, Tuesday. You
will further state that the memorandum, as I shall inform the Chilean and
the Peruvian Ambassadors here, is being brought to the attention of all
South American Governments for their information as its subject is
obviously of continental importance.42 You will also say that it will be
released to the press for the morning papers of Thursday, December 2, in
order to avoid public misunderstanding of the nature of the proposal and to
guard against its being prejudiced by the publication of vague or incorrect
rumors in regard to its actual tenor.
“Memorandum43
The Tacna-Arica controversy has engaged my closest attention
ever since I assumed the duties of Secretary of State. All of my
predecessors in this office during the past 40 years have followed
with the deepest interest the varying phases of the problem, and
several Secretaries, particularly my immediate predecessor, Mr.
Hughes, have been intimately concerned, as I have been, with the
task of contributing, if possible, to its solution. It is, I know, fully
appreciated, not only by the parties themselves but by the world
at large, that the Government of the “United States never has had,
nor can have, any motive or interest in relation to the matter other

than that of a friendly adviser to both parties, anxious to do what
it can to enable them to escape from the unfortunate situation in
which they find themselves. This spirit, combined with an abiding
faith in the sincerity of the contestants, has guided every step
taken by my Government. I have at all times endeavored
conscientiously to observe the strictest neutrality, and have, I
think, been able to arrive at a sympathetic appreciation of the
respective points of view which have been presented.
In the present state of the controversy I am persuaded that it may
be helpful to the parties if I outline candidly certain observations
and conclusions which I have formed as the result of my
experience with the matter during the past year and a half.
1. The numerous efforts which have been made since the Treaty
of Ancon to effect a solution within the scope and intent of the
treaty itself, whether by direct negotiations between Chile and
Peru, or as contemplated by arbitration and plebiscite, have been
thus far unproductive.
2. The recent negotiations for settlement outside the treaty with
the aid of the good offices of the United States have
unquestionably served to explore the possibilities of adjustment,
and define the positions of the principals. Representatives of the
two Governments have explained their respective attitudes to me
with the utmost frankness, and I am convinced that there is a
sincere desire on both sides to arrive at a final and constructive
adjustment.
3. We are obviously dealing with a question which turns upon a
point of national honor. Now national honor is a very real thing,
and in this particular case, it is perfectly clear that national
susceptibilities in this regard are peculiarly sensitive in both
countries and must be fully protected. I see no reason why this
cannot be done. It is my conviction that this problem should be,
and can be, definitively solved without the slightest sacrifice of
national honor and dignity, or injury to national susceptibilities on
either side. On the contrary, nothing could possibly redound so

much to the honor and dignity of Chile and Peru as a high-minded
settlement of this controversy, so as to permit them to stand
before the world as friends unembarrassed by any serious
differences between them.
4. I have studied with the greatest care the various types of
solutions which have been advanced throughout the negotiations,
and I have patiently listened to the views which have been so
freely expressed by the representatives of the contending powers.
Leaving out of consideration the attempt to carry out the
unfulfilled provisions of the Treaty of Ancon, it would appear that
from the nature of the case there are but three ways to deal with
the disputed territory: You can assign it all to one of the
contestants; you can divide it between them on some basis to be
defined; or you can effect some arrangement whereby neither
contestant shall get any of the territory. These three general types
comprise an exclusive classification of the logically possible
ways to dispose of the res. I think it may fairly be said that the
first of them, namely, delivery of the disputed territory in its
entirety to one or the other of the parties, has virtually ceased to
be regarded as a practical solution by anybody who really hopes
for a permanent settlement.
The second method, that of division has also seemed to me to
recede further and further into the background. The parties have
not been able to find any formula or basis, either of straight
division, or of division coupled with a “corridor” feature or a
“free city” device, which is acceptable to both of them. The
prospect of success by following this path is not encouraging.
Apparently no scheme of division, however ingeniously worked
out, has yet been able to overcome the stubborn fact that neither
of the Governments considers that it can afford to make an
adjustment which involves making substantial concessions to the
other. The essential elements of compromise in the true meaning
of the term are lacking. We may as well face the issue squarely,
and recognize that division of this territory between Chile and
Peru on any basis of agreement presents almost insuperable

difficulties so long as each applies to every arrangement
suggested the test of whether it may conceivably enable the other
to claim a moral victory. I am not criticizing this attitude; I only
state it as a fact which militates powerfully against a territorial
compromise.
There remains the possibility of some arrangement by which
neither contestant shall face the possibility of giving up anything
to the other. Manifestly a solution of that character would possess
the distinct advantage of eliminating all apprehensions arising
from a comparison of relative territorial benefits secured. It would
involve a joint, as distinguished from a mutual sacrifice, and
would rest fundamentally upon the realization that m all the
circumstances neither country can expect to receive any
substantial part of this long disputed area, and at the same time
enjoy the security and satisfaction accruing from a complete
adjustment which they themselves, as well as the rest of the
world, could regard as permanent. Concerning myself with the
practical aspects of the problem, and conceiving it to be my duty
to find, if I can, a plan which both Governments can afford to
accept in the names of the peoples to whom they are responsible,
I have come to regard this third method as one meeting the more
vital conditions, and offering decided advantages from the point
of view of permanent peace. I am moved to this conclusion
principally because such a formula does not call for a moral
surrender, or anything that can be so construed, by one country to
the other.
5. In the course of the negotiations I have suggested for
consideration, in one form or another, all three of these logically
possible types of solution. On no one of them have the ideas of
Chile 
and 
Peru 
converged. 
I 
have 
suggested 
various
combinations, such as division of territory with the “corridor”
feature and the “free city” device annexed. Interesting discussions
of details as to boundaries, etc. have ensued, but these discussions
have led to no conclusion. I have also suggested the neutralization

of the territory but this has not been received with favor by both
parties.
To recapitulate: The proceedings under Article 3 of the Treaty of
Ancon have not been successful. The parties have not agreed
upon any division of the territory upon any basis whatever. They
have not agreed to neutralization of the whole or of any part of
the territory. No suggestion which has been put forward has
proved acceptable to both Chile and Peru. What remains?
Notwithstanding the fact that an agreement has thus far not been
obtained, and in the light of all that has taken place, I feel bound
to consider what step it may lie in my power now to take, in the
pursuit of a friendly and disinterested effort to assist the parties;
and after mature reflection I have decided to outline and place
before the two Governments a plan which, in my judgment, is
worthy of their earnest attention. I venture to express the sincere
hope that they will adopt it. This plan calls for the cooperation of
a third power, Bolivia, which has not yet appeared in any of the
negotiations, at least so far as my Government is concerned.
While the attitude of Bolivia has not been ascertained, save that
her aspiration to secure access to the Pacific is common
knowledge, it seems reasonable to assume that Bolivia, by virtue
of her geographical situation, is the one outside power which
would be primarily interested in acquiring, by purchase or
otherwise, the subject matter of the pending controversy. With
this preface let me now define the concrete suggestion which I
have in mind:
a. The Republics of Chile and Peru, either by joint or by
several instruments freely and voluntarily executed, to
cede to the Republic of Bolivia, in perpetuity, all right,
title and interest which either may have in the Provinces
of Tacna and Arica; the cession to be made subject to
appropriate 
guaranties 
for 
the 
protection 
and
preservation, without discrimination, of the personal

and property rights of all of the inhabitants of the
provinces of whatever nationality.
b. As an integral part of the transaction provision to be
made for adequate compensation to be given by the
Republic of Bolivia for said cession, including public
works, railways and improvements in the territory
transferred, and taking into account the present value of
all such public works, railways and improvements made
by both Chile and Peru during the periods when they
have respectively been in control and occupation of the
territory; such compensation to be determined in direct
negotiations participated in by Chile, Peru and Bolivia;
it being understood that the Secretary of State will place
at the disposal of the three Governments his good
offices, if they are required either to promote an
agreement, or to fix the character and amount of
compensation in case it should prove impracticable to
determine the same in the tri-partite negotiation.
c. Chile and Peru to agree in direct negotiation upon the
equitable apportionment between them of any cash
compensation which may be provided for; it being here
also understood that the Secretary of State will place at
their disposal his good offices, if required to assist them
in making the apportionment, and that he will himself
undertake to apportion the compensation if asked to do
so by both Chile and Peru.
d. The promontory known as the Morro of Arica, with
boundaries appropriately defined, to be reserved from
the transfer to Bolivia, and to be placed under the
control and jurisdiction of an international commission
which shall be charged with maintaining it as an
international memorial to the valor of both Chile and
Peru, with the suggestion that there be erected on the

Morro a lighthouse, or monument, to commemorate the
friendly settlement of the Tacna-Arica question.
e. Simultaneously with the completion of the foregoing
arrangement, or as soon thereafter as may be
practicable, suitable treaties of friendship to be entered
into between Chile and Peru covering the resumption of
diplomatic 
and 
consular 
relations, 
commerce,
navigation, and all other matters necessary to
reestablish normal and friendly intercourse between the
two countries.
f. The territory now comprised in the Provinces of
Tacna and Arica44 to be, by agreement between Peru,
Chile and Bolivia, perpetually demilitarized in the
fullest sense of that term.
g. The City of Arica by appropriate agreement among
the three powers to be made forever a free port, and
adequate provision to be made insuring that no
discriminatory rates or charges, as among the three
countries, Chile, Peru, and Bolivia, shall be made with
respect to the port, or to the railroad, or to any other
means of communication within the said territory now
comprising the Provinces of Tacna and Arica.
6. In submitting this plan I have not undertaken to do more than
sketch its broad outlines. The details should, in my judgment,
present no serious difficulties. The main advantages which this
type of solution has over others which have been considered need
little emphasis.
a. It furnishes a substitute for the unfulfilled provisions
of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon, and thus forever
disposes of the controversy which has existed ever
since that treaty was signed.

b. It is a clean, simple solution free from obvious
complicating factors attendant upon other plans.
c. It is comprehensive and definitive, leaving no room
whatever for claims and disputes, and maneuvers for
revision of territorial dispositions.
d. It can injure no national susceptibilities, either
Chilean or Peruvian. Neither country makes any
concession to the other and the moral positions of both,
so far as the original controversy is concerned, are left
intact.
e. It takes into account the continental interest in the
controversy and embodies a settlement which South
America as a whole could welcome as one insuring
permanent peace and stability.
Frank B. Kellogg
Secretary of State.
Washington, November 30, 1926.”
You are also instructed to cable the Department immediately the hour of
memorandum’s delivery and a full account of your interview.
KELLOGG
41 Similar telegram sent to Chile Nov. 30, 1 a.m., as Department’s No. 158.
42 Circular telegram, Nov. 30, 11 a.m.; not printed.
43 Text of memorandum not paraphrased.
44 The Chilean Province of Tacna comprised the former Peruvian Provinces
of Tacna and Arica. The Province of Tacna was divided into the
Departments of Tacna and Arica.

723.2515/2715: Telegram
[Document 351]
The Chargé in Chile (Engert) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
SANTIAGO, November 30, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received 7:20 p.m.]
338. When I presented your memorandum45 to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs,46 he and the Under Secretary, who was present, requested me to
translate it roughly as I read it, both gentlemen being unfamiliar with
English. They were visibly impressed by the complete sincerity of your
observations and your tactful and sympathetic understanding of national
susceptibilities; above all they were impressed by your lucid and practical
suggestions for a solution. On these points they were enthusiastic, and the
Minister requested me to convey to you his heartfelt thanks for the generous
and unselfish interest which you have taken in this problem. Señor Matte
added that although the United States was reputed to be a land of business
and money, he knew, what your memorandum confirmed, that our people
were also a people of high ideals.
The memorandum will be submitted to the President as soon as the Foreign
Office has finished translating it, probably this afternoon.
From purely informal remarks made to me by the Minister and the Under
Secretary this morning I surmise that they personally favor some such
solution as you have suggested, and that they have hopes of seeing it
become effective.
ENGERT
45 See telegram No. 84, Nov. 30, 1 a.m., to the Ambassador in Peru, supra.

48 Jorge Matte, who had succeeded Mr. Huneeus as Chilean Minister for
Foreign Affairs.

723.2515/2716: Telegram
[Document 352]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LIMA, November 30, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 6:00 p.m.]
100. Department’s telegram 84, November 30, 1 a.m. Your memorandum
was delivered to the Minister for Foreign Affairs at 12:55 this afternoon and
to President Leguía at 1:10, accompanied by statement in accordance with
your instructions. The Minister thanked me for the memorandum and for
the delivery of separate copies to him and to the President; he stated that he
would give it his careful consideration.
President Leguía made no comment except to ask if it were proposition for
settlement. I said yes, and added that I preferred that he get his first
impression of it by reading the memorandum. He said he would, and
nothing more was said.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
POINDEXTER

723.2515/2741: Telegram
[Document 353]
The Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell) to the Secretary of State
LA PAZ, December 3, 1926—8 a.m.
[Received 1:40 p.m.]
78. Referring to my No. 74,47 I transmit herewith translation of reply
received this afternoon [sic] from the Minister for Foreign Affairs to my
note transmitting memorandum of the Secretary of State as to Tacna and
Arica and also in reply to the proposal embodied in such memorandum, as
follows:48
“La Paz, December 2[, 1926]. Mr. Minister: I have the honor to
acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s note of yesterday
together with which and in compliance with instructions of your
Government, you have delivered to me the memorandum of the
Secretary of State of the United States relative to the problem of
Tacna and Arica. You have informed me that other copies of the
same memorandum were delivered yesterday likewise to the
Governments of Chile in Santiago and of Peru in Lima. [Other
copies were delivered the day before to the Ambassadors of Chile
and Peru in Washington.]
Your Excellency is good enough to say that the memorandum has
been sent to this Government in order that it may be informed of
the proceedings adopted by the Department of State in
Washington with a view [to] arriving at a solution of the problem
of Tacna-Arica that it may be fully and definitely determined
without injuring or offending the susceptibilities and pride of
neither Chile nor Peru. The indicated solution of said problem,
that of the transfer of Tacna-Arica to Bolivia by virtue of
compensation which this country would recognize for the
improvements and public works made by the Governments of
Peru and Chile during the time that they have had [the] said

territories under their Governments, embodies a formula which
harmonizes all interests and all legitimate claims. In accord with
and being duly authorized by His Excellency the President of the
Republic I have the honor to manifest to Your Excellency that
Bolivia accepts fully the form of solution proposed by the
Government of the United States and will [pledge her every
effort] to arrive at an agreement, under the conditions of said
transfer, with the Governments of Chile and Peru by means of the
good offices of the Government of the United States.
The Government of Bolivia [experiences] a high feeling of
satisfaction and Americanism in contributing in this manner to the
solution of a problem that has had no other means of settlement
and which in each instance has placed international peace in
danger. The Government feels equally pleased to see that its
repeated appeals to international justice and equity have been
heard and have assumed a form of satisfaction without injuring
the fundamental interests of Chile and Peru nor giving either
country the advantage of a victory or the disappointment of a
defeat in the settlement of a matter which had the point of
exciting all the energies and all the pride of the two signatory
nations to the Treaty of Ancon.
The Government of Bolivia, upon assuming the role of a
participant in this solution, wishes to communicate to the
Government of the United States its most profound appreciation
for having satisfied a national aspiration and for having
contributed with such a lofty spirit in offering definite bases for
the peace and the harmony of this continent.
I take advantage of this new opportunity [to] reiterate to Your
Excellency the assurances of my high and distinguished
consideration. A. Gutierrez.”
Minister for Foreign Affairs referring to my statement upon the delivery of
the memorandum of the Secretary of State to him, also sends this Legation
a note in which he says:

“This manifestation of Your Excellency’s Government is greatly
appreciated and contributes to strengthen the feeling of gratitude
of the Government and the Bolivian people for the wise and just
manner as set forth for the solution of that problem.”
COTTRELL
47 Not printed.
48 Translation revised from Spanish text of memorandum in Bolivia Anexos
a la Memoria que presenta el Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores y Culto al
H. Congreso Nacional de 1927, p. 43.

723.2515/2833½
[Document 354]
Memorandum of the Chilean Government49
The Government of Chile has read with keen interest the Memorandum in
which His Excellency, the Secretary of State of the United States of
America, submits to its consideration the general lines of a plan intended to
procure a definitive solution of the controversy regarding Tacna and Arica.
The reflections which the Secretary makes in setting forth the antecedents
which have induced him to favor that formula, move the Chilean
Government to recall, although briefly, the principal historical and
diplomatic phases of the question.
The Secretary of State is aware that we can point with dignity to our
tradition of a century of foreign policy, always characterized by a spirit of
cordial friendship for all of the peoples of America. Never have we failed to
make any sacrifice, however great it might have been, when a principle of
Pan-American solidarity required it for the purpose of safeguarding the
political independence of a nation of this continent.
We do not wish to recall the historic causes which resulted in the break,
which in our opinion the Treaties with Peru, of 1883 and with Bolivia, of
1904, brought to an end, and which loyally reestablished the cordiality and
peace in which, for more than fifty years, we have been living with these
nations.
Only one question remained unsettled at the termination of the War of the
Pacific: the definitive nationality of the territory of Tacna and Arica, which
was to be decided by its inhabitants ten years after the date of the Treaty.
During forty years, in spite of our repeated initiatives to bring about an
agreement fixing the bases to which this popular vote should be subjected,
it was not possible for us to reach a satisfactory result.

In tranquil possession of the territory and sure that time would be our best
ally to consolidate the position we reached in those provinces, to whose
moral and material progress we have devoted our best energy, we
spontaneously renounced that privileged position and went to Washington
to seek a definitive solution for this longstanding question, animated by our
high conception of international confraternity.
The Washington Protocol, entrusted to His Excellency, The President of the
United States, the fixing of the bases of that solution and his Award entirely
upheld the Chilean thesis which defended the principle of the determination
of the sovereignty of the territories through the free will of its inhabitants.
The Plebiscitary proceedings evidenced the enormous electoral majority
that existed there in favor of Chile, consecrating our rights to the definite
annexation of Tacna-Arica to Chilean territory.
If that verdict had been unfavorable to Chile, our Government and people
would have hastened to respect and fulfill it honorably.
In spite of this legitimate expectation, the Government of Chile has not
hesitated to entertain the suggestions of the Department of State looking
forward to the division of the territory, a sacrifice accepted only as a
generous effort in furtherance of peace.
The Secretary of State, who justly appeals to national sentiment of
fundamental importance in this problem, will understand the full extent of
this sacrifice if he considers the work of culture carried out in those
territories by men who there devoted the best years of their lives to permit
them to enjoy all benefits of civilization. Teachers, soldiers, missionaries,
manufacturers, were the tireless workers of this crusade.
The Republic of Bolivia which, twenty years after the termination of the
war spontaneously renounced having a seacoast, demanding as more
suitable for its interests, compensation of a financial nature and means of
communication, has expressed its desire to be considered in the negotiations
which are taking place to determine the nationality of these territories.
Neither in justice nor in equity can justification be found for this demand
which it formulates today as a right.

Nevertheless, the Government of Chile has not failed to take into
consideration this new interest of the Government of Bolivia and has
subordinated its discussion, as was logical, to the outcome of the pending
controversy with the Government of Peru. Furthermore, in the course of the
negotiations conducted during the present year before the State Department
and within the formula of territorial division, the Government of Chile has
not rejected the idea of granting a strip of territory and a port to the Bolivian
nation.
The lofty and inspired proposals which the Government of Chile has
accepted in this particular matter, did not encounter on the part of the
Government of Peru the reception which they deserved, and the question
has remained pending until the present moment.
Our Government remains within the stipulations of the Treaty of Ancon,
thus following its long and uninterrupted tradition of respect for the pledged
word and the faithful and exact fulfillment of international obligations. With
the same thought it has respected the Award of President Coolidge and
believes that the best solution of the problem is the application of the
method indicated in Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon and confirmed by the
decision of the Arbitrator. The definitive possession of the territory as
between Chile and Peru, once determined in conformity with these
provisions, the Chilean Government would honor its declarations in regard
to the consideration of Bolivian aspirations.
 
The proposal of the Department of State goes much farther than the
concessions which the Chilean Government has generously been able to
make. It involves the definitive cession, to the Republic of Bolivia, of the
territory in dispute and although, as the Secretary of State says, this solution
does not wound the dignity of the contending countries and is in harmony
with the desire, repeatedly shown by the Chilean Government to help
satisfy Bolivian aspirations, it is no less true that it signifies a sacrifice of
our rights and the cession of a territory incorporated for forty years in the
Republic by virtue of a solemn Treaty, a situation which cannot be
juridically altered, except by a plebiscite, whose results are not at all
doubtful in the opinion of the Chilean people.

At no time did the Government of Chile abandon this solid juridical
position given it by the Treaty of Ancon and the Arbitral Award and will not
abandon it now. Nevertheless, in deference to the great cause of American
confraternity and being anxious to foster reconciliation among the countries
involved in the War of the Pacific, Chile has always been disposed to listen
to all propositions for settlement which might contribute toward such lofty
aims and at the same time might offer compensation proportionate to the
sacrifice of that part of its legitimate rights which such proposals import.
She now desires to attest, once more, that in discussing such propositions
she does not abandon those rights, but solely has considered the possibility
of sacrificing them freely and voluntarily on the altar of a superior national
or American interest.
In this sense the Chilean Government agrees to consider, in principle, the
proposal, thereby giving a new and eloquent demonstration of its aims of
peace and cordiality.
The Secretary of State justly assigns special importance to the commercial
ties between the interested countries. We understand and share this high
aim, not only in the sense of solving the pending question, but also to
reestablish friendship between the countries separated by the conflict of
1879.
Being of this opinion, we attach primary importance to the previous
conclusion, among the three countries, of Treaties of Commerce, of
Agreement on Customs, Ports and other matters of this character, which
may serve as a solid tie in the present, which will insure harmony in the
future and which will cement the economic union of Bolivia, Peru and
Chile, as a basis for a more ample understanding among all the peoples of
Latin-America, facilitating their trade and furthering the progress of the
continent to the service of mankind.
Consequently, we deem it advisable that the Treaty of Commerce and
Customs Agreements which the Secretary of State suggests be concluded
with Peru must also be extended to the Bolivian Governmerit in accordance
with our constant desire to draw nearer to that nation. This would be for
Chile nothing but the consecration, upon a solid basis, of the intense

commercial current which exists today between Chile and Bolivia and
which it is to the interests of both countries to intensify.
The Chilean Government attributes capital importance to the thoughts
which the Secretary of State set forth in his Memorandum with regard for
the character of perpetual neutrality in which these territories must be
maintained. We, therefore, agree with him that the term demilitarization of
that region must be understood in its widest sense, eliminating absolutely
all possibilities that in it or in its territorial waters there may be maintained
bases of forces of land, air or sea. We must, in this respect, express to the
Secretary of State our opinion with frankness and precision. If we grant a
means of communication to the Pacific intended to develop the economic
life of Bolivia, we have the right to make sure that the sacrifice we are
making in deference to a lofty ideal, will not constitute a future danger to
our external security. As a natural corollary to this idea, it would be
indispensable to stipulate that the territory whose cession is proposed could
not be transferred, in whole or in part, to any of the contracting nations or to
any other power. The acceptance of any other view would be tantamount to
a distortion of the noble motives which inspired the Secretary of State in
formulating his proposal.
In the course of the negotiations to which this proposal may give rise we
shall present in definitive form the observations hereinbefore formulated,
we shall submit all those which may involve our interests and we shall
listen with attention to those which the other interested parties may in their
turn suggest.
The proposals of the Secretary of State and the suggestions which the
parties may formulate we shall consider as an indivisible whole, which
corresponds to the lofty aim of the Government of the United States, fully
shared by the Government of Chile, to solve definitively the question and to
insure peace and confraternity among all nations of America.
JORGE MATTE
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Chile
DECEMBER 4, 1926.

49 Copy in English left at the Department of State by Benjamin Cohen, the
Secretary of the Chilean Embassy, Dec. 5, 1926.

723.2515/2777a: Telegram
[Document 355]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, December 7, 1926—8 p.m.
88. Press report from Lima carries statement that leading newspapers are
abstaining from editorial comment but that high political interests close to
President Leguía are now condemning proposal openly. It has been
approved practically unanimously by press of the United States and of
South America. Bolivia has accepted it unconditionally and Chile has
accepted it in principle. I suggest that you urge President Leguía to accept
the same way, thereby opening the road to a final settlement. We learn by
the same press report that the President of the Chamber of Deputies had
declared that the Lassiter motion50 was still the law ruling in the Tacna-
Arica proceedings; and until the Arbitrator has modified or altered it, must
remain so. The Government of Peru should understand that the Lassiter
motion does not dispose of the problem which we are trying to solve.
KELLOGG
50 Of June 14, 1926, terminating the plebiscitary proceedings in the Tacna-
Arica plebiscite; see telegram June 14, 8 p.m., from the consul at Arica, p.
482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334].

723.2515/2729: Circular telegram
[Document 356]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Jay), the
Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan), and the Minister in Uruguay
(Grant-Smith)
WASHINGTON, December 7, 1926—8 p.m.
I have received from the Bolivian Government a reply, dated December 2,
to my proposal for the settlement of the Tacna-Arica question in which
Bolivia accepts fully the form of solution proposed. I am further in receipt
of a reply from the Chilean Government to my Memorandum above-
mentioned, dated December 4, in which Chile accepts in principle the
proposal. The press in the United States has practically unanimously
supported the proposal and urges acceptance by all parties as means of
settling this long lasting dispute and insuring the peace of South America.
South American press also in general very favorable to proposal and most
papers in countries not parties to dispute urge acceptance.
[Paraphrase.] I have not yet received a reply from Peru, merely a
memorandum on December 351 requesting information on whether the
proposal contains a provision providing for an election whereby will of
inhabitants of the territory will be determined. I have not yet replied to this
memorandum, but I intend to inform the Peruvian Government tomorrow
that I consider the terms of the proposal to be so clear and precise that no
further explanation is necessary.
In view of earnest desire of this Government to see peace and harmony
established in the southern continent, it is felt that the present is an
appropriate moment to inform the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Government to which you are accredited of the facts given above.

From unofficial sources it appears that certain elements in Lima are
condemning the proposal and that belief exists in some quarters that Peru
will reject it. In order to avoid Peru’s rejection, it is felt that immediate
steps should be taken by Governments of Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay to
urge acceptance by Peru before that Government definitely commits itself.
I am relying on you to make clear to Minister for Foreign Affairs of country
to which you are accredited that although I do not feel that I may, with
propriety, urge or request his Government to take any action, any step that it
might see fit to take to bring about Peru’s acceptance in obvious interest of
continental solidarity and of lasting South American peace would be
agreeable to me.
This cable is being sent to the American Embassies in Argentina and Brazil
and the Legation in Uruguay. You are instructed to cable at once the result
of your interview, and to inform us what steps the Government to which
you are accredited will take. [End paraphrase.]
KELLOGG
51 Quoted in memorandum, Dec. 11, to the Peruvian Ambassador, p. 518
[Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360].

723.2515/2782: Telegram
[Document 357]
The Minister in Uruguay (Grant-Smith) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
MONTEVIDEO, December 9, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received 11 a.m.]
68. Last night I learned from the Argentine Minister that the Government of
Uruguay is consulting that of Argentina in regard to representations at
Lima. The Minister is of opinion that representations should not be
independent but either joint or identic; he thought it was doubtful, however,
whether they could be made before Government of Peru had sent its reply
to your proposal. The Minister had communicated with Argentine Foreign
Office yesterday morning by telephone.
Telegram repeated to Embassies Buenos Aires and Rio de Janeiro.
GRANT-SMITH

723.2515/2783: Telegram
[Document 358]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
RIO DE JANEIRO, December 9, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received 11:55 a.m.]
95. Following a conference between President of Brazil and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, I conferred with latter on subject of your circular telegram
of December 7, 8 p.m. The Minister has been informed from Lima that your
memorandum took Peru by surprise and created a sharp political crisis
which must be calmed before favorable reply can be hoped for. No
immediate action on part of Peru is foreseen. At present moment
representations from the leading South American powers would be used for
local political purposes and would not serve to benefit main purpose.
Although Brazil desires to further the common good, her Government will
await further information from Lima should appropriate moment for
representation come.
MORGAN

723.2515/2786: Telegram
[Document 359]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Jay) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
BUENOS AIRES, December 9, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received 11:30 p.m.]
96. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dr. Gallardo, tells me that President
Alvear, in view of fact that Argentine Minister at Montevideo has informed
him that we are also seeking support of Brazil and Uruguay, feels that it
would not be advisable either to telegraph to President of Peru directly or to
instruct diplomatic action through Argentine Legation at Lima, without
consulting the other two powers. He has, therefore, instructed the Minister
for Foreign Affairs to obtain views of Brazilian Government by telegraph.
Mr. Gallardo expects to have a reply from Rio by tomorrow, but he frankly,
though regretfully, expresses the belief that even concerted action will be
too late. He has shown me telegrams he has sent and received, including
one from Lima that had just arrived foretelling probable refusal within 48
hours.
JAY

723.2515/2749
[Document 360]
The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde)
MEMORANDUM
The Secretary of State acknowledges the receipt of the memorandum of His
Excellency, the Peruvian Ambassador, dated December 3, 1926, reading as
follows:
“The Government of Peru, in order to be in a better position to
make a decision and as the necessary clarification of the
memorandum presented by His Excellency, the Secretary of State,
November 30, last, desires to know if, in the opinion of His
Excellency, the proposed transfer of the inhabitants of Tacna-
Arica is to be made without consulting their own wishes and if in
case this consultation is made what forms will be employed in its
execution and what authorities would discharge this duty.”
With full appreciation of the spirit of solicitude for the welfare of the
inhabitants of Tacna and Arica which has prompted this inquiry by the
Government of Peru, and which the Secretary of State cordially shares, he
desires to direct attention to the provisions appearing in paragraph (a) of the
plan of solution outlined by him on November thirtieth last. It will be
observed that this paragraph provides that the Republics of Chile and Peru,
either by joint or by several instruments freely and voluntarily executed,
shall cede to the Republic of Bolivia in perpetuity all right, title and interest
that either may have in the provinces of Tacna and Arica. In making this
proposal the Secretary of State was not unmindful of the propriety of
appropriate guarantees for the protection and preservation of the personal
and property rights of the inhabitants of the provinces of whatever
nationality and, with that in view, the following provision was inserted in
paragraph (a):

“The cession to be made subject to appropriate guarantees for the
protection and preservation, without discrimination, of the
personal and property rights of all the inhabitants of the provinces
of whatever nationality.”
It is the opinion of the Secretary of State that the provision above quoted,
upon acceptance of the Secretary’s proposal by both parties, will secure
every protection to the interests of the inhabitants of the provinces that is
possible in the circumstances of the case. The Secretary of State sincerely
trusts that the foregoing assurance will prove satisfactory to the
Government of Peru, and will facilitate its acceptance of the pending
proposal.
The Secretary of State takes pleasure in transmitting herewith for the
information of His Excellency, the Peruvian Ambassador, copies of the
communications which he has received from the Governments of Chile and
Bolivia.
WASHINGTON , December 11, 1926.

723.2515/2802: Telegram
[Document 361]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Jay) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
BUENOS AIRES, December 15, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received 4:30 p.m.]
98. My No. 96, December 9, 8 p.m. Minister Gallardo informed me that he
communicated to the President, when the latter returned after brief absence
from the city, the Brazilian Government’s reply which expresses the opinion
that intervention at Lima is inopportune at present moment for reasons that
have already been explained to Morgan. Although Argentina does not
contemplate any immediate action, Mr. Gallardo thinks that delay of
Government of Peru in replying to your memorandum is a favorable sign.
JAY

723.2515/2853
[Document 362]
Memorandum of the Peruvian Government52
The Peruvian Government has received and carefully examined with due
consideration the Memorandum which the Honorable Secretary of State of
the United States of America has addressed to it through His Excellency the
American Ambassador, relative to the pending questions between Peru and
Chile in regard with the nonfulfillment of the third clause of the Treaty of
Ancon; a memorandum in which it is proposed as a final solution that the
territories of Tacna and Arica be ceded to the Republic of Bolivia in
perpetuity upon compensations to be agreed upon among the three
countries.
The Peruvian Government appreciates the interest shown by the Honorable
Secretary of State in said memorandum in that a final solution be found for
the Peruvian-Chilean controversy.
Animated of a sincere spirit of peace and with all due respect and
deference, and with no other purpose than that of frankly and loyally
expressing his points of view, the undersigned Minister for Foreign
Relations of Peru desires to express the following ideas: When the
Arbitration was concluded, to which the Protocol and Complementary Act
of July 20th, 192253 refers, submitting the controversy between Peru and
Chile to the cognizance and the arbitration of His Excellency, the President
of the United States of America, the latter was requested to decide whether,
in the present circumstances, the plebiscite referred to in the third clause of
the Treaty of Ancon was or was not practicable; that should he deem it
advisable to declare that the plebiscite could be held, the Arbitrator was
empowered to determine the conditions under which it was to be carried
out; and in the event that the Arbitrator should desire that a plebiscite
should not be held, both parties, in case that they should not come to an
agreement upon the situation created, were to request the good offices of
the Government of the United States of America.

 
In as much as the proposed arbitration did not include any other parties than
Peru and Chile, neither in the Protocol nor in the Complementary Act, was
there, even in contemplation, the intervention of a third power. The
subsequent acceptance of good offices without abandoning the arbitration
could not modify the implied excluding conditions in the act as to the
parties.
How can it then be explained that if the agreements concluded between
Peru and Chile regarding the arbitration did not contemplate the
intervention of a third power in the settlement of the controversy, the latter
should come to an end by the intervention of Bolivia which, according to
the proposed settlement in the Memorandum, would receive the ownership
of the territory of Tacna and Arica.
There is no precedent in International History of any similar case and if
there has ever been any country which has profited by the territories which
constituted the subject of the controversy between others, it was only as the
result of a war or by virtue of the treaties of peace which put an end to the
war.
Juridico-political controversies of the nature of that of Tacna and Arica are
by obvious reasons of law and of morality limited in their scope to the
contending nations. To extend that scope would be to distort the nature of
the controversy with detriment to the parties.
Peru and Chile in compliance with the arbitral award proceeded to carry out
the plebiscite in Tacna and Arica.
It is not necessary to recount here the plebiscitary process with the incidents
attending the same; the fact is that it has not been possible to carry out the
plebiscite, and this is not a mere statement by the Foreign Office of Peru,
but the irreproachable just decision of the Plebiscitary Commission headed
by General Lassiter, supported, besides, by the opinion expressed by
General Pershing and the American legal advisers, Dennis and Kreger.

Therefore, as the plebiscite has not been held by reason of Chile’s attitude
in the matter, it is clear that the third clause of the Treaty of Ancon, which
juridically involved a resolutory condition of the said Treaty, has failed of
its purpose, and as the only limitation there was in respect to the nationality
of Tacna and Arica was contained in the same clause, these territories have
reassumed their status as provinces free from all foreign domination and it
has become manifest with all the force of law and fact, that they continue to
be Peruvian provinces.
How is it possible that having arrived at this juridical conclusion on the part
of Peru and of the United States it should now be claimed that Peru should
cede those territories to Bolivia?
The Honorable Secretary of State declares that the numerous efforts made
since the Treaty of Ancon was concluded have been ineffective to arrive at a
solution within the letter and spirit of the Treaty itself, whether through
negotiations between Chile and Peru or whether, as it has been attempted,
through arbitration and plebiscite; this declaration conclusively shows that
the third clause of the Treaty of Ancon could not have been enforced, and
that said treaty has been obliterated for the purpose of bringing about a
solution, within its letter and its spirit, regarding the pending controversy.
And he further declares that for that reason an attempt has been made to
find a solution through arbitration and plebiscite. This last declaration is
closely related to that made by the Plebiscitary Commission presided over
by General Lassiter in as much as both of them are of a juridical nature and
clearly show that the fulfillment of an arbitration and the execution of a
plebiscite have met, not on the part of Peru, but on the part of Chile, with
the only and positive obstacle presented to its realization.
The Plebiscite having failed, as it has been declared by the aforementioned
report of the Plebiscitary Commission headed by General Lassiter, Peru
continues to contribute the whole contingent of its good will for the purpose
of arriving at a solution of the conflict. Its juridical situation was
unquestionable; it had regained its fullest right to the possession, ownership
and dominion over the territories of Tacna and Arica. As regards the
discussion of good offices Peru was willing however to make sacrifices for
the purpose of arriving at an agreement.

In the memorandum of the Honorable Secretary of State it is stated that he
has to deal with a question which turns upon a point of national honor.
Now, he adds, national honor is a very real thing, and in this particular case,
it is perfectly clear that national susceptibilities in this regard are peculiarly
sensitive in both countries and must be fully protected.
This statement is of importance and we should congratulate ourselves that it
has been inserted in the document on the [under] consideration. Indeed, the
controversy regarding Tacna and Arica is intimately and closely related to
the honor and dignity of Peru. Tacna and Arica were always since colonial
times until the present, an integral part of our territory. These provinces
which constitute a part of the national heart, cannot be transferred to a third
power in times of peace without impairing the national honor, affecting the
dignity of the country and destroying the most cherished expectations of
Peru. It is deserving of praise that the Honorable Secretary of State should
have taken as a point of inspiration in his proposal not to wound the
national honor and dignity of any country. Those good intentions,
unfortunately, would not materialize with the cession of Tacna and Arica to
Bolivia. And if to this is added that the cession is neither gratuitous nor
founded on right, but it is to be placed on the basis of pecuniary
compensations, then it will be necessary to conclude that by that cession the
honor and dignity of Peru would not only suffer but would be irretrievably
outraged.
The Bolivian Government itself in its note of December 8th [7th],54 in
answer to the Chilean Memorandum55 regarding the proposal of the
Honorable Secretary of State makes the following illustrative declaration: If
the Government of Bolivia should ever acquire sovereignty of these
territories, Tacna and Arica, it is understood that it will fulfill all duties
which devolve upon it for the defense and support of those dominions;
those provinces cannot be made the subject of a bargain nor can they be
transferred any more than any other part of the national territory. As it can
be seen, Bolivia must regard her territory as sacred. She cannot sell it or
transfer it. This is no doubt true; therefore if Bolivia is required thus to
consider the nature of the territory which is sold to her, it is only reasonable
to expect that Peru should consider it with the same respect and that it shall

not accept that the provinces of Tacna and Arica shall be a subject of the
bargain.
Our country never consented, not even at the time when it was under the
pressure of armed forces, to cede Tacna and Arica neither for money nor for
any compensations and it is precisely for that reason that the formula was
adopted of a plebiscite to take place at a certain time.
The Honorable Secretary of State declares that, leaving out of consideration
the attempt to carry out the unfulfilled provisions of the Treaty of Ancon, it
appears that, from the nature of the case, there are but three ways to deal
with the disputed territory: 1. delivery of the disputed territory in its entirety
to one or the other of the parties to the dispute; 2. division of the said
territory between them upon bases to be established; 3. some arrangements
by which neither contestant could retain any part of the territory. In respect
to the first way indicated, it is expressed that it may be correctly stated that
such a formula has virtually ceased to be regarded as a practical solution by
anybody who really hopes for a permanent settlement.
My Government must, at this point, insist upon declaring that there is no
reason for concluding that such way is impracticable and that it is virtually
abandoned. That way is precisely the one pointed out by law and justice in
as much as the third clause of the Treaty of Ancon has been obliterated by
the failure of the plebiscite and, therefore, Tacna and Arica continue to
constitute an integral part of the Peruvian territory. It would be quite natural
for any judge to so declare it.
 
It is to be repeated here that although Peru accepted as an act of
Americanist abnegation and as a deference to the high personality of the
Arbitrator, to enter into the discussion of other formulas of solution she did
so exclusively for the purpose of arriving at a settlement with Chile; but
Peru did at all times maintain the intangibility [untouchability?] of her
rights and the consequent reintegration of Tacna and Arica to her territory,
suggesting only the zone to the south of Azapa for the purpose of giving
therein a port to Bolivia.

Peru has therefore, shown herself always conscious of her right, and her
spirit of cordiality in the discussion of good offices is no reason for
assuming that she has renounced it.
The belief that the division of the territory has receded further and further
into the background and that however ingeniously it may have been worked
out has yet been unable to overcome the fact that neither of the
governments considers that it cannot [can] afford to make an adjustment
which involves making substantial concessions to the other does not appear
to be, and is not, well founded. Indeed, as it has just been stated, Peru has
been willing to cede part of the territory with the object of giving a port to
Bolivia, or whether [in order?] to put an end to the controversy with Chile,
and even this latter country has manifested her willingness to make
restorations to Peru of nearly all the province of Tacna. It is rather startling
therefore that a tripartite division of the territory upon the basis of giving
Arica to Chile, should have been looked upon as feasible, and that the idea
that the division has become impracticable should have arisen only when
such a division was discussed giving to Peru the province of Tacna together
with the city of the same name and the port and Morro of Arica, and making
the division of the rest of the province of Arica, between Bolivia and Chile,
to the south of Azapa.
On the other hand the proposed division of the territory on the part of Peru
is not a mere product of imagination. Such a division is based on one hand
on the indisputable legal titles of Peru over all the territories of Tacna and
Arica, and on the other hand on the geographical conditions of the land. The
division of the territory, by restoring to Peru the cities of Tacna and Arica
would have been, and continues to be feasible specially so by reason of the
fact that to the south of those territories are the borate deposits (borateras)
of Chilcaya, which is the most valuable and productive part of those
provinces, this latter circumstance is one more proof that Peru has not
attempted to obtain economical advantages but is mindful only of that
which constitutes an integral part of its nationality.
It would not had [have] meant a moral victory for either Peru or Chile to
make a division of the territory in the form above indicated, because such a
division would have taken into consideration reciprocal and equitable

concessions in respect to the interest of both countries and it might even
lead to the cession of a port to the Republic of Bolivia.
The Honorable Secretary of State believes there is a possibility of an
arrangement by which neither of the parties in controversy will have to
deliver anything to the other which shall eliminate the prejudices which
arise from a comparison with comparative territorial advantages so that
such an agreement would imply a mutual sacrifice and would be based
principally on the conviction that, under any circumstances neither of the
two countries may expect to receive any important part of this area which
has been for such a long time in dispute.
It must be said in candor that in the proposed formula there is not the
mutual sacrifice that is supposed to exist, and there is not such sacrifice
because Chile in the situation in which she is, according to the report of the
Plebiscitary Commission presided over by General Lassiter, has lost all
right over the territories of Tacna and Arica, so much so that by not
returning them to Peru and by delivering them to Bolivia as it is now
proposed, she makes no sacrifice whatever; far from it she would in that
case, obtain important advantages, for according to the proposal, there must
be compensations for Peru and for Chile.
Which would these be? The proposal itself declares it: The only thing that
Chile is to say is how far she goes in her demands; on the other hand Peru
would have to make incalculable sacrifices for the proposed formula
referred to the delivery to a third power of territories which have always
belonged to Peru, which Chile has only retained as hostage and which in a
juridical sense have been returned to Peru by reason of the decision of the
Plebiscitary Commission. It is also assented [asserted?] that none [neither]
of the two countries can expect to receive any important portion of the area
in dispute. As to this, my Government is able to declare, once more, that it
has always hoped, and still hopes, that justice shall eventually prevail and
that as a result thereof the territories of Tacna and Arica shall be returned to
Peru. Furthermore, in the same division formulas, Chile has shown her
willingness in various occasions to return the province of Tacna to Peru.
It seems therefore, that the expectations of Peru to recover her territories,
have not only existed in the past but they still exist now; on the other hand

Chile does not have, and could not have any expectation of retaining that
which she must not now possess.
As to the question relative to the neutralization of the territories of Tacna
and Arica to which the memorandum refers it is necessary to state here that
Peru has been a supporter of an arrangement upon that basis, because [as]
she sees it, such formula upholds the principles evolved and establishes a
regime of liberty and protection for the natives of those territories. The
Peruvian Plenipotentiary expressed these views in Washington at the
Plenary session held on April 15th of last year when he also rejected the
proposal for the cession of Tacna and Arica to Bolivia, presented at that
time by the Honorable Secretary of State.56
My Government would gladly favor neutralization, more than any thing
else because it would put an end to the martyrdom of the natives of Tacna
and Arica and because the international policy of Peru has never been
inspired in material interest but in high ideals of justice and protection to
human rights.
Neutralization has been opposed by Chile on the grounds that the countries
of America look upon it with suspicion or as a mark of American
predominance in those territories. That is merely a piece of sophistry,
indeed neutralization involves a juridical conception entirely opposed of
[to] that of imperialism and to that of the predominance of a nation to the
detriment of another. Neutralization rather constitutes a basis of equality.
It is true that the efforts made as regards compliance with the treaty of
Ancon have been unsuccessful. This assertion which is identical to the one
made by General Lassiter is of real and farreaching international juridical
importance. The Honorable Secretary of State of the United States of
America himself decidedly states that the third clause of the Treaty of
Ancon has not been complied with, which evidently means, as contended
by Peru, that the plebiscite has been obliterated from the word and spirit of
the aforementioned Treaty.
Expounding the thought developed in the memorandum it may be said that
it proposes in a concrete manner that the Republic[s] of Chile and Peru
jointly, or through various agreements, shall freely and voluntarily cede to

the Republic of Bolivia in perpetuity, all the rights, titles, and interests
which everyone of them may have in and to the provinces of Tacna and
Arica, a cession which would be made subject to adequate guaranties for
the protection and defense without distinction as to personal rights and
rights of property, of all the inhabitants of the provinces regardless of their
nationality.
Peru cannot accept the proposed cession of the territory of Tacna and Arica,
to anyone, whether by purchase or by any other method, because he who
has been defending for more than forty years his rights over said territories
cannot convert them into a merchandise subject to a price however large
this may be.
 
As for Chile it has no rights to cede because it has lost all expectations of
retaining those territories from the moment that the possibility ended of a
plebiscite which would decide their fate.
The most serious point of the cession is the one relative to its inhabitants
referring to which the Honorable Secretary of State only provides
guaranties for their protection and defense. This part of the proposal of the
Honorable Secretary of State contradicts the principles of nationality, those
of self-determination and the respect which must be borne not only to the
great but to the small national entities, principles proclaimed chiefly by
American statesmen like Woodrow Wilson during the European conflict,
and when it was found necessary that the World should agree to a durable
and just peace. On the 11th of February 1918 Mr. Wilson declared:57 “the
peoples and provinces cannot be objects of bargain among sovereignties as
if they were simple things or pawns in a game, even if it is that of the
equilibrium of forces from now on discredited.” The proposal to cede the
territories of Tacna and Arica to Bolivia was made in the plenary session of
the 15th of April 1926 and it was disregarded [rejected?], as has been
already stated, by the Peruvian Plenipotentiary in the most categorical way.
It is surprising therefore that with this antecedent it should be brought up
again as a new and decisive formula.

After proposing the cession to Bolivia of the disputed territories the
Honorable Secretary of State establishes, as an integrant part of the
adjustment, an adequate compensation which Bolivia is to give to Chile and
Peru respectively for the public works, railroads and improvements, made
both by Chile and Peru during the time that each was in possession of the
territories and administered them, which involves the admission that Chile
and Peru must be treated on equal terms and forgetting that in virtue of the
Lassiter motion, said territories are Peruvian only.
The Honorable Secretary of State proposes that the morro of Arica, with its
boundaries to be determined, will be excluded from the transfer to Bolivia
and will be converted, under the authority and jurisdiction of an
international commission, into a monument, a mausoleum or a light-house
which may illuminate the friendly agreement of the Tacna and Arica
question.
This suggestion is an ample proof of the possibility of arriving to the
neutralization of the territory, because it would be just the same to
internationalize it all as to internationalize a part of it.
 
The morro is not and can never be to Chile what it is to Peru. The history of
the War of the Pacific only says that it was made immortal because [of] the
heroism of Bolognesi and the sacrifice of Alfonso Ugarte. The morro has
therefore an historical and sentimental interest for Peru; for Chile it can be a
strategical position for future conquests but its loss does not wound any
fibre of its nationality.
The Honorable Secretary of State in his desire to see continental peace
consolidated says that once the aforesaid agreements of transferring the
territory to Bolivia, of the payment for compensations and the arrangement
between Chile and Peru of said compensations are carried out, treaties of
peace will be signed between these two nations, their diplomatic, consular,
commercial and navigation relations will be renewed as also all those on
other matters necessary to re-establish normal and friendly relations
between the two countries.

It is appropriate to state that Peru is and has been a partisan of true
friendship; it can only renew it with Chile the day that the latter shows itself
disposed to return to Peru the territories of Tacna and Arica. Before that just
reparations, which would reveal sincere repentance, it is not possible for
treaties to come and which far from tempering forty years of continual
outrages would revive them and threaten peace. Peru does not deny its
friendship to Chile, but it demands that it come inspired by a spirit of
sincerity and of justice which will give it a stable character.
In speaking of the demilitarization, the memorandum refers to the territory
which now embraces Tacna and Arica. This phrase must be rectified so that
the question of Tarata may not be considered as included in the proposal of
the Honorable Secretary of State. In the award of His Excellency the
President of the United States of America it is decided that no part of the
Peruvian province of Tarata is included in the territory to which the
dispositions of article three of the Treaty of Ancon refer to, and which only
refer to the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and Arica as they existed on
October 20th, 1883 and that the northern frontier of that part of the territory
included by article three which lay within the Peruvian province of Tacna,
was the river Sama. To establish the boundaries of the province of Tarata
the same award created the Boundary Commission. Once the award was
issued, delivery was made to Peru, six months afterwards, of a small portion
of the Tarata territory; Chile has still to return the rest of the territory which
belongs to the same province. It agreed to this by signing an act in which it
declared that when the special Boundary Commission made its report and
determined the true area of the Province of Tarata in accordance with what
article three of the Treaty of Ancon stated, as it was interpreted in the
arbitral award, then it would deliver the rest of the territory.
It is not therefore acceptable that it be said that the basis for the cession to
Bolivia must be the territories as they are today in the power of Chile. The
award has already resolved on those territories and has determined as their
area what the Peruvian laws of October 20th, 1883 established. There is
therefore a large part of the territory which cannot be disposed of.
The suggestion of the Honorable Secretary of State indicates that the
territory of Tacna and Arica will be completely demilitarized in the most

ample sense of the word.
The advantage of this suggestion is understood and Peru applauds it; but
even more than the demilitarization of the territories, what is needed in
America, as in the rest of the world is to diffuse or impose the spirit of
peace and solidarity between the peoples, and above all that of justice in the
order of their relations, because without the basis of justice nothing lasting
can be built.
With the aforesaid suggestion comes also the one of declaring the city of
Arica a free port by means of a tripartite convention making arrangements
to insure that no tariff or differential duties be established between the three
countries, Chile, Peru and Bolivia and that the same be done about the
railroad or about any other means of communication within the same
territory which now is composed of the provinces of Tacna and Arica. This
suggestion is not clear enough. Is the port to be free only for Peru, Chile
and Bolivia or it is [is it] to be free to all commerce of the world?
The memorandum of the Honorable Secretary of State continues stating in
short, the reasons which in his high opinion better the idea of ceding the
territories of Tacna and Arica to Bolivia. He believes that they offer the way
to substitute the dispositions which have not been complied with of article
three of the Treaty of Ancon and end the controversy which has existed
since the treaty was signed; that is to say that he recognizes the necessity of
revising the Treaty of Ancon from the moment that he recognizes that
clause number three has not been fulfilled. The reasoning ratifies and
strengthens and exalts the Lassiter motion.
The proposal of the Honorable Secretary of State does not end the
controversy nevertheless, his Memorandum far from simplifying the
solution complicates it.
It is affirmed in the Memorandum that the proposal it contains cannot
wound any national susceptibility neither Peruvian nor Chilean, because
neither one of these two countries makes any concessions to the other. Peru,
it is convenient to state, would not only make concessions but would be the
one to cede its territories of Tacna and Arica to Bolivia, leaving Chile the

right to obtain compensations as if said country preserved any right over the
provinces.
The Honorable Secretary of State takes pride in the idea that the proposed
solution will insure peace in America. To re-establish the predominance of
Right and Peace in America all that is required is to respect justice and to
give to each one what belongs to him.
That is why the principal statesmen of the world when signing the Treaty of
Versailles sought not only formulas which would end controversies, but
immutable principles of right.
Because of the preceding considerations the Government of Peru has found
itself in the difficult position of not accepting the proposal of the Honorable
Secretary of State, but in its desire to give it life and seeking the means of at
least attenuating the resistance incited by it, in the country, addressed to the
Honorable Secretary of State the consultation contained in its Memorandum
of the third of December last which was meant only to clear up the
conception of his proposal in the part which most deeply affected public
sentiment, whether if to agree to the cession of the territories to Bolivia, the
will of the inhabitants of said territories was to be consulted or not. The
Honorable Secretary of State has unfortunately not yet answered the
question. In his Memorandum of 11th of the same month he only refers to
the civil rights of said inhabitants referred to in his last proposal, but he says
nothing of the political rights of the same, which was the matter consulted.
The Peruvian Foreign Office, finds therefore, very much to its sorrow, that
it cannot accept the proposal contained in the Memorandum of the 30th of
November last. This rejection does not carry with it, nevertheless, the
intention of obstructing any other solutions. Far from that, Peru has
accepted the partial or complete internationalization of the provinces, has
accepted their division giving Bolivia gratuitously an outlet to the shore and
there an inlet whose conditions would allow it to be converted into a large,
suitable, and safe port. Finally it is disposed to listen to all suggestions for a
settlement, but under the condition that the towns of Tacna and Arica be
returned to it, the latter with its port and Morro.

Peru cannot accept, even at the risk of running counter to its traditional
policy of deference to the United States of America, a solution which
carries with it the forsaking of its citizens, which is what it would amount
to, if they are left in the state of subjugation and shame in which they live
today.
LIMA , January 12, 1927.
PEDRO JOSE RADA Y GAMIO
Minister for Foreign Relations of Peru
52 Memorandum in English left at the Department of State by the Peruvian
Ambassador Jan. 17, 1927.
53 Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 505.
54 Bolivia, Anexos a la Memoria que presenta el Ministro de Relaciones
Exteriores y Oulto al H. Congreso de 1927, p. 52.
55 Ibid., p. 46.
56 See telegram No. 44, Apr. 15, 8 p.m., to the Ambassador in Peru, p. 385
[Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246].
57 Message to Congress Feb. 11, 1918; Foreign Relations, 1918, supp. 1,
vol. I, p. 108. The quotation reads: “Second, that peoples and provinces are
not to be bartered about from sovereignty to sovereignty as if they were
mere chattels and pawns in a game, even the great game, now forever
discredited, of the balance of power.”

Boundary disputes

Contents

Bolivia and Paraguay58
58 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 282–287 .
[363] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
Asunción, March 3, 1926. [Received April 1.]
724.3415/89
[364] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck)
Washington, April 5, 1926—4 p.m.
724.3415/89: Telegram
[365] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
Asunción, September 10, 1926. [Received October 14.]
724.3415/100
[366] The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
Asunción, December 7, 1926. [Received January 6, 1927.]
724.3415/107

724.3415/89
[Document 363]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
ASUNCIÓN, March 3, 1926.
[Received April 1.]
No. 51
SIR: I have the honor to report a conversation which recently took place and
in which the Minister of Foreign Affairs spoke concerning the Paraguay-
Bolivia boundary question.
After giving a resumé, he stated that Paraguay had suggested to Bolivia that
the boundary question be left to the judgment and decision of the United
States. Bolivia agreed to the suggestion, but later sent a note to Paraguay
suggesting that it would be better for South American countries to settle
their own differences and controversies rather than solicit the services of the
United States. In this same note from Bolivia it was suggested that
Paraguay and Bolivia agree to meet for conference in Buenos Aires, each
nation designating a special plenipotentiary to consider the controversy,
and, in case these could not agree upon various points, that the decision of
the President of Argentina should decide the matters presented to him.
This suggestion of Bolivia was accepted by Paraguay and a date of
conference agreed upon. Paraguay sent its Plenipotentiary, but, upon his
arrival in Buenos Aires, found, instead of the Bolivian Plenipotentiary, a
messenger saying that Bolivia had reconsidered the matter and had decided
to send a special plenipotentiary to Paraguay who would adjust the
difficulty in Asuncion. This Special Plenipotentiary proved to be Minister
Alvestegui. He arrived and began negotiations, but without making any
headway whatsoever, whereupon he was transferred, supposedly to Chile.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs then inferred a question, asking if the
United States would consider acting as arbitrator. Any direct reply to the

question was avoided by suggesting that Bolivia and Paraguay are both
members of the League of Nations and that there ought to be the ground for
adjustment. The suggestion seemed to give him a matter for consideration.
I made this suggestion for it is my candid opinion the less we have to do
with controversies in South American affairs the better. From the records
and documents I have examined I am convinced of the justness of the
Paraguayan claims; nevertheless, it is my opinion that it would be
preferable for other parties to attempt a decision rather than the United
States. Our efforts expended upon lines of friendliness and individual
helpfulness to these nations will redound to our credit and advantage, but as
third parties to controversies, to dissatisfaction, suspicion and disadvantage.
I have [etc.]
GEO. L. KREECK

724.3415/89: Telegram
[Document 364]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 5, 1926—4 p.m.
6. In the penultimate paragraph of your despatch No. 51 dated March 3,
1926 you report your suggestion to the Foreign Minister that the Bolivia-
Paraguay boundary dispute be referred to the League of Nations. The
Department instructs you to make no further suggestion whatsoever
regarding the League of Nations. As you know the United States is not a
member of the League of Nations and does not desire that its
representatives propose the intervention of the League of Nations in any
matter.
KELLOGG

724.3415/100
[Document 365]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
ASUNCIÓN, September 10, 1926.
[Received October 14.]
No. 144
SIR: With reference to the Paraguayan-Bolivian boundary question and its
settlement, I have the honor to report a conversation held with the Minister
of Foreign Affairs while visiting at his home the other evening.
During the day the Minister had received a detailed despatch from the
Paraguayan Legation in La Paz, concerning the Bolivian attitude upon the
Chaco question. In substance, he related to me the following.
Bolivia does not desire the United States to arbitrate the question, has stated
so definitely to the Paraguayan Minister in La Paz, saying that Bolivia
believes the question is of no interest to other than South American
countries and therefore should be determined by South American views and
wisdom. Bolivia will not submit to mediation or decision by the United
States. Such also is Bolivia’s attitude toward Argentina, in the belief that
Argentina, through various interests, favors Paraguay, rather than being
impartial in its views.
The Minister is strongly for the good offices of the United States and will
stress that necessity in confidential negotiations, although he said that, if
mediation by the United States should prove impossible because of the
Bolivian attitude, Paraguay would permit the naming of other mediators,
believing its cause most secure in view of the fact that it is so strongly
authenticated by records of fact, historical maps and the like.
During the Paraguayan sojourn of the Vice President of Bolivia, Dr. Abdón
Saavedra, two conferences will be held upon this subject. At the personal

conferences with the Minister the latter will stress the wisdom of action by
the United States in the matter; believing that he can perhaps more
forcefully put forth the Paraguayan view than can the Minister in La Paz.
“Impartial decision can only be made by the United States,” these are his
exact words, “therefore the question should be submitted to your (the
American) Government.”
The President will offer a banquet to the visiting official of the neighboring
country and every evidence of the most friendly relations and feeling will
be shown. It is the President’s belief that through friendly considerations the
most can be accomplished.
The American Minister has carefully avoided indication, or comment, as to
the possibility of the American Government’s entertaining, or desire to
entertain, negotiations concerning the controversy.
I have [etc.]
GEO. L. KREECK

724.3415/107
[Document 366]
The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State
ASUNCIÓN, December 7, 1926.
[Received January 6, 1927.]
No. 203
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my cablegram to the Department, No. 15,
dated December 7, 1926, 6 p.m.,59 confirming and summarizing it below:
The Paraguayan Minister of Foreign Affairs … advises me that Paraguay is
preparing a note in which the Government of the United States is requested
to interest itself in the Bolivian-Paraguayan limits controversy upon the
termination of the Pacific question. …
The above information was received in the course of a call upon the
Minister of Foreign Affairs, who had indicated that the President would
give me his views upon the memorandum of the Secretary of State, in
regard to the settlement of the Tacna-Arica controversy.60
It is the President’s view that the Secretary of State has shown himself a
true friend of all America, and that the United States has only the peace of
this continent in view, to the end that the family of the republican nations of
the Western Hemisphere may live with cordial relations in contentment.
 
It is believed that the plan of settlement suggested will be accepted by all of
the interested parties, and because of its extreme interest, fairness, justice
and good-will, this nation will prepare a note asking the United States to
interest itself in the Bolivian-Paraguayan boundary question. The Minister
expressed himself as of the opinion that now is the time for Paraguay to
come forward with her problem to the United States, that the American
people may know the situation and, through proof by truth and justice,

bring about a termination of this question. He also stated that, if the
Bolivian-Paraguayan boundary were also determined, all matters of
controversy seriously affecting the peace of the American continents would
have passed away, leaving the attention of these peoples free for the
development, intellectually and economically, of their nations.
It is felt that there could be no stronger or more forceful endorsement of the
efforts of the Secretary of State toward universal American peace than to
have another nation tender him the solution of its like controversy.
It is understood that when the note has been completed it will be delivered
to me for transmission to the Department.61
I have [etc.]
GEO. L. KREECK
59 Not printed.
60 See telegram No. 84, Nov. 30, 1926, to the Ambassador in Peru, p. 504
[Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350].
61 No note of the nature contemplated was delivered.

Colombia and Peru62
62 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 436–471 .
[367] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, June 16, 1926—noon.
721.2315/301a: Telegram
[368] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, June 18, 1926—9 a.m. [Received 2:50 p.m.]
721.2315/303: Telegram
[369] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, June 19, 1926—noon.
721.2315/303: Telegram
[370] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
Rio de Janeiro, July 5, 1926—7 p.m. [Received 8:30 p.m.]
721.2315/306: Telegram
[371] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
Washington, July 14, 1926—5 p.m.

721.2315/306: Telegram
[372] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
Washington, August 5, 1926—noon.
721.2315/308: Telegram
[373] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
Rio de Janeiro, August 19, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 7 p.m.]
721.2315/311: Telegram
[374] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, September 29, 1926—6 p.m.
721.2315/308: Telegram
[375] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
Lima, October 2, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 11:30 p.m.]
721.2315/319: Telegram
[376] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
Washington, October 4, 1926—2 p.m.
721.2315/319: Telegram

721.2315/301a: Telegram
[Document 367]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 16, 1926—noon.
53. More than a year and three months have passed since the procès-verbal
between Brazil, Colombia, and Peru for the settlement of their boundary
difficulties was signed in Washington,63 and I think it not unreasonable to
expect the Peruvian Government now to give some definite indication of its
intentions in regard to carrying out the provisions of the procès-verbal. The
boundary treaty between Peru and Colombia64 was approved last October
by the Colombian Congress. The Government of Colombia has again
manifested its desire to fulfill the last of its provisions under the procès-
verbal, namely, the conclusion with Brazil of a boundary treaty fixing the
boundary on the Apaporis-Tabatinga line. Neither Brazil nor Colombia can
take further action until Peru ratifies the treaty of March 1922, with
Colombia. Thus all further action is suspended until Peru complies with its
undertakings in the procès-verbal. For this reason I desire you to take up the
matter most earnestly with President Leguía and with the Minister for
Foreign Affairs in an endeavor to see if it is not possible to terminate this
matter at an early date. You may point out to them that Peru’s inaction on
this treaty means that not only is the boundary dispute between Colombia
and Peru kept open but also that the fulfillment of the other provisions of
the procès-verbal is made impossible, as they are to be taken only after Peru
has ratified the treaty with Colombia; that is, Peru’s inaction also keeps
open the boundary question between Brazil and Colombia. I am sure that
the Government of Peru does not desire the responsibility for keeping
pending two international conflicts of long standing, but that it will desire to
have them settled as quickly as possible. I hope that President Leguía will
take whatever action may be necessary to try to have the treaty of 1922
ratified at the earliest possible moment. Report fully by cable.

KELLOGG
63 Signed March 4, 1925; ibid. , p. 461.
64 Treaty of March 24, 1922; League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. LXXIV, p. 9.

721.2315/303: Telegram
[Document 368]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LIMA, June 18, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received 2:50 p.m.]
66. In accordance with the terms of the procès-verbal, the President has
recommended to Congress the approval of the boundary treaty with
Colombia.
On repeated occasions I have interviewed the President to urge favorable
action in this matter. He has assured me on various occasions that he would
do everything he could to obtain favorable action from the Congress, but he
also stated that as the attitude of that body was hostile he was not sure that,
in spite of his efforts, he would be able to bring about favorable action. …
The bitter opposition to the treaty existing in the Department of Loreto also
constitutes a serious obstacle to ratification. I have suggested to the
Colombian Minister and the Peruvian Government, as well as to interested
parties, that a settlement for rights claimed in the disputed area be made in
return for withdrawal of opposition to the treaty, but nothing has yet been
done in that regard. Congressional opinion seems to be, as nearly as I can
ascertain it, that Congress will not ratify the treaty; it has not been in
session since April 3, and no further action is possible until it reconvenes,
which it may do the last of July. The Colombian Minister here agrees with
me that it is inadvisable to press the matter until Congress is in session. If,
however, the Department instructs that further representations be made
immediately on the subject to the President I shall be glad to do so. Please
advise. I have also urged ratification of the treaty upon the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, who has been noncommittal in his conversations with me.
Now that Alberto Salomón, the former Foreign Minister who negotiated the
treaty, is in Washington, some representations might be made through him
as he is still influential with President Leguía. Day before yesterday I sent

the Department copy of a memorandum left with the press by the
Ecuadorian Minister, and with it copy of a counter memorandum in reply
made at my request by the Colombian Minister.65
POINDEXTER
65 Memorandum and counter memorandum not printed.

721.2315/303: Telegram
[Document 369]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 19, 1926—noon.
54. Your No. 66, June 18, 9 a.m. The Department agrees that under the
circumstances it would be inexpedient to take further action before the
Peruvian Congress convenes. At that time bring the matter up again in an
endeavor to obtain favorable action. Should a suitable opportunity present
itself in the meantime you should, at your own discretion, express discreetly
the hope that upon the convening of Congress the treaty will be promptly
ratified.
KELLOGG

721.2315/306: Telegram
[Document 370]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
RIO DE JANEIRO, July 5, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received 8:30 p.m.]
54. Brazilian Minister for Foreign Affairs considers the moment favorable
for renewing representations to the Peruvian Government regarding
ratification of Colombian-Peruvian treaty. Colombian Minister here
entertains same belief.
MORGAN

721.2315/306: Telegram
[Document 371]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, July 14, 1926—5 p.m.
38. I have discussed the matter of the treaty with Dr. Salomón, former
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru, who is in Washington at present in
connection with Tacna-Arica.66 He has communicated with President
Leguía by cable and informs me that the President has cabled in reply that
as soon as Congress convenes the end of this month he will again urge
ratification of the treaty. I think it would be helpful if Brazil would also
make known to President Leguía desire that treaty be ratified. You will keep
the Department informed.
KELLOGG
66 See pp. 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 138] ff.

721.2315/308: Telegram
[Document 372]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, August 5, 1926—noon.
40. Department’s No. 38 of July 14, 5 p.m. Peruvian Congress convened
July 28. President Leguía has assured our Ambassador that he will use all
his influence to obtain ratification of the treaty, agreeing that this should be
done at the beginning of the session and without delay. Ambassador
Poindexter believes that the present is an opportune time to bring to bear all
available influence, and that renewed representations on the part of Brazil
would be advantageous. Bring the matter again to the attention of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and cable results.
KELLOGG

721.2315/311: Telegram
[Document 373]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
RIO DE JANEIRO, August 19, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received 7 p.m.]
61. Foreign Minister has shown me text of telegram received today from
Brazilian Chargé d’Affaires Lima stating that President Leguía has
promised him that the Colombian-Peruvian treaty will be ratified by
Peruvian Congress “within the next few weeks”.
MORGAN

721.2315/308: Telegram
[Document 374]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, September 29, 1926—6 p.m.
70. Nearly two months have passed since President Leguía assured you that
he was determined to obtain ratification of the Colombian-Peruvian
boundary treaty, and as no word has been received that the treaty has been
ratified, the Department wishes to be informed of the reasons for this long
delay. Seek the earliest suitable opportunity to reiterate to the President, and
also to Minister Rada y Gamio, if you think it desirable to do so, the views
of this Government which you have already expressed on various occasions
and urge that ratification of the treaty be effected at this session. Say that
this Government would be highly gratified at this action on the part of Peru,
in view of the interest which the Government of the United States has taken
in this matter. You may, should you consider it advisable, approach the
Brazilian and Colombian diplomatic representatives in Lima, and indicate
to them the advisability of their taking action of a similar nature.
KELLOGG

721.2315/319: Telegram
[Document 375]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LIMA, October 2, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received 11:30 p.m.]
84. This morning I interviewed the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Señor Rada
y Gamio, and stated to him that my Government was greatly interested in
the friendly settlement of the boundary question, dependent upon the
ratification of the treaty of 1922, in view of the fact that Peru had requested
the good offices of the United States in bringing about an agreement
between Brazil, Colombia, and Peru on the boundary treaty and the
objections to it raised by Brazil, and that the Government of the United
States would look with much gratification on favorable action by Peru. I
also stated that the matter had been postponed so often and over so long a
period of time that I greatly hoped prompt action would be taken at the
present session of Congress.
The Minister stated that on the first day he was in office the President had
instructed him explicitly to take up the boundary treaty and press its
ratification before Congress. He took from his pocket a copy of the treaty to
show that he was giving it his immediate attention. He had been familiar
with the matter for years, he said, and was ready to meet any objections
which might be urged against it. He stated that a joint committee was now
preparing a report on it, and as soon as this report was made a joint session
of the House and Senate would be called to act on it, and that he felt sure it
would be ratified within a month.
I had learned from previous conversations with the President that he had
been awaiting a change of Ministers for Foreign Affairs before bringing the
matter before Congress, and I am informed that Rada y Gamio was selected
for his sympathy with the President’s views and his favorable attitude

toward the ratification of the treaty. In view of my conversations with both
the Minister and the President, I think it advisable to await developments
for awhile before again urging the matter on the President’s attention. I am
advised that he has taken strong measures at Iquitos to handle any situation
that might arise as a result of the ratification of the treaty. Powerful
opposition from Loreto still continues in the House of Deputies.
Day before yesterday I saw the Colombian Minister on the subject of the
treaty; he stated that he regarded the matter as making favorable progress. I
have also conferred recently with the Brazilian Chargé, who stated that he
now regarded the outlook as favorable. For my part, I regard it as quite
uncertain, considering the adverse sentiment that exists in Congress and
among the Peruvians generally. After allowing a short time for
developments in Congress I shall see the President again, and shall also
urge activity by the Brazilian and Colombian representatives.
POINDEXTER

721.2315/319: Telegram
[Document 376]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)
WASHINGTON, October 4, 1926—2 p.m.
71. Your 84, October 2, 4 p.m. I agree with you and leave the whole matter
to your discretion.
KELLOGG

Costa Rica and Panama67
67 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 471–483 .
[377] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Panama (Munro)
Washington, February 4, 1926—4 p.m.
718.1915/762a: Telegram
[378] The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
Panama, August 10, 1926. [Received August 20.]
718.1915/779

718.1915/762a: Telegram
[Document 377]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Panama (Munro)
WASHINGTON, February 4, 1926—4 p.m.
8. You will please present the following note to the Panaman Government
and give a copy of it to the President and discuss the matter with him:
I have been instructed by my Government to say that, mindful of
its obligation under Article I of the Treaty of 1903 with Panama,68
it has followed closely the course of the direct negotiations
between Panama and Costa Rica for the settlement of the
boundary dispute between those countries. The views of my
Government regarding this matter have been stated in great detail
on previous occasions, notably in 192169 and more recently in
this Legation’s note of February, 1925,70 so that it does not appear
necessary to restate that position now.
In the course of the direct negotiations that have taken place
during the last year and a half it appears that Panama made two
proposals to Costa Rica during the visit of Señor Casorla71 to
Panama. The first proposed a modification of the Loubet Line72
on the Pacific side which would give to Panama a large extent of
territory which was determined by President Loubet to belong to
Costa Rica and which was recognized by Panama as belonging to
Costa Rica in Article I of the Porras-Anderson Treaty of March
17, 1910,73 as well as in a communication from the Legation of
Panama at Washington to the Secretary of State of the United
States under date of October 20, 1914.74 Costa Rica rejected this
proposal as it modified the line already recognized by Panama.
Panama made a further proposal asking an indemnity from Costa
Rica for the occurrences of 1921 stating that on this basis it would

accept the line fixed by the White Award75 and the Loubet Line
on the Pacific but asking that in drawing this line the interest of
Panamans living or holding property in that region be protected.
Negotiations were later transferred to Costa Rica and the
Government of Costa Rica suggested a line of compensation
which would modify the Loubet Line in order to incorporate
under Panaman jurisdiction the Panamans living and holding
property on the Costa Rican side of the Loubet Line, an equal
amount of territory on the Panaman side of that line to be given to
Costa Rica. This proposal would not have changed the amount of
territory under the jurisdiction of either Government but would
incorporate in Panaman territory the Panamans who lived or held
property in the region in dispute. This proposal was rejected by
Panama.
Costa Rica then made a further proposal on December 17, last, as
follows:76
1. The delimitation of the frontier between Costa Rica
and Panama will be made in accordance with the
Loubet and White Awards.
2. Costa Rica will recognize the titles to land issued by
the Government of Panama to private persons in the
territory which remains under the sovereignty of Costa
Rica.
3. The question whether Costa Rica owes any
indemnity whatsoever to Panama for the expenses
which the latter Government made in 1921 at the time
of the Coto conflict should be submitted to arbitration;
and also the question whether Panama is indebted to
Costa Rica on account of the expenses which it in turn
incurred for the same reason on that date.
4. On the settlement being made, Panama will return to
Costa Rica the arms, boats and flags which were seized

by the Panaman forces.
5. If the Arbitrator should say that it is not Costa Rica
but Panama that owes indemnity Costa Rica waives
now payment therefor, with the exception of that
stipulated in paragraph 4.
It appears that Señor Fabrega asked President Jimenez to promise
to find out in May, 1926, whether a treaty could be submitted to
the Costa Rican Congress in the terms desired by Panama.77
Señor Fabrega had suggested a line modified somewhat from the
first proposal made to Señor Casorla in Panama which
contemplated the cession to Panama of territory on the Costa
Rican side of the Loubet Line. My Government is advised that
after thinking the matter over President Jimenez decided that it
would be impossible to arrive at an agreement on this basis. Señor
Fabrega then returned to Panama.
From the above it appears that all proposals made have been
rejected with the exception of the Costa Rican proposal of
December 17, 1925, quoted above, on which the Panaman
Government does not appear to have expressed its views. By this
proposal Costa Rica appears to have afforded an opportunity for
an agreement on the basis of Panama’s second proposal to Señor
Casorla. Point 2 of the Costa Rican proposal protects the interests
of Panamans living or holding property in that region. On the
question of the indemnity asked by Panama for the Coto incident
of 1921 Costa Rica in point 3 expresses the readiness to submit to
the determination of arbitration the question whether Costa Rica
owes an indemnity to Panama or whether Panama owes an
indemnity to Costa Rica and in the latter case makes the friendly
offer of waiving at the outset any demand for indemnity should
the Arbitrator decide that it is Panama and not Costa Rica that
should give indemnity.
This proposal seems so eminently fair, reasonable, and
conciliatory that my Government feels Panama will desire to

accept it. It has accordingly instructed me to request the views of
Your Excellency’s Government regarding this proposal and to
express the very earnest hope that Panama will avail herself
without delay of this amicable means of settling now this long
drawn out and bitter controversy which has disturbed the relations
of the sister Republics of Panama and Costa Rica for such a long
time.
In presenting this note you will please say to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and to the President that this Government has been advised that
Costa Rica was willing to make a mutual exchange on the line of
compensation proposed to Señor Fabrega and rejected by Panama but that
in view of the Loubet Award as recognized by Panama it cannot consent to
give up territory without equal territorial compensation.
 
In the proposal of December 17, it has gone very far, however, toward
meeting Panama’s demands regarding an indemnity. If Panama thinks an
indemnity is due it it can sustain its contention before an Arbitrator in the
knowledge that should the Arbitrator find, as Costa Rica on its side
contends, that it is Panama and not Costa Rica that owes an indemnity
Costa Rica will waive any claim for idemnification. The Department does
not see how a more conciliatory offer could be made by Costa Rica nor
does it perceive how Panama could justify rejecting such an eminently
advantageous offer. You may also state that with regard to Point 4 of the
Costa Rican proposal you have been advised by your Government that
Costa Rica would be willing to withdraw its demand for the return of the
launches and also to leave out of the agreement any mention of the war
trophies which it is understood Panama wishes to give back to Costa Rica
should an arrangement be made, as a spontaneous gesture of friendship. If
the Panaman Government will inform this Government that such is its
intention no mention of the trophies need be made in the agreement with
Costa Rica.
Please endeavor to have the above proposal accepted by Panama and keep
Department informed by cable.

KELLOGG
68 Ibid. , 1904, p. 543.
69 See ibid., 1921, vol. I, pp. 175 ff.
70 See telegram No. 17, Feb. 6, 1925, 3 p.m., to the Minister in Panama,
Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 474.
71 Buenaventura Casorla, confidential agent of Costa Rica in Panama.
72 The text of the Loubet award was printed in Foreign Relations , 1910, p.
786.
73 Ibid. , p. 820.
74 Ibid. , 1914, p. 994.
75 Ibid. , p. 1000.
76 See telegram No. 54, Dec. 18, 1925, 4 p.m., from the Minister in Costa
Rica, ibid., 1925, vol. I, p. 481.
77 See telegram No. 123, Dec. 27, 1925, from the Chargé in Panama, ibid. ,
p. 482.

718.1915/779
[Document 378]
The Minister in Panama (South) to the Secretary of State
PANAMA, August 10, 1926.
[Received August 20.]
No. 1125
SIR: With reference to my despatch No. 1088 of July 13, 1926,78 stating that
the Secretary of Foreign Relations had promised an early reply to the
Legation’s note of February 6, 1926, with regard to the boundary dispute
between Panama and Costa Rica,79 I have the honor to transmit herein, with
translation, a copy of note S. P. No. 1957, dated August 7, 1926, from the
Secretary of Foreign Relations in which he states that he has received
instructions from his Government to inform me that the proposal made by
President Jimenez of Costa Rica on December 17, 1925, cannot be accepted
by the Government of Panama.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I have [etc.]
J. G. SOUTH
 
[Enclosure—Translation80 ]
The Panaman Minister for Foreign Affairs (Alfaro) to the American Minister (South)
PANAMA, August 7, 1926.
S. P. No. 1957

EXCELLENCY: Owing to the circumstances which I had the honor to explain
orally to Your Excellency, no reply was made to the courteous note from the
American Legation, No. 433, dated February 6, 1926. That note I now
answer as follows: My Government highly appreciates the interest which
Your Excellency’s Government manifests in a prompt solution of the
boundary dispute between Panama and Costa Rica and has duly considered
the suggestion contained in that note to the effect that, a settlement making
use of direct negotiations not being possible, as Panama intended, it feels
that the proposal made December 17, 1925, by President Jimenez of Costa
Rica, which appears in detail in the note referred to, is acceptable.
It is with regret that I inform Your Excellency that I have received
instructions from my Government to state to Your Excellency that Panama
cannot accept this proposal because it does not, in fact, constitute any
concession by Costa Rica in return for the conciliatory attitude which we
showed in making some suggestions for settling the question, first to Señor
Casorla and afterwards through our confidential agent Dr. Fábrega.
I avail myself [etc.]
H. J. ALFARO
78 Not printed.
79 Note presented in accordance with instructions contained in telegram No.
8, Feb. 4, to the Chargé in Panama, supra.
80 File translation revised.

Dominican Republic and Haiti81
81 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, pp. 356–362 .
[379] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
Santo Domingo, March 4, 1926. [Received March 17.]
738.3915/291
[380] Memorandum by Mr. Orme Wilson of the Division of Latin
American Affairs
[Washington,] June 16, 1926.
738.3915/293
[381] Memorandum by Mr. Orme Wilson of the Division of Latin
American Affairs
[Washington,] June 17, 1926.
738.3915/292
[382] The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
Santo Domingo, November 30, 1926. [Received December 8.]
738.3915/299

[383] The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic
(Young)
Washington, December 18, 1926.
738.3915/299

738.3915/291
[Document 379]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
SANTO DOMINGO, March 4, 1926.
[Received March 17.]
No. 105
SIR: I have the honor to report that informal conversations are in progress
between the Haitian Minister at this capital and the Dominican Government
with a view to effecting a settlement of the long standing boundary
controversy.
According to the Legation’s information it now seems not improbable that
an adjustment and settlement of the question may be effected by the
adoption, with slight modifications, of the “American Line” of 1912.82 The
more important modifications to which consideration is now being given
are based on:—
(a) The desire of the Dominican Government to connect the
towns of Restauración and Banica with a road which will run only
through Dominican territory. At present travelers between these
two points must cross over into Haiti.
(b) The desire of the Haitian Government to connect Banane and
Anse á Pitre with a road running over Haitian territory.
(c) With respect to Lake Saumatre, through which the line now
runs, the Haitian Government is desirous, according to the
Legation’s information, of procuring an adjustment under which
the line would skirt the eastern and southeastern shore of the lake,
leaving the village of Jimaní, however, within Dominican
territory.

President Vasquez in a recent conversation informed me that he is desirous
of arranging, shortly after the coming elections in Haiti, a meeting with the
Haitian President at the border for the purpose of effecting, if possible, an
agreement in principle with respect to the boundary. The President added
that he intended to urge the adoption of the “American Line” with whatever
changes might be found desirable and convenient to both countries. He
asked me to regard this information as strictly confidential, adding that he
had not yet broached the matter to the leaders in Congress.
The Legation will of course keep the Department fully informed of
developments. It is not believed however that any of importance will
eventuate until after the Presidential elections in Haiti.
I have [etc.]
EVAN E. YOUNG
82 See telegram, Sept. 24, 1912, to the Minister in the Dominican Republic,
Foreign Relations , 1912, p. 368.

738.3915/293
[Document 380]
Memorandum by Mr. Orme Wilson of the Division of Latin
American Affairs
[WASHINGTON,] June 16, 1926.
At the request of Mr. White83 I informed Mr. Ariza84 that the Department
felt that the presence of President Borno85 in Washington was a particularly
favorable opportunity for using its informal good offices with a view to
assisting both countries to reach a settlement of the boundary question. I
inquired what the status of the boundary question was and whether any
negotiations were now in progress.
The Minister expressed his appreciation of the Department’s offer. He said
that no negotiations were now in progress but that President Vasquez,86 who
is a good friend of President Borno, desires greatly to have this matter
settled during his term of office. The Minister feared, however, that the
delicate political situation in the Dominican Republic would prevent
President Vasquez from taking any definite action in response to the
Department’s offer as his opponents would use the opportunity to arouse
public sentiment against any proposed settlement. I replied that it appeared
to me that it would do no harm to lay the Department’s suggestion before
the President in order to obtain his views, as he might instruct the Minister
to discuss the question with President Borno and thus help to bring about a
settlement. Mr. Ariza hesitated at first to transmit any message by cable, as
he was apprehensive that unauthorized persons would see it. He
subsequently consented to do so, however, and told me that he would have
a reply by tomorrow.
I pointed out to him the distinct advantage which a definite and final
boundary settlement would confer on his country, as such a settlement
would put a stop to the constant infiltration and encroachment of Haitian
squatters. He appeared to realize this fully and told me that although the

land along the boundary had little value now, it would be worth much more
in the future.
The Minister also informed me that during a dinner party which he gave in
honor of President Borno last evening the President on his own initiative
discussed the matter with him. Although Mr. Ariza did not tell me the exact
nature of the President’s views he stated that they were very conciliatory
and encouraging.
WILSON
83 Francis White, Chief of the Division of Latin American Affairs.
84 José del Carmen Ariza, Dominican Minister at Washington.
85 Joseph Louis Borno, President of Haiti.
86 Horacio Vasquez, President of the Dominican Republic.

738.3915/292
[Document 381]
Memorandum by Mr. Orme Wilson of the Division of Latin
American Affairs
[WASHINGTON,] June 17, 1926.
Mr. Ariza telephoned me this morning to say that after careful consideration
he had determined to send no cable to President Vasquez informing him of
the Department’s offer of good offices in connection with the Haitian-
Dominican boundary dispute, which I discussed with the Minister during
our conversation of June 16. He said that the matter was one of such
importance that he did not desire to initiate any negotiations in view of his
early departure from Washington. He said, however, that as soon as he
reached Santo Domingo he would tell President Vasquez of his conversation
with President Borno (See memo of June 16) as well as of the Department’s
kind offer.
WILSON

738.3915/299
[Document 382]
The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary
of State
SANTO DOMINGO, November 30, 1926.
[Received December 8.]
No. 348
SIR: I have the honor to forward herewith for the Department’s confidential
information a copy of a memorandum of a conversation which I had
yesterday with the Haitian Minister in regard to the boundary question.
I have [etc.]
EVAN E. YOUNG
[Enclosure]
Memorandum of a Conversation With the Haitian Minister in the Dominican Republic (Dejean)
[SANTO DOMINGO,] November 29, 1926.
The Minister said that when he was appointed to this post he was of the
opinion that there was little possibility of an agreement being reached with
the Dominican Government on the boundary question unless negotiations
were conducted under the auspices of the Department, and with its constant
aid and assistance; that this opinion was based on a fear that the
Dominicans would resort to delays and obstructions, and to the belief that
President Vasquez was not sufficiently strong in his own country to procure
the necessary ratification of an agreement even should one be reached.
Recently, however, he had become much more hopeful of an adjustment of
the long-standing controversy through direct negotiations, though he

thought it would be wise to keep Washington fully informed in order that its
good offices might be requested should occasion warrant.
The change in his opinion regarding the possibility of success attending
direct negotiations was due, he said, to his belief that President Vasquez was
now much stronger than some months ago and could probably procure
ratification by the Dominican Senate of such agreement as might be
reached, and, further, that as a result of his investigations here he had come
to the opinion that the Dominican Government was now sincerely desirous
of reaching a solution of the question.
The first practical move, he felt, should take the form of a visit of President
Borno to Santo Domingo. There had been some talk of two Presidents
meeting at the border, but this he thought would be unwise and not likely to
be attended by any concrete results. He felt fairly confident, however, that
during the course of a visit by President Borno to Santo Domingo, with
more time at their disposal and better facilities for their conferences, an
agreement in principle could be effected which could be followed up at
once by negotiations carried on by duly accredited delegates and
representatives.
 
With regard to the position of his Government regarding the line itself, he
said that he thought the “American Line” would serve as the basis of the
discussion between the two Presidents, but that certain modifications should
be made which would be equally advantageous to the two countries
concerned.
He impressed me as being distinctly optimistic as regards the possibility of
effecting a settlement of the question.
E[VAN] E. Y[OUNG]

738.3915/299
[Document 383]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic
(Young)
WASHINGTON, December 18, 1926.
No. 125
SIR: The Department is in receipt of your confidential despatch No. 348 of
November 30, 1926, with which you enclosed a memorandum of a
conversation which you held with the Haitian Minister on November 29,
1926.
The Department is pleased to know that the Haitian Minister takes a
cheerful view of the possibility of an adjustment of this longstanding
dispute, and authorizes you to take whatever steps you may consider useful
in order to promote an early settlement at the same time keeping in mind
that the American Government would prefer under the circumstances that
the new boundary line be adjusted by negotiation between the Republic of
Haiti and the Dominican Republic without resorting to arbitration.
I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW

Privileges and immunities of persons
belonging 
to 
foreign 
diplomatic
missions in the United States
[384] The German Ambassador (Maltzan) to the Secretary of State
Washington, May 18, 1926.
701.05/126
[385] The Secretary of State to the German Chargé (Dieckhoff)
Washington, July 16, 1926.
701.05/126
[386] The Secretary of State to the German Chargé (Dieckhoff)
Washington, July 27, 1926.
701.05/129

701.05/126
[Document 384]
The German Ambassador (Maltzan) to the Secretary of State
[Translation88 ]
WASHINGTON, May 18, 1926.
MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: By direction of my Government I have the honor to
request Your Excellency for a compilation of the provisions of law which
relate to the privileges and immunities of persons belonging to diplomatic
missions.
My Government would attach especial importance to having authentic
information as to how far exemption from civil and criminal jurisdiction,
including that of the administrative and police courts of the country, and
obligation to testify is granted.
Under the German law, extraterritorial persons who belong to foreign
missions are classified into the following categories:
1. The chiefs and members of the missions. To the member class
belong, according to the provisions of the law, the persons having
the so-called diplomatic character, that is, the counselors of
embassy and legation, the secretaries of legation, the attaches,
including the military, naval, and commercial attaches. From the
German point of view, physicians and chaplains of legation would
also belong to the missions insofar as all or the greater part of
their activities are given to it.
2. The office attendants. To this class belong the following:
Chancellor, interpreter, clerical staff, typists, telephone operators,
office servants, janitors, stenographers, et cetera. In general, all
those who are paid from the official fund.

3. The household attendants of the persons under section 1, that
is, servants, private secretaries, stewards, governesses, et cetera.
These three categories enjoy in Germany exemption from the jurisdiction of
the courts of the land, provided those involved are not German subjects.
Similar privileges belong to members of the families of those in the first
category.
Should there be no specific provisions of law in the United States
concerning extraterritorial rights, I should be grateful to Your Excellency
for information concerning the actual treatment of the persons who come
under the three categories.
Accept [etc.]
MALTZAN
88 File translation revised.

701.05/126
[Document 385]
The Secretary of State to the German Chargé (Dieckhoff)
WASHINGTON, July 16, 1926.
SIR: I have received the Ambassador’s note of May 18, 1926, requesting to
be furnished a compilation of the provisions of law that have reference to
the privileges and immunities of persons belonging to foreign missions. He
states that your Government would attach special importance to having
authentic information as to how far exemption from civil and criminal
jurisdiction, including that of the administrative and police courts of the
country, and obligation to testify is granted.
In reply I have the honor to draw your attention to Sections 4062, 4063,
4064 and 4065 of the Revised Statutes of the United States which provide
as follows:
“Section 4062. Every person who violates any safe
conduct or passport duly obtained and issued under
authority of the United States; or who assaults, strikes,
wounds, imprisons, or in any other manner offers
violence to the person of a public minister, in violation
of the law of nations, shall be imprisoned for not more
than three years, and fined, at the discretion of the
court.
“Section 4063. Whenever any writ or process is sued
out or prosecuted by any person in any court of the
United States, or of a State, or by any judge or justice,
whereby the person of any public minister of any
foreign prince or state, authorized and received as such
by the President or any domestic or domestic servant of
any such minister, is arrested or imprisoned, or his

goods or chattels are distrained, seized, or attached,
such writ or process shall be deemed void.
“Section 4064. Whenever any writ or process is sued
out in violation of the preceding section, every person
by whom the same is obtained or prosecuted, whether
as party or as attorney or solicitor, and every officer
concerned in executing it, shall be deemed a violator of
the laws of nations and a disturber of the public repose,
and shall be imprisoned for not more than three years,
and fined at the discretion of the court.
“Section 4065. The two preceding sections shall not
apply to any case where the person against whom the
process is issued is a citizen or inhabitant of the United
States, in the service of a public minister, and the
process is founded upon a debt contracted before he
entered upon such service; nor shall the preceding
section apply to any case where the person against
whom the process is issued is a domestic servant of a
public minister, unless the name of the servant has,
before the issuing thereof, been registered in the
Department of State, and transmitted by the Secretary
of State to the marshal of the District of Columbia, who
shall upon receipt thereof post the same in some public
place in his office.”
The immunity from criminal prosecution and civil process and from the
obligation to testify is considered to apply to a foreign diplomatic
representative, his secretaries, attachés, including military, naval and
commercial attachés, employees, members of his household, including his
family, and domestic servants. Employees or servants of diplomatic
missions are entitled to the immunities in question regardless of their
nationality with the exception of one case provided for in Section 4065 of
the Revised Statutes—namely where process is founded upon a debt
contracted before the employee or servant entered the service of the
mission.

Names of members of foreign legations and foreign embassies in the United
States entitled to diplomatic immunities, down to and including the grade of
attaché, are published in the Diplomatic List. The names of other persons
entitled to such immunities are contained in the List of Employees in the
Embassies and Legations in Washington Not Printed in the Diplomatic List.
In a circular note of January 27, 1906, addressed by the Department to the
diplomatic missions in Washington, the Department made the following
statement:
“It has been determined in the future publications by this
Department of the Diplomatic List to include only such officials
and attachés of foreign missions in this country as are not citizens
of the United States.
“It is not to be understood by this that this Government has any
objection to the employment by embassies and legations of
American citizens as counselors, but the inclusion of the names of
such persons in the diplomatic lists would seem to warrant the
assumption that such person might be called upon to participate in
the diplomatic representation of the country to whose service he
may appear to be attached—a presumption to which this
Department considers it inadvisable to give any support.”
Ambassadors and Ministers accredited to the United States and the
members of their households, including secretaries, attaches, and servants,
who are not citizens of the United States, are exempted from the payment of
Federal income tax upon their salaries, fees and wages, and upon the
income derived by them from investments in the United States in stocks and
bonds, and from interest on bank balances in the United States. The income
derived from any business carried on by them in the United States would,
however, be taxable.
Property in the District of Columbia owned by foreign governments for
Embassy and Legation purposes is exempt from general and special taxes or
assessments. Property owned by an Ambassador or Minister and used for
Embassy or Legation purposes is exempt from general taxes but not from
special assessments for improvements. The payment of water rent is

required in all cases, as this is not regarded as a tax but the sale of a
commodity.
The taxes on the sales of automobiles and jewelry provided for in Sections
600 and 604 of the Revenue Act of 1924 are taxes imposed upon the
manufacturers of automobiles and upon the vendors of jewelry. In the
collection of such taxes the Government looks to the manufacturer and to
the vendor for the payment of the tax and not to the purchasers of the
articles. For this reason and the further reason that the price of the article
sold is a matter of negotiation between the vendor and the purchasers, the
appropriate authorities of this Government have taken the position that no
exemption from the payment of these taxes can be granted to the
manufacturer or vendor by reason of the fact that the sale is made to a
diplomatic representative of a foreign government.
The members of foreign diplomatic missions and foreign consular officers
in the District of Columbia are exempt in the District from the payment of
personal property taxes on automobiles and other personal property, either
tangible or intangible, owned by them. They are furnished identification
tags and operators’ permits for their automobiles, without charge, provided
the applications made therefor bear the seal of the mission and the seal of
the Department of State. It is understood that automobiles bearing District
of Columbia tags are permitted to enter the several States without obtaining
additional tags. Members of foreign diplomatic missions in the United
States and foreign consular officers stationed in the District of Columbia are
accordingly not required to pay the fees ordinarily charged other owners of
automobiles in this country.
By an order dated July 8, 1921, the Collector of Taxes of the District of
Columbia was authorized to issue dog licenses to foreign legations without
charge.
Articles 404 and 405 of the United States Customs Regulations of 1923
provide for the granting of customs courtesies and the exemption from the
payment of customs duties, to diplomatic and consular officers of foreign
countries and outline the procedure to be followed by such officers in
requesting these courtesies.

Under these regulations foreign ambassadors and ministers, and the
secretaries and other attaches of foreign embassies and legations, and their
families, are entitled to the free admission of their baggage and effects on
their arrival in this country, whether they are stationed in the United States
or are en route to missions in other countries. Subsequent to their arrival in
the United States they are permitted to import, without the payment of duty,
merchandise of any character, if intended for their use or for the use of their
families.
Supplies intended for official use of foreign embassies and legations and
foreign consulates in the United States, such as office furniture and office
material, may be entered free of duty. Exemptions of consular officers from
taxation and the payment of customs duties are specifically provided for in
Articles XIX and XXVII of the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and
Consular Rights between the United States and Germany concluded on
December 8, 1923.89 Exhibits of the products of foreign countries, if
forming a part of the permanent exhibitions in the consulates may also be
admitted free of duty.
The granting of these customs exemptions to diplomatic officers of foreign
countries is conditional upon the granting of similar exemptions to
American diplomatic officers by those countries.
Any material imported by a foreign government to be used in constructing
an embassy or legation building is exempted from the payment of customs
duties.
Under a recent ruling of the Treasury Department mail parcels sealed and
unsealed, addressed to a chief of mission in Washington, will be delivered
free of duty without examination; such parcels addressed to a member of
the family of a chief of mission, members of the diplomatic staff or their
families, will hereafter be subject to customs inspection, although they will
be admitted free of duty on the basis of reciprocity.
Accept [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW

701.05/129
[Document 386]
The Secretary of State to the German Chargé (Dieckhoff)
WASHINGTON, July 27, 1926.
MY DEAR MR. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: I beg to refer to Dr. Schlimpert’s90 call at the
Department on July 19 when he requested certain information in regard to
the Department’s note to you of July 16, 1926, concerning privileges and
immunities accorded in this country to persons belonging to foreign
missions. In this relation Dr. Schlimpert requested further information in
regard to the sentence on page 3 of the note reading as follows:
“The immunity from criminal prosecution and civil process and
from the obligation to testify is considered to apply to a foreign
diplomatic representative, his secretaries, attachés, including
military, naval and commercial attachés, employees, members of
his household, including his family, and domestic servants.”
The above quoted sentence may be modified to read as follows, in order to
answer the specific inquiries concerning this sentence which Dr. Schlimpert
made during his call at the Department:
“The immunity from criminal prosecution and civil process,
including that of the administrative and police courts of this
country, and from the obligation to testify is considered to apply
to a foreign diplomatic representative, his secretaries, attachés,
including military, naval and commercial attachés, members of
their household, including their families, employees and domestic
servants.”
It is not entirely clear to the Department as to what your Government may
have had in mind in referring to “administrative courts”. However, it would
appear that the persons mentioned above are entitled in this country to
exemption from the civil and criminal jurisdiction of all the courts.

I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
ROBERT E. OLDS
90 Dr. Martin Schlimpert, Secretary of Embassy.

Rulings by the Department of State
with 
regard 
to 
presumption 
of
expatriation of naturalized citizens in
certain cases
[387] The Secretary of State to American Diplomatic and Consular
Officers
Washington, January 8, 1926.
136.2/73b
[388] The Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State
Beirut, March 17, 1926. [Received April 9.]
136.2/76
[389] The Chief of the Division of Passport Control (Huddle) to the
Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue)
Washington, May 4, 1926.
136.2/76

136.2/73b
[Document 387]
The Secretary of State to American Diplomatic and Consular
Officers
WASHINGTON, January 8, 1926.
Diplomatic Serial No. 457
SIRS: Your attention is called to a recent ruling of the Department to the
effect that the presumption of expatriation, under the second paragraph of
Section 2 of the Act of March 2, 1907,91 does not arise against a person
who was born in Great Britain and who is residing in one of the self-
governing Dominions of the British Empire until he has resided in the latter
for five years. The same rule is applicable to a person who was born in one
of the self-governing Dominions and who is residing in Great Britain or in
another self-governing Dominion.
I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
ROBERT E. OLDS
91 34 Stat. 1228.

136.2/76
[Document 388]
The Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State
BEIRUT, March 17, 1926.
[Received April 9.]
No. 2121
SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s circular instruction of
January 8, 1926 (File No. 136.2/73b), calling attention to a recent ruling of
the Department to the effect that the presumption of expatriation under the
second paragraph of Section 2 of the Act of March 2, 1907, does not arise
against a person who was born in Great Britain and who is residing in one
of the self-governing Dominions of the British Empire until he has resided
in the latter for five years.
I have the honor to inquire whether a similar situation applies with
reference to persons born in one part of the former Ottoman Empire and
now residing in some other former part of that Empire now independent of
Turkey. For example, many Armenians who were born in Turkey proper are
now residing in Syria. Should the presumption of expatriation arise against
such naturalized citizens after a two-year or a five-year period?
Section 2 of the Act of March 2, 1907, reads, in part, as follows: “When any
naturalized citizen shall have resided for two years in the foreign State from
which he came, or for five years in any other foreign State, it shall be
presumed that he has ceased to be an American citizen.” While persons
born in Turkey proper in returning to Syria are not technically residing in
the “foreign State from which they came”, they are returning to the same
general geographical area. Further, in the case of Armenians, Syria has
become their home in the sense that most of their relatives and friends have
migrated to Syria and are now residing here.
I have the honor to request the Department’s instructions in the premises.

[have [etc.]
P. Kn ABENSHUE

136.2/76
[Document 389]
The Chief of the Division of Passport Control (Huddle) to the
Consul at Beirut (Knabenshue)
WASHINGTON, May 4, 1926.
The Department has received your despatch No. 2121 of March 17, 1926, in
which you refer to the Department’s circular instruction of January 8, 1926,
ruling that the presumption arising under the second paragraph of Section 2
of the Act of March 2, 1907, shall not be considered to be resting against a
person who was born in one self-governing dominion of the British Empire
and is residing in another portion of that Empire until he has resided there
for five years. You request to be informed whether, in view of that ruling,
persons born in what was formerly a part of the Ottoman Empire and
residing in a locality now independent of Turkey, and other than the place
of their birth, should be considered as residing in the foreign state from
which they came.
The Department considers that the words “in the foreign state from which
he came” should be considered to mean “in the foreign country from which
he came”; and that it was the intent of Congress that the presumption should
arise after a residence of two years in the country in which the person
originally had his home. Accordingly, if persons of the class mentioned by
you are residing in territory which was their original home, the presumption
of non-citizenship arises against them after a residence there of two years,
even though the territory itself is now under the jurisdiction of a different
sovereign than at the time of the birth of the person concerned.
Conversely, cases arise in which a naturalized citizen takes up his residence
in a country which, as defined by present boundaries, is not the original
home country of such person, but was formerly a part of the country from
another district of which he came. The presumption will not arise against
such persons until the expiration of five years. For example, in the case of
Mrs. Olga Josephine Lehrs who was born in Moscow, Russia, and

naturalized through marriage to a native citizen of the United States, it was
decided that the presumption of expatriation would arise against her after a
residence of five years in Latvia.
J. K. HUDDLE

Reply by the Department of State to
questionnaires on international law
submitted by the League of Nations
[390] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Atcherson)
Washington, October 12, 1926—4 p.m.
500.C 1196/11: Telegram

500.C 1196/11: Telegram
[Document 390]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Atcherson)
WASHINGTON, October 12, 1926—4 p.m.
64. Your despatch No. 798, April 7.92 Please transmit to the Secretary
General of the League of Nations in the usual manner the following
communication:
The Secretary General of the League of Nations with a
communication dated March 22, 1926,93 was good enough to
transmit to the Secretary of State of the United States certain
questionnaires and reports prepared by the Committee of Experts
for the Progressive Codification of International Law, and to
request the opinion of the Government of the United States as to
whether the regulation by international agreement of the subjects
treated in the questionnaires having regard both to their general
aspects and the specific points mentioned in the questionnaires is
desirable and realizable in the near future.
It is the view of the Government of the United States that
international arrangements on the general subjects of (1)
nationality, (2) territorial waters, (3) diplomatic privileges and
immunities, and (4) responsibility of states in respect of injury
caused in their territory to the person or property of foreigners,
which are the first four subjects mentioned in the communication
of the Secretary General, would serve a useful purpose and
would, therefore, be desirable and that there should be no
insuperable obstacles to the concluding of agreements on these
general subjects. The Government of the United States is not
prepared at this time to state whether all the points mentioned in
the questionnaires on the subjects referred to would yield to
regulation by international agreement, nor does it desire to
express an opinion regarding the desirability or possibility of

regulating all the points by international agreement until it has
had opportunity to make a more intensive study of them than it
has as yet made. The details would seem to be proper matters for
discussion in any negotiations which may ensue.
With respect to the fifth, subject, namely, procedure of
international conferences and procedure for the concluding and
drafting of treaties, the Government of the United States
perceives no real necessity for the regulation of these subjects by
international agreement. It would seem that the determination of
the procedure of international conferences might well be left to
the discretion of the delegates representing the Governments
participating in such conferences, and that the procedure for the
drafting and concluding of treaties might be left for determination
by the parties negotiating them.
In regard to the sixth subject enumerated in the communication of
the Secretary General, namely, piracy, it is the view of the
Government of the United States that piracy as that term is known
in international law is so nearly extinct as to render of little
importance consideration of that subject as one to be regulated by
international agreement.
With respect to the seventh subject, namely, exploitation of the
products of the sea, the Government of the United States is of the
opinion:
1. That international regulation of certain fisheries, such
as those for whales, is desirable and should be
realizable.
2. That information as to the status of fisheries for most
of the true fishes is not sufficiently complete to admit of
the formulation of proper regulations at the present
time.
3. That in most cases particular fisheries may best be
regulated by treaties between the nations most directly

concerned.
4. That investigations to determine the need for and
character of regulations to sustain the various fisheries
should be encouraged; and
5. That an international conference is desirable to
consider the problem of conserving the whale.
KELLOGG
92 Not printed. For texts of the seven questionnaires which were transmitted
with despatch No. 798, see League of Nations, Committee of Experts for the
Progressive Codification of International Law: Questionnaires adopted by
the Committee at its Second Session, held in January 1926: (1) Nationality
(C.43.M.18.1926.V [C.P.D.1.53]); (2) Territorial Waters (C.44.M.21.1926.V
[C.P.D.I.54]); (3) Diplomatic Privileges and Immunities (C.45.M.22.1926.V
[C.P.D.I.55]); (4) Responsibility of States for Damage Done in Their
Territories to the Person or Property of Foreigners (C.46.M.23.1926.V
[C.P.D.I.56]); (5) Procedure of International Conferences and Procedure for
the Conclusion and Drafting of Treaties (C.47.M.24.1926.V [C.P.D.I.57]);
(6) Piracy (C.48.M.25.1926.V [C.P.D.I.58]); (7) Exploitation of the
Products of the Sea (C.49.M.26.1926.V [C.P.D.I.59]).
93 Not printed.

Afghanistan:
Contents
Proposal for the establishment of diplomatic and consular
representation between the United States and Afghanistan
(Documents 391-392)

Proposal for the establishment of
diplomatic 
and 
consular
representation between the United
States and Afghanistan
[391] The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
Paris, November 4, 1925. [Received November 16.]
701.90 h 11/6
[392] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
Washington, January 26, 1926.
701.90 h 11/6

701.90 h 11/6
[Document 391]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, November 4, 1925.
[Received November 16.]
No. 5671
SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith the original and translation of a
note addressed to me by the Minister of Afghanistan, with which was
transmitted a rough draft of a proposed treaty between Afghanistan and the
United States regarding the establishment of an Afghan Legation at
Washington, and an American Legation at Kabul.
The Department’s instructions, regarding the nature of a reply to be made to
the Afghanistan Minister in the premises, are respectfully requested.
I have [etc.]
MYRON T. HERRICK
[Enclosure—Translation]
The Afghan Minister in France and Belgium (Nadir) to the American Ambassador (Herrick)
PARIS, October 30, 1925.
No. 386
MR. AMBASSADOR: In our conversation of July 15th last,1 I made known to you the
desire of the Royal Afghanistan Government for the maintenance of
friendly relations with the Government of the United States of America, the
appointment of diplomatic representatives in the two countries respectively,
as in other countries of Europe, and the establishment of regular diplomatic

intercourse with the great American power which is a pioneer State of
civilization and progress in the entire world.
During our conversation mentioned above, I verified the harmony of your
friendly ideas with my own, and I have hastened to transmit this
information on to my Government, which has just communicated to me the
desire of Afghanistan to establish relations with the United States of
America.
 
To this end, I had the honor verbally to discuss with you on October 28,
1925, the desire of my country to institute diplomatic relations, and at the
same time I hasten to confirm this by the present letter. I have the honor to
bring to the attention of your Excellency that I have been charged by my
Government to begin conversations with the government of the United
States of America for the establishment of diplomatic relations with
Afghanistan.
I have the honor to inform you that, as soon as you shall have officially
received a favorable reply from your government on this subject, I shall be
prepared to leave for Washington for the purpose of concluding, in the name
of Afghanistan, a treaty of friendship with the great republic of the United
States of America, the draft of which I take pleasure in enclosing herewith.
Accept [etc.]
M. NADIR
[Subenclosure—Translation]
Draft of Treaty of Friendship
Desirous of facilitating the relations of friendship and commerce between
the Republic of the United States of America and Afghanistan, His
Excellency, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the American Republic and
His Excellency, Sirdar Ala Mohamed Nadir Khan, Envoy Extraordinary and

Minister Plenipotentiary, of the Royal Government of Afghanistan in
France and Belgium, have agreed to the following:
1. The American government consents to receive a permanent
diplomatic mission from the Afghan government. The Afghan
government consents to receive a permanent diplomatic mission
from the American government. These missions shall enjoy in
both countries equal treatment in conformity with international
law.
2. The missions of both countries may consist of: a representative
of the rank of Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary,
a Counsellor, a First Secretary, two Second Secretaries, a
Commercial Attaché and an interpreter.
3. The representative of each country may float his national flag
above the building in which he resides. He may communicate en
clair and in code by telegram and wireless with his government
and its other representatives.
4. The contracting States are in agreement as regards the
conclusion in the future of a treaty for the purpose of facilitating
economic and consular relations.
5. The buildings of the contracting States shall enjoy the right of
extraterritoriality and in no case may they be used for purposes of
asylum by persons who violate local laws in force.
Done in two copies, English and Persian, both texts being of equal validity.
1 In his despatch No. 6078 of Feb. 20, 1926 (not printed), the American
Ambassador in France reported that the first interview between M. Nadir
Khan and the Ambassador occurred on June 19, 1925, and not on July 15.

701.90 h 11/6
[Document 392]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
WASHINGTON, January 26, 1926.
No. 1839
SIR: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your despatch No. 5671 of
November 4, 1925, transmitting the original and a translation of a note
addressed to you by the Minister of Afghanistan accompanied by a draft of
a proposed treaty between Afghanistan and the United States providing for
the establishment of diplomatic and consular relations between the two
countries.
It is noted that the Afghan Minister in his communication to you of October
30, 1925 makes reference to conversations of July 15 and October 28, 1925,
respectively, with you with regard to this matter. The Department, however,
has no record that the substance of these conversations has been embodied
in any reports submitted to it by the Embassy and desires therefore that a
report be prepared and forwarded at your early convenience.2
There is enclosed herewith for your consideration the text of a reply which,
unless you see any objection, you may hand to the Afghan Minister
conveying this Government’s appreciation of the friendly sentiments which
he has expressed toward this country.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I am [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
[Enclosure]

Draft Note From the American Ambassador (Herrick) to the Afghan Minister in France and
Belgium (Nadir)3
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s
letter of October 30, 1925 in which you were good enough to indicate your
Government’s desire that friendly relations with the Government of the
United States might be maintained and that diplomatic and consular
relations between the two countries might, within the near future, be
established.
I have not failed to communicate these facts to my Government
transmitting, at the same time, a copy of the draft treaty which you so
kindly furnished me and which, so you stated, you desired to serve as the
basis of a Treaty of Friendship to be concluded between our two countries.
I am happy to be able to inform you that I am now in receipt of a
communication from my Government with respect to the suggestion
contained in your above mentioned communication. I have been instructed
to convey to Your Excellency my Government’s deep appreciation of the
friendly sentiments which you have been good enough to express toward
the United States and to inform you that my Government has been pleased,
furthermore, to note the renewed expression of your Government’s desire to
establish diplomatic and consular relations between the two countries.
Careful consideration will be afforded the draft treaty which you have
presented.
I need not assure Your Excellency that my Government recalls with great
pleasure the visit to the United States in 1921 of the Afghan Mission headed
by His Excellency Mohammed Wali Khan4 on which occasion the President
in a communication addressed to His Majesty Amanullah Khan, Emir of
Afghanistan, and handed to His Excellency Mohammed Wali Khan, assured
His Majesty of his wish that the relations between the United States and
Afghanistan might always be of a friendly character and that he would be
happy to cooperate with His Majesty to that end.
2 See footnote 1, p. 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 391].
3 A copy of this note was handed to the Afghan Minister on Feb. 20, 1926.

4 See Foreign Relations, 1921, vol. :,_pp. 258-262.

Argentina:
Contents
Request to the Argentine Government that American arms
manufacturers be given the same consideration as those of
other nations (Documents 393-396)

Request to the Argentine Government
that American arms manufacturers be
given the same consideration as those
of other nations
[393] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
Washington, March 1, 1926—4 p.m.
835.24/20a: Telegram
[394] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Jay)
Washington, March 1, 1926—4 p.m.
835.24/20b: Telegram
[395] The Ambassador in Argentina (Jay) to the Secretary of State
Buenos Aires, March 4, 1926—10 a.m. [Received 6 p.m.]
835.24/21: Telegram
[396] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
Brussels, March 5, 1926—4 p.m. [Received March 5—3:11 p.m.]
835.24/22: Telegram

835.24/20a: Telegram
[Document 393]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 1, 1926—4 p.m.
11. The Colt Company has informed the Department that it has been
negotiating for an arms contract with a commission from Argentina having
its headquarters in Brussels. The company further states that its agent is on
the ground, that the commission is favorably inclined toward its product,
but that influence brought to bear in behalf of foreign manufacturers is
having its effect.
The Department desires that you report by telegraph regarding the
negotiations of the commission from Argentina, and ascertain from the Colt
agent the present status of the matter. Should the opportunity present itself,
you may inform the commission of your interest in assuring to American
manufacturers fair consideration with regard to any contracts it may
consider placing.
KELLOGG

835.24/20b: Telegram
[Document 394]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Jay)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 1, 1926—4 p.m.
12. The Colt Company has informed the Department that the Government
of Argentina has appropriated a large sum to purchase new and modern
military equipment and that a commission from Argentina having its
headquarters in Brussels is considering the placing of contracts shortly. The
company further states that its agent is on the ground, that the commission
is favorably inclined toward its product, but that influence brought to bear
in behalf of foreign manufacturers is having its effect.
 
Should the opportunity present itself, it is the desire of the Department that
you inform the Government of Argentina that the Government of the United
States trusts that Americans competing for this business will receive the
same consideration as that given to nationals of other countries.
Telegraph report to Department.
KELLOGG

835.24/21: Telegram
[Document 395]
The Ambassador in Argentina (Jay) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
BUENOS AIRES, March 4, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received 6 p.m.]
16. Your 12, March 1, 4 p.m. Yesterday a favorable opportunity occurred
and I discussed the matter frankly and informally with the Foreign Minister.
He authorized me to say that the Government of Argentina will disregard all
influences brought to bear, and he reminded me that despite keen foreign
competition the Government of Argentina accepted an American bid to
recondition Argentina’s two battleships.1 My understanding is that no
decision will be made until the commission returns and makes its report.
The Foreign Minister would not admit my purely personal suggestion that
the Government of France was pushing the matter, but mentioned Sweden
and Spain as deeply interested. Evidently the successful work on the
battleships has greatly pleased the Government of Argentina and I hope the
effect will be beneficial.
JAY
1 The Argentine battleships Moreno and Rivadavia were repaired in 1925–
1926, at Quincy, Mass.

835.24/22: Telegram
[Document 396]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
BRUSSELS, March 5, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received March 5—3:11 p.m.]
18. Department’s telegram No. 11, March 1. I have just succeeded in
reaching the agent of the Colt Company. I took up the matter with the
military mission from Argentina and learned that no decision had yet been
made with regard to the order in which the Colt Company is interested, nor
would a decision be made until a subcommission of experts had been sent
to the United States to make certain tests of the Colt Company product. The
Colt agent informed me that he received similar information and that the
subcommission would leave for the United States the end of this month. In
accordance with instructions I expressed to the military mission from
Argentina the hope that American companies would receive fair
consideration.
PHILLIPS

Bolivia:

Contents

Representations by the United States
to 
Bolivia 
regarding 
petroleum
concessions 
containing 
clauses
discriminating 
against 
American
citizens
[397] The Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell) to the Secretary of State
La Paz, October 3, 1924 [Received October 22.]
824.6363/48
[398] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell)
Washington, January 3, 1925—4 p.m.
824.6363/50: Telegram
[399] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell)
Washington, May 9, 1925—1 p.m.
824.6363/56: Telegram
[400] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell)
Washington, February 11, 1926.
824.6363/62

[401] The Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell) to the Secretary of State
La Paz, March 15, 1926. [Received April 8.]
824.6363/64

824.6363/48
[Document 397]
The Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell) to the Secretary of State
LA PAZ, October 3, 1924
[Received October 22.]
No. 576
SIR: I have the honor to inform you that in various petroleum concessions
granted to Bolivian citizens since the beginning of the year there has been
inserted a clause, of which a copy and translation are enclosed, stating not
only that the petroleum rights granted cannot be alienated without the
consent of the Government, but that they cannot be alienated in any case to
others than European capitalists. Concessions in which this clause appears
have been about ten in number and all in the Departments of La Paz, the
Beni, Cochabamba and the Territorio de Colonias. I have discussed this
matter with the local representatives of the Standard Oil Company of
Bolivia (Standard Oil Company of New Jersey), who inform me that they
take little interest in this clause as they do not believe that petroleum in
commercial quantities is to be found in these provinces.
I have taken occasion informally to bring the clause in question to the
attention of the Minister of Finance and various officials directly connected
with the granting of petroleum concessions. They inform me that this was
designed to prevent the monopolization of the Bolivian oil fields by the
United States. The Minister of Finance, Señor Victor Navajas Trigo,
however, has assured me that this clause was inserted by error and that steps
will be taken to have it struck from the concession contracts. …
I have also informally brought this clause to the attention of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, but have not made any forcible representations in this
connection. Doctor Paz has assured me that an explanation of this clause
will be furnished immediately. It would appear that the clause in question is
not only a discrimination against American citizens, but in direct violation

of article two of the Treaty of Friendship, Navigation and Commerce
between the United States and Bolivia of 1862.1
I have [etc.]
JESSE S. COTTRELL
[Enclosure—Translation]
Clause Inserted in Petroleum Concessions Granted to Bolivian Citizens
14. Neither shall they (the capitalists) be able to transfer, sell or mortgage in
their entirety or in part the material holdings of this concession, except only
to European capitalists or industrialists, who for their part, shall not be able
to transfer, sell, mortgage or take a partner in the ownership, use or profit of
the concession, except to European industrial elements; they being obliged
in any case of misunderstanding or want of knowledge of this clause to
conform to the caducity “ipso facto” of the present adjudication and to all
the duties embodied therein.
1 The treaty was signed at La Paz, May 13, 1858; ratifications were
exchanged Nov. 9, 1862. See Malloy, Treaties, 1776–1909, vol. I, p. 113.

824.6363/50: Telegram
[Document 398]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell)
WASHINGTON, January 3, 1925—4 p.m.
2. Legation’s 30, November 11, 10 a.m.2 and previous. You are instructed to
present this matter to the proper Bolivian official and leave with him the
following aide-memoire:3
“The Government of the United States has noted that clauses to
the following effect have been incorporated in certain petroleum
concessions understood to have been granted recently by the
Bolivian Government. (Here quote clause enclosed with your
despatch No. 576.)4
The Government of the United States considers that the insertion
of such a clause in concessions of this character constitutes a
discrimination against American interests, and that it is
inconsistent with the spirit of the provisions of the Treaty of
Friendship, Peace, Commerce and Navigation concluded between
the Government of Bolivia and the Government of the United
States on May 13, 1858. Apart from any question as to the
enjoyment by the Bolivian Government of wide latitude in
determining what classes of aliens may enjoy particular rights or
privileges within its domain, the Government of the United States
feels that restrictions such as that now in question should not be
applied in such a way as to discriminate against American citizens
and in favor of citizens of other nationalities.
The Government of the United States, therefore, feels confident
that the Government of Bolivia on having this matter brought to
its attention will take such steps as will insure to American
citizens equal opportunity with the citizens of other nations in the
matter of investments in Bolivia.”

You are instructed to reinforce the above with appropriate oral
representations. Department considers it important that this discrimination
be done away with.
HUGHES
2 Not printed.
3 The Chargé delivered this aide-mémoire to the Bolivian Foreign Office on
Jan. 7, 1925.
4 Supra.

824.6363/56: Telegram
[Document 399]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell)
WASHINGTON, May 9, 1925—1 p.m.
15. Your despatch 663, March 18,7 and previous. Bolivian memorandum7
does not sufficiently meet Department’s contentions as outlined in
Department’s 2, January 3. If you see no objection, you are instructed to
present the following note to the proper Bolivian official, reinforcing it with
such oral representations as you believe will be most effective:
“Under instructions from my Government I have the honor to
refer to Your Excellency’s recent memorandum in reply to my
communication of Blank concerning the granting by the Bolivian
Government of certain petroleum concessions which contain
provisions constituting a discrimination in favor of European
interests and against American interests.
My Government has noted the statement of the Bolivian
Government that the execution of the provisions of the treaty of
1858 is subject to regulation by the law of the respective
countries, but cannot believe that it was the intent of this treaty
that either party should be free to adopt measures which expressly
place the citizens of European or other nations in a more
favorable position than American citizens in matters such as that
now under consideration. My Government is not unmindful of the
concessions that have been granted in the past by the Bolivian
Government to American interests. The Government of the
United States, however, makes no discrimination against Bolivian
commerce or other Bolivian interests and feels that Bolivia should
not maintain clauses which constitute direct discrimination
against American interests and which tend to exclude such
interests from participation in the further development of the
natural resources of Bolivia.

My Government is gratified to note the view of the Bolivian
Government that the clauses in question have no general character
and may be modified or suppressed as convenience may dictate. It
is, therefore, my Government’s hope that the Bolivian
Government may take early action to modify or suppress the
provisions in question to the end that American interests may
have equal opportunity with any other foreign nationals to
participate in that development.
Telegraph result of your representations.
HARRISON
7 Not printed.
7 Not printed.

824.6363/62
[Document 400]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell)
WASHINGTON, February 11, 1926.
No. 220
SIR: The Department has received and read with interest your strictly
confidential despatch dated January 2, 1926,8 in which you inform the
Department that the Bolivian Government has removed or suppressed the
clause which had been inserted in certain decrees granting oil concessions
and which discriminated against American interests.
The Department understands from your despatch that the clause in question
no longer appears in existing concessions and that you have been informed
that the Bolivian Government does not intend to insert such a clause in
future concessions. It does not appear from your despatch, however,
whether you were officially so informed. In view of the correspondence
which you have had with the Bolivian Government with regard to this
matter, the Department feels that it would be helpful to have official
assurances that such a clause will not be inserted in concessions which may
be granted in the future. If you see no objection, and if the assurances you
received can not be called official assurances, the Department would be
glad to have you seek discreetly such assurances from the Bolivian
Government.
I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
LELAND HARRISON
8 Not printed.

824.6363/64
[Document 401]
The Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell) to the Secretary of State
LA PAZ, March 15, 1926.
[Received April 8.]
No. 1010
SIR: Referring to my strictly confidential despatch dated January 2, 19268
and the Department’s instruction No. 220 dated February 11, 1926, as to the
Bolivian Government having suppressed the clause which had been inserted
in certain decrees granting oil concessions and which discriminated against
American interests, I have the honor to report that after my first
conversation with the Minister of Foreign Relations and Worship, Dr. Diez
de Medina, upon which I based my despatch of January 2, 1926, I again
talked to him about this matter, and he reassured me that such a clause
would not again appear in decrees granting oil concessions …
I consider the statement of the Minister of Foreign Relations as a definite
and official assurance, and as evidence of this various concessions have
since been granted to persons … without this clause and all have since
approached local officials of the Standard Oil Company in La Paz with
propositions that the company purchase their concessions.
I have [etc.]
JESSE S. COTTRELL
8 Not printed.

Boundary dispute with Paraguay. (See
under General.)
(See pages 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 363] ff.)
Brazil:
Contents

Proposed 
treaty 
of 
friendship,
commerce and consular rights between
the United States and Brazil
[402] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil
(Morgan)
Washington, August 21, 1926.
711.322/2a
[403] The Chargé in Brazil (Daniels) to the Secretary of State
Rio de Janeiro, September 18, 1926. [Received October 8.]
711.322/4

711.322/2a
[Document 402]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil
(Morgan)
WASHINGTON, August 21, 1926.
No. 1162
SIR: Reference is made to the Department’s telegram No. 172, December 16,
1922, 6 p.m.,1 and to subsequent correspondence dealing with the policy
adopted by the United States pursuant to Section 317 of the Tariff Act of
19222 and involving the decision of the United States no longer to seek
from Brazil special tariff preferences but instead to ask for unconditional
most-favored-nation treatment in respect of its commerce.
On May 23, 1923, the Brazilian Ambassador handed to Mr. Hughes a
memorandum3 in which the following statement was made: “Brazil is ready
to accept in its commercial relations with the United States the new policy
of reciprocal most-favored-nation treatment proposed by this country.” The
Ambassador also referred to the suggestion by the United States that the
two countries enter into “a modus vivendi, preparatory to a Treaty on this
subject” (See Department’s telegram No. 45, June 8, 1923, 3 p.m.4 ).
On October 18, 1923, accordingly, an arrangement was entered into through
an exchange of notes5 by means of which the United States, promising
reciprocally with Brazil to accord unconditional most-favored-nation
treatment in customs and other commercial matters, for the first time put
into effect an international instrument based upon its new policy. This
Government now desires to conclude with Brazil a treaty of friendship,
commerce and consular rights such as those which it is entering into with
other countries. The central principle in respect of commerce is, of course,
an unconditional most-favored-nation clause governing customs and related
matters. The object sought is assurance of equality of treatment for the

commerce of the United States in all countries. The treaties referred to
include also provisions relating to rights of nationals of each party in the
other country, to protection of property and to rights and immunities of
consuls.
The first treaty to become operative expressing the present policy of this
Government was the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Eights
with Germany, signed December 8, 1923,6 ratifications of which were
exchanged October 14, 1925. Similar treaties have been signed by the
United States with Hungary,7 Esthonia8 and Salvador,9 of which the one
with Esthonia has been brought into force by exchange of ratifications.
Treaties containing the unconditional most-favored-nation clause were
signed with Turkey on August 6, 1923,10 and with Panama on July 28,
1926.11 Several others are in process of negotiation. Modi vivendi, similar
to the exchange of notes with Brazil, likewise based upon the principal of
unconditional 
most-favored-nation 
treatment, 
are 
in 
force 
with
Czechoslovakia,12 
Dominican 
Republic,13 
Finland,14 
Greece,15
Guatemala,16 Latvia,17 Lithuania,18 Nicaragua,19 Poland (including
Danzig),20 Rumania21 and Turkey.22 A similar agreement entered into with
Haiti on July 8, 1926,23 becomes by its terms operative October 1, 1926.
Two copies of the treaty of December 8, 1923, with Germany are enclosed.
You are requested, unless you perceive objection, to inquire whether it
would be agreeable to the Government of Brazil to proceed to the
negotiation of a similar treaty with the United States. A special draft will, of
course, be prepared for presentation to Brazil if this proposal is acceptable
to the Brazilian Government. It is probable that certain departures from the
text of the German treaty should be made either in the special text to be
submitted to the Government of Brazil or, on behalf of either party, during
the course of negotiations.
It may be useful for you to bear in mind that in adopting the unconditional
in place of the conditional most-favored-nation clause the United States has
brought its commercial policy into accord with that prevailing among
commercial countries. It would be gratifying if, among its early treaties as
well as modi vivendi embodying this principle, the United States could

celebrate a general commercial treaty with Brazil. The lack of a general
commercial treaty with Brazil since the articles relating to commerce and
navigation of the Treaty of Amity, Commerce and Navigation concluded
December 12, 1828,24 were terminated on December 12, 1841, is a matter
of regret to this Government, which hopes that a comprehensive modern
agreement may now be entered into.
Though the Department, in proposing a treaty with Brazil, is influenced
chiefly by its policy of concluding with other countries generally treaties
containing the unconditional most-favored-nation clause, you are
nevertheless desired to use especial diligence in seeking a favorable
response from the Brazilian Government in order to forestall any efforts
that other countries may be planning to make for the purpose of interposing
in South America arrangements based upon special privilege—a policy
wholly antagonistic to the policy of equality of treatment which the United
States is undertaking to promote.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Department either has transmitted or expects at an early date to
transmit instructions, similar to the present instruction, to the American
missions in the other South American capitals except Panama, with which
as stated a treaty has been signed, and Ecuador, the political régime now
functioning in which is not recognized by the United States.
I am [etc.]
LELAND HARRISON
1 Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, p. 453.
2 42 Stat. 858, 944.
3 Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, p. 456.
4 Not printed.
5 Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, p. 461.
6 Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. II, p. 29.
7 Signed June 24, 1925, ibid., 1925, vol. II, p. 341.

8 Signed Dec. 23, 1925, ibid. , p. 70.
9 Signed Feb. 22, 1926, ibid., 1926, vol. II, p. 912.
10 Ibid., 1923, vol. II, p. 1153.
11 Marginal notation by the economic adviser: “Error: the treaty signed with
Panama is not one to be classified as commercial and does not contain a
most-favored-nation clause governing general commercial exchanges.
W[allace] M[c]C[lure].” See vol. II, p. 828.
12 By an exchange of notes, Oct. 29, 1923, Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I,
pp. 873–874 .
13 By an exchange of notes, Sept. 25, 1924, ibid., 1924, vol. I, pp. 666–670 .
14 By an exchange of notes, May 2, 1925, ibid., 1925, vol. II, pp. 94–98 .
15 By an exchange of notes, Dec. 9, 1924, ibid., 1924, vol. II, pp. 273–282 .
16 By an exchange of notes, Aug. 14, 1924, ibid. , pp. 290–292 .
17 By a provisional commercial agreement, Feb. 1, 1926, ibid., 1926, vol. II,
p. 488.
18 By an exchange of notes, Dec. 23, 1925, ibid., 1925, vol. II, pp. 500–503 .
19 By an exchange of notes, June 11 and July 11, 1924, ibid., 1924, vol. II,
pp. 510–518 .
20 By an exchange of notes, Feb. 10, 1925, ibid., 1925, vol. II, pp. 692–696 .
21 By an exchange of notes, Feb. 26, 1926, ibid., 1926, vol. II, pp. 898–901 .
22 By an exchange of notes, Feb. 18 and July 20, 1926, ibid. , pp. 992–1000
.
23 By an exchange of notes, July 8, 1926, ibid. , pp. 401–406 .
24 Miller, Treaties, vol. 3, p. 451.

711.322/4
[Document 403]
The Chargé in Brazil (Daniels) to the Secretary of State
RIO DE JANEIRO, September 18, 1926.
[Received October 8.]
No. 2652
SIR: In compliance with the Department’s Instruction No. 1162, of August
21, 1926, I have the honor to report that on September 17 I called upon Dr.
Felix Pacheco, Minister for Foreign Affairs, to inquire whether it would be
agreeable to the Government of Brazil to proceed to the negotiation of a
treaty of “Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights” similar to the treaty
of December 8, 1923, between the United States and Germany. I pointed
out that the exchange of notes dated October 18, 1923, by means of which
the United States promised reciprocally with Brazil to accord unconditional
most-favored-nation treatment in customs and other commercial matters
was merely a modus vivendi and reminded him that in the memorandum
which the Brazilian Ambassador had handed to Mr. Hughes on May 23,
1923, he had referred to the suggestion by the United States that the two
countries enter into “a modus vivendi, preparatory to a treaty on this
subject”. Following the lines of the Department’s Instruction, I stated to the
Minister that the central principle of the treaty which the American
Government now desires to negotiate with Brazil would be, of course, an
unconditional most-favored-nation clause covering commerce and related
matters, but that it should likewise include provisions relating to rights of
nationals of each party in the other country, to protection of property and to
rights and immunities of consuls.
Dr. Pacheco appeared to be pleased with the idea, but stated that
unfortunately he would only be in office until November 15, and that, as
less than 60 days now remained, the time seemed very short for the
negotiation of such a treaty. I stated that I realized this, but that since the
exchange of notes of October 18, 1923, referred to above, had been effected

during the Bernardes’ administration and while Dr. Pacheco was Minister
for Foreign Affairs, I felt that it would be peculiarly fitting that negotiations
for a treaty to contain the unconditional most-favored-nation clause should
be begun while Dr. Pacheco was in office, I also stated that it would be
gratifying if among the early treaties embodying this principle the United
States could celebrate a general commercial treaty with Brazil, and that it
would be a matter of personal satisfaction to myself and also, I felt sure, to
Mr. Morgan if Brazil should be the first South American country to express
the intention of negotiating such a treaty. I then offered to telegraph
immediately to Washington for a special draft for presentation to the
Brazilian Government if the proposal proved acceptable. Dr. Pacheco
replied that he would take up this question with his colleague in the
Department of Agriculture, Industry and Commerce, Dr. Miguel Calmon,
and would advise me later of the decision reached.
I took this occasion to ask the Minister for Foreign Affairs whether the
results brought about by the exchange of notes of October 18, 1923, had
proved satisfactory to Brazil. He said that they had, and referred to recent
articles in the Jornal do Commercio which indicated the ever-increasing
volume of trade between the United States and Brazil. I reminded him that
in one of the articles to which he referred it was stated that the value of
coffee shipments from Brazil to the United States alone in the 12 months
ending June 30 was close to 204 million dollars, and that the value of goods
exchanged between the two countries had increased enormously in the last
few years. I left with Dr. Pacheco an aide mémoire embodying the ideas
contained in the first three pages of the Department’s Instruction together
with a copy of the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights of
December 8, 1923, between the United States and Germany.
Prior to my conversation with the Minister for Foreign Affairs on the
subject of a treaty I talked with Dr. Sebastião Sampaio, who is Dr.
Pacheco’s chief assistant. His personal opinion was that there would be too
little time for the present Administration to undertake the negotiation of the
treaty with the United States. He said that the Ministry of Agriculture,
Industry and Commerce were particularly procrastinating in such matters
and that it usually required two or three years for the negotiation of a treaty.
As in my subsequent talk with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, I took pains

to explain that since Brazil had been the first country to enter into an
agreement with the United States based on the unconditional most-favored-
nation clause it would now be consistent with the friendly relations existing
between the two countries if Brazil, first of all the South American
countries, should express its desire to negotiate a treaty of Friendship,
Commerce and Consular Rights. It was for this reason, I said, that I felt that
a decision should be reached by the present Administration in Brazil.26
I have [etc.]
THOMAS L. DANIELS
26 In instruction No. 1173, Oct. 1, 1926 (not printed), the Department
transmitted to the Chargé in Brazil a draft of the proposed treaty for
submission to and negotiation with the Government of Brazil. These
negotiations did not result in the signing of any treaty (file No. 711.322/3).

Renewal of contract for American
Naval 
Mission 
to 
Brazil, 
signed
November 6, 192227
27 See Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, pp. 651 ff.
[404] The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Ambassador (Do
Amaral)
Washington, June 30, 1926.
832.30/189
[405] The Brazilian Ambassador (Do Amaral) to the Secretary of State
Washington, July 6, 1926.
832.30/141
[406] The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Ambassador (Do Amaral)
Washington, July 6, 1926.
832.30/141

832.30/189
[Document 404]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Brazilian Ambassador (Do
Amaral)
WASHINGTON, June 30, 1926.
EXCELLENCY: With reference to your note of May 21,28 conveying the request of
your Government that the contract for the American Naval Mission to
Brazil be renewed for a period of four years under the same conditions, I
have the honor to inform you that this Department transmitted a copy of
your communication to the Secretary of the Navy for such comment as
might appear appropriate to him in the premises. Mr. Wilbur has replied that
the renewal of the present contract without modification would be agreeable
to his Department.
In view of this fact I take pleasure in informing you that this Government
gives its consent to this renewal without modification for a period of four
years from the date of the expiration of the present contract on November 6,
1926. This Government considers, furthermore, that this can be validly
accomplished by an exchange of notes between this Department and your
Embassy. I therefore have the honor to request that you signify in this
manner your Government’s acceptance of this renewal as set forth herein.
Accept [etc.]
JOSEPH C. GREW
28 Not printed.

832.30/141
[Document 405]
The Brazilian Ambassador (Do Amaral) to the Secretary of State
[Translation]
WASHINGTON, July 6, 1926.
No. 26
EXCELLENCY: The undersigned, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
of the United States of Brazil, has the honor to answer the note which Your
Excellency sent him on June 30 last, with reference to his own of May 21 of
this year,28 by which, in the name and by direction of the Federal
Government of Brazil, he asked the Government of the United States of
America to renew the contract of the American Naval Mission now in Rio
de Janeiro.
In compliance with the suggestions made in Your Excellency’s note, the
undersigned, in the name and by order of his Government, hereby says and
declares that he effects an exchange of diplomatic instruments of that
nature, that the Federal Government of Brazil accepts the renewal of the
contract of the American Naval Mission now in force, for a term of four
years counted from November 6 of this year, when it expires without any
change in its terms.
Like the Government of the United States of America, the Federal
Government of Brazil considers this exchange of notes to be perfectly valid
or to give perfect validity to the renewal of the contract, which is thus
established.
The undersigned avails himself [etc.]
S. GURGÉL DO AMARAL

28 Not printed.

832.30/141
[Document 406]
The Secretary of State to the Brazilian Ambassador (Do Amaral)
WASHINGTON, July 6, 1926.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 26
dated July 6, 1926, in which Your Excellency states, in the name and by
order of your government, that in compliance with the suggestion made in
the note dated June 30, 1926, of the Acting Secretary of State, the Federal
Government of Brazil accepts the renewal without modification of the
contract of the American Naval Mission to Brazil for a period of four years
from the date of the expiration of the present contract on November 6,
1926, and that your government considers, as does this government, that
this exchange of notes validly accomplishes the renewal of the contract in
question.
On this occasion I wish to express to Your Excellency the appreciation of
the Government of the United States for this additional manifestation of the
sympathy and friendly spirit of co-operation that has so long existed
between Brazil and the United States. It is indeed a source of gratification
to know that the services of American Naval officers on duty in Brazil have
been found satisfactory and helpful to the Brazilian Government.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

Proposals to stimulate the production
of rubber in the Amazon Valley
[407] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
Washington, December 19, 1925—8 p.m.
832.6176/37: Telegram
[408] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
Rio de Janeiro, December 22, 1925—3 p.m. [Received 5 p.m.]
832.6176/38: Telegram
[409] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
Rio de Janeiro, January 18, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 3:45 p.m.]
832.6176/41: Telegram
[410] The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
Rio de Janeiro, January 25, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 3:04 p.m.]
832.6176/43: Telegram

832.6176/37: Telegram
[Document 407]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, December 19, 1925—8 p.m.
72. Rubber manufacturers in the United States are actively interested in
establishing and financing collectively some organization to stimulate the
production of wild rubber in the Amazon Valley, providing capital,
guaranteeing future prices, establishing new and broader purchasing and
collecting agencies, and other effective methods so that full potential
production will reach world markets.30
Please make appropriate inquiries of the Brazilian Government as follows:
(1) Would such action by American companies in Brazil or in
connection with residents of Brazil be welcomed?
(2) Would the Government give assurances that export duties on
rubber would not be advanced?
(3) Would Brazil give assurances that it would not restrict the free
production and exportation of rubber?
Please expedite and reply by cable. Also, state which of the above methods
is believed to be most effective. Give your opinion on soundness.
Manufacturers believe that with proper encouragement a 60-thousand-ton
crop could be produced for the year ending June 1927. Such an organization
would ultimately be expected to extend its rubber plantation interests on
large scale into new regions.
KELLOGG

30 In this connection, see sections entitled “Efforts by the United States to
obtain for American rubber manufacturers relief from British restrictions on
the export of raw rubber,” Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. II, p. 245, and ibid.,
1926, vol. II, p. 358.

832.6176/38: Telegram
[Document 408]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
RIO DE JANEIRO, December 22, 1925—3 p.m.
[Received 5 p.m.]
82. Embassy and commercial attaché are working with Brazilian Secretary
of Agriculture on subject of Department’s telegram No. 72 dated December
21 [19].
The answer to the first question is an emphatic “yes.”
The answer to the second question is also “yes,” but assurances must be
secured from interested State Governments. The Governor of Para declares
that Para will reduce its export duty to a level equal to the duties in force in
the Middle East.
The answer to the third question is also “yes.” Since a combination of the
character referred to would be wholly injurious to Brazilian interests, such a
contingency is not likely to arise.
The increase of production to the figure mentioned for the year designated
depends on the mobilization of capital to meet the cost of a largely
increased labor supply to be imported from adjacent States.
MORGAN

832.6176/41: Telegram
[Document 409]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
RIO DE JANEIRO, January 18, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 3:45 p.m.]
3. Referring to the Embassy’s number 2, January 6, 2 p.m.31 Minister of
Agriculture communicated in writing on January 16th that on behalf of the
Federal Government he welcomed the cooperation of American capital in
promoting the immediate increase of rubber production in the Amazon
Valley; that no increase will be made in export duties in Federal territory
nor will the Federal Government enter into any agreement restricting
production. The communication further states that the Minister is awaiting
answers to the inquiries which he addressed to the Governors of Amazonas
and Para in regard to the assurance that there will be no increase in present
State export duties.
MORGAN
31 Not printed.

832.6176/43: Telegram
[Document 410]
The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State
RIO DE JANEIRO, January 25, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 3:04 p.m.]
6. Embassy’s telegram 4, January 20, 1 p.m. [3, January 18, 3 p.m.]
Brazilian Minister of Agriculture has communicated the Portuguese text of
telegrams from Governors of Para and Amazonas stating that the Governor
of Para will welcome any reputable economic organization which may
come to the State for agriculture purposes especially for planting rubber.
Exportation taxes in Para have already been reduced to minimum and the
fixed purpose of the Government is not to increase them. The Federal
Government has alone authority to enter into an agreement with foreign
countries to restrict production and the State authorities have nothing to do
therewith.
The Governor of Amazonas who has recently taken office states that not
only will his Government guarantee no increase in the present export tax on
rubber but that this tax will be reduced in accordance with the increase in
production. When the State Legislature next meets the Governor undertakes
that the necessary laws in the above sense shall be enacted.
MORGAN

Canada:

Contents

Approval by the United States of
proposal by the British Government
for the appointment of a Canadian
Minister at Washington
[411] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
Washington, November 19, 1926.
701.4211/53
[412] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, November 20, 1926.
701.4211/53
[413] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
Washington, December 3, 1926.
701.4211/55
[414] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, December 4, 1926.
701.4211/55

701.4211/53
[Document 411]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, November 19, 1926.
No. 723
SIR: Under instructions from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, I have the honour to inform you that His Majesty’s
Government have come to the conclusion that it is desirable that the
handling of matters at Washington relating to Canada should be confided to
an Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary accredited to the
United States Government. Such a Minister would be accredited by His
Majesty the King to the President of the United States and he would be
furnished with credentials which would enable him to take charge of all
affairs relating to Canada. He would be the ordinary channel of
communication with the United States Government on these matters.
Matters which are of Imperial concern or which affect other Dominions in
the Commonwealth in common with Canada will continue to be handled as
heretofore by this Embassy.
The arrangements proposed by His Majesty’s Government would not
denote any departure from the principle of the diplomatic unity of the
Empire. The Canadian Minister would be at all times in the closest touch
with His Majesty’s Ambassador and any question which may arise as to
whether a matter comes within the category of those to be handled by the
Canadian Minister or not would be settled by consultation between them.
The Canadian Minister being responsible to the Canadian Government
would not be subject to the control of His Majesty’s Ambassador nor would
His Majesty’s Ambassador be responsible for the Canadian Minister’s
actions.

In communicating to you these proposals, which His Majesty’s Government
trust will promote the maintenance and development of cordial relations
between the British Empire and the United States, I have been instructed to
express the hope that the United States Government will concur in the
appointment of a Canadian Minister at Washington on the footing I have
indicated above. As regards questions such as the precedence to be
attributed to the Canadian Minister or any other points which the United
States Government may desire to raise in connection with the appointment,
His Majesty’s Government will await the views of the United States
Government.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

701.4211/53
[Document 412]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, November 20, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 723, of
November 19, 1926, in which, under instructions from His Majesty’s
Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, you advise me that His
Majesty’s Government have come to the conclusion that it is desirable that
the handling of matters at Washington relating to Canada should be
confided to an Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to be
accredited by His Majesty the King to the President of the United States,
and express the hope that the Government of the United States will concur
in the appointment of a Canadian Minister at Washington on the footing
indicated in your note.
In reply I take pleasure in saying that the appointment by His Majesty the
King of an Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary, who will be
furnished with credentials which would enable him to take charge of all
affairs relating to Canada, and who will be the ordinary channel of
communication with the Government of the United States on these matters,
is entirely acceptable to the Government of the United States, and that it
will be agreeable to the President to accord him formal recognition at the
convenience of His Majesty the King and the Government of Canada.
Note is taken of the arrangements outlined in your note under which the
appointment would be made, as well as of your statement that as regards
questions such as precedence to be attributed to the Minister or any other
points which the Government of the United States may desire to raise in
connection with the appointment, His Majesty’s Government will await the
views of the Government of the United States.
Accept [etc.]

Frank B. Ketoce

701.4211/55
[Document 413]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, December 3, 1926.
No. 764
SIR: With reference to your note of November 20th last, intimating that the
appointment of a Canadian Minister at Washington was entirely acceptable
to the United States Government, I have the honour to inform you that His
Majesty The King has now approved the appointment of the Honourable
Vincent Massey, a member of His Majesty’s Privy Council of Canada, as
His Majesty’s Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to
represent the interests of the Dominion of Canada in the United States.
I have already had a verbal assurance from you that the appointment of Mr.
Massey is agreeable to the President and the United States Government.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

701.4211/55
[Document 414]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, December 4, 1926.
SIR: I have received your note No. 764, of the third instant, in which,
referring to previous correspondence in which this Government has been
happy to assure you that the appointment of a Canadian Minister would be
entirely acceptable, you inform me that His Majesty the King has now
approved the appointment of the Honourable Vincent Massey, a member of
His Majesty’s Privy Council of Canada, as His Majesty’s Envoy
Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to represent the interests of the
Dominion of Canada in the United States.
In reply it affords me pleasure to reiterate the assurance which has already
been verbally communicated to you to the effect that the appointment of
Mr. Massey in such capacity will be entirely agreeable to this Government.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

Continued protests by the Canadian
Government 
against 
increased
diversion of the waters of the Great
Lakes1
1 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 558 ff.
[415] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, February 5, 1926.
711.4216 M 58/80
[416] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
Washington, April 28, 1926.
711.4216 M 58/96
[417] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
Washington [,undated]. [Received May 1, 1926.]
711.4216 M 58/97
[418] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
Washington, May 18, 1926.
711.4216 M 58/96

[419] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
Washington, July 26, 1926.
711.4216 M 58/97
[420] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
Washington, November 16, 1926.
711.4216 M 58/110
[421] The Acting Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, November 26, 1926.
711.4216 M 58/110
[422] The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
Washington, December 7, 1926.
711.4216 M 58/110

711.4216 M 58/80
[Document 415]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, February 5, 1926.
No. 91
SIR: With reference to your note No. 711.4216M58/72 of November 24th
last,2 I have the honour to inform you that the Government of Canada has
given careful consideration to your statements in regard to the permit issued
to the Sanitary District of Chicago by the Secretary of War on March 3rd,
1925, for the diversion of water from Lake Michigan.3
The Canadian Government desires to express its appreciation of the clarity
and definiteness of the interpretation of the current permit contained in your
notes of June 15th4 and November 24th. It is understood that the 8500 cubic
second feet which the Sanitary District is authorized to withdraw includes
the reversed flow of the Chicago and Calumet rivers, but is exclusive of the
1200 cubic second feet drawn from Lake Michigan for domestic purposes
by the City of Chicago and eventually passing through the Sanitary Canal.
The Canadian Government agrees that although, so interpreted, the permit
does not effect any immediate reduction of the amount of water withdrawn,
on the other hand it does not authorize—as there has been some ground for
believing—an increase in the withdrawal beyond the amount previously in
fact abstracted. It is further noted that it is the belief of the Government of
the United States that the installation of sewage works and the metering of
water supply and other measures will result by December 31st, 1929, in a
reduction of the present total of 9700 cubic second feet to a figure between
8000 and 6700 cubic second feet, and by 1935 or earlier to 4167 cubic
second feet.
In the situation which has resulted from the policy of the Sanitary District in
relying for sanitary purposes upon a diversion of water from the Great
Lakes, the Canadian Government appreciates the force of the view set forth

in your note of the 24th November that the abstraction could not be entirely
and immediately ended without imperilling in some degree the life and
health of the citizens of the locality, but it has not been made acquainted
with the considerations which have convinced the Secretary of War that the
whole of the present withdrawal is essential on these grounds, and it has
been strongly represented to the Dominion Government that a distinctly
smaller flow would serve the sanitary needs of the district. In any case, the
fact remains that on every day that the diversion continues it carries most
serious loss to Canada and to every community on the Great Lakes and on
the St. Lawrence, by reason of its effect in hindering navigation, in
increasing the cost of harbour and canal and river improvements, and in
reducing the hydro-electric power capable of development. The degree to
which the considerations advanced as to the necessity of the diversions in
the interests of the health of the citizens of the Sanitary District should carry
weight would appear, further, to depend hereafter upon the degree of
goodwill and effectiveness displayed in the carrying out of the works which
have been made a condition of the permit.
 
The Dominion Government cannot conceal the apprehension in this
connection, aroused in Canada by certain proposals for the construction of
an Illinois and Mississippi waterway, proposals embodied in measures
already introduced into Congress during the present session, or reported as
about to be introduced, and which appear to be based and to depend upon
the indefinite continuance of the abstraction of the water of the Great Lakes
through the Chicago Sanitary District Canal, and even upon the increase to
10,000 cubic feet per second of the amount abstracted. It feels certain that
the Government of the United States will agree that whatever temporary
and limited concessions might be made upon the ground of public health,
no other ground warrants the withdrawal of water from the Great Lakes,
much less the extension of the present diversion. It believes it to be a
recognized principle of international practice that unless by joint consent,
no permanent diversion should be permitted to another watershed from any
watershed naturally tributary to the waters forming the boundary between
the two countries, and in any case the decision of the United States
Supreme Court of January 5th, 1925,5 recognizes that in the present

instance, the Treaty of January 11th, 1909,6 expressly provides against uses
“affecting the natural level or flow of boundary waters” without the
authority of the United States or the Dominion of Canada within their
respective jurisdictions, and the approval of the International Joint
Commission agreed upon therein.
In conclusion, the Government of Canada desires to express its appreciation
of the evident desire of the Government of the United States to find a
solution of the problem fair to all interests, and its hope that such a degree
of progress will shortly be attained as will warrant those who now suffer
from the diversion in counting upon its early termination. The Canadian
Government would, in this connection, appreciate any statement which you
may find it possible to make as to the progress which has been attained by
the Sanitary District and by the Municipality of Chicago in the provision of
the measures called for by the conditions of the current permit which will
actually diminish the abstraction from the Great Lakes.
I have [etc.]
ESME HOWARD
2 Ibid. , p. 567.
3 Ibid. , p. 561.
4 Ibid. , p. 564.
5 Sanitary District of Chicago v. United States, 266 U. S. 405.
6 Malloy, Treaties, 1910–1923, vol. III, p. 2607.

711.4216 M 58/96
[Document 416]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, April 28, 1926.
No. 291
SIR: At the request of the Government of Canada, I have the honour to
transmit to you herewith, in the hope that you will be so good as to
communicate it without delay to the interested authorities of the United
States Government, copy of a Resolution adopted on the 7th instant by the
Legislative Assembly of the Province of Ontario, protesting against the
enactment by the United States Congress of any legislation authorising the
diversion of water from the Great Lakes at Chicago in disregard of the vital
interests of communities bordering upon the Great Lakes, and particularly
those of the Province of Ontario.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON
[Enclosure]
Copy of a Resolution of the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Ontario Passed April 7, 1926
On motion of Mr. Ferguson, seconded by Mr. Sinclair,
RESOLVED, That in view of the application to the United States Congress for
legislation to authorize a further diversion of water by the Chicago
Drainage Canal from the Great Lakes System, this House desires to place
on record the following facts and considerations:— The Sanitary District of
Chicago has for some years been abstracting large quantities of water which
is part of the water-shed of the Great Lakes and diverting it to the Gulf of
Mexico. The Province of Ontario, as joint riparian owner with the

neighbouring States of the American Union, has a direct and vital interest in
this matter.
There is in existence a Treaty between Great Britain and the United States,
dated January 11th, 1909, which governs international boundary waters.
It has been decided by the Supreme Court of the United States that this
Treaty expressly provides against uses affecting the natural level and flow
of boundary waters without the authority of the United States or the
Dominion of Canada within their respective jurisdictions and the approval
of the International Commission.
That the application to the United States Congress for legislation to sanction
a further diversion at Chicago is in effect a proposal to violate this Treaty.
That legal actions have been brought by several of the States of the Union
to have it declared that the United States Congress cannot pass any Act
depriving those States of the advantage of the flow of said water, and that
such actions are still pending.
In view of these facts this Legislature is of opinion that attempts to deal
with this matter by way of Legislation, without reference to Canada or its
interests, are not in accord with the long-established friendly relations that
have existed between these two countries and ought to continue.
 
That this Legislature therefore requests that proper steps be taken to
represent to the Government of the United States, through diplomatic
channels, the unneighbourly character of the proposed legislation, and the
desirability of reaching an early adjustment of the matter by a mutual
arrangement in accordance with the terms of the Treaty.

711.4216 M 58/97
[Document 417]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON [,undated].
[Received May 1, 1926.]
No. 299

Immediate
SIR: I beg leave to refer to Sir Esme Howard’s note No. 91 of February 5th
last in regard to the permit issued to the Sanitary District of Chicago by the
Secretary of War on March 3rd, 1925, for the diversion of water from Lake
Michigan and to inform you that the Government of Canada have been led
by recent press reports to invite your attention again to the international
aspect of projects now being pressed in Congress for the construction of an
Illinois-Mississippi waterway which involve the withdrawal of water from
the Great Lakes system through the Chicago Sanitary District Canal. The
explicit or implicit authorization by the United States Congress of such
withdrawal for navigation purposes would, as has previously been
represented, introduce a further disturbing factor into the consideration of a
situation already of much difficulty.
The approaching report of the Joint Engineering Board upon the proposed
St. Lawrence Waterway, including certain aspects of lake levels, the
probability of joint consideration at an early date of the Niagara situation,
and the assurances contained in your note No. 711.4216 M 58/72 of
November 24th, 1925, of progressive reduction of the present abstraction at
Chicago would seem to provide bases for discussion by the two countries of
all outstanding waterways problems. The discussion and settlement of these
issues would be seriously complicated were the Chicago abstraction to be
confirmed by enactments which would appear to add national to state
approval and to recognize diversions for navigation purposes in addition to
the sanitary purposes which alone were stated in your note of November
24th, 1925, to be the basis of the present permit. The Government of
Canada have, of course, no desire to express any opinion upon the purely
United States phases of the projected waterway, but they cannot overlook
its bearing upon the vital interests of Canada in the preservation of the
Great Lakes system which Canada shares with the United States and of the
national sections of the St. Lawrence waterway. Those common interests
and the neighbourly goodwill which has marked the settlement of boundary
waterways problems reinforce the principles of international practice and
the provisions of the Boundary Waterways Treaty in the conclusion that no
diversions from the Great Lakes involving a transfer of water from a

common watershed to another should be effected or confirmed in either
country, unless after joint consideration and agreement.
In furnishing you with these observations, I would express the earnest hope
that the Government of the United States will agree that only through the
recognition of this principle can a firm basis be secured for safeguarding the
interests of both countries.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON

711.4216 M 58/96
[Document 418]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, May 18, 1926.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your Embassy’s
note, No. 291 of April 28, 1926, and its enclosure, a copy of a Resolution
adopted on April 7 last by the Legislative Assembly of the Province of
Ontario protesting against the enactment by Congress of any legislation
authorizing the diversion of water from the Great Lakes at Chicago in
disregard of the vital interests of communities bordering upon the Great
Lakes, and particularly those of the Province of Ontario.
Copies of your Embassy’s note and the Resolution are being transmitted to
the interested authorities of this Government.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

711.4216 M 58/97
[Document 419]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, July 26, 1926.
EXCELLENCY: In your note No. 91 of February 5, 1926, relating to the diversion
of water from Lake Michigan by the Sanitary District of Chicago, reference
was made, among other matters, to the failure on the part of this
Government to state in its note of November 24 last the considerations
which convinced the Secretary of War that the whole of the amount of the
withdrawal of water authorized by the permit which he issued on March 3,
1925, to the Sanitary District, is essential to the protection of the life and
health of the citizens of the locality and to the apprehension of the Canadian
Government that measures under consideration by Congress relating to the
construction of an Illinois and Mississippi waterway are based upon or
depend on the indefinite continuance of the abstraction of water of the
Great Lakes through the Chicago drainage canal at the present rate of
diversion or even upon the increase to 10,000 cubic feet per second of the
amount abstracted. You also stated that the Government of Canada would
appreciate any statement which this Government might find it possible to
make as to the progress which has been attained by the Sanitary District and
by the Municipality of Chicago in the provision of measures called for by
the conditions of the permit of March 3, 1925, which will actually diminish
the abstraction from the Great Lakes.
In the Embassy’s undated note No. 299 received by the Department on May
1, 1926, reference again was made to the project before Congress for the
construction of an Illinois-Mississippi waterway and it was stated that the
discussion by the United States and Canada of all outstanding waterways
problems would be seriously complicated were the abstraction at Chicago
confirmed by a legislative enactment by Congress which would recognize
diversions for navigation purposes.

With reference to the diversion limits, I may state that the investigations
made by the War Department showed that those prescribed were the least
consistent with due regard to the health of the large population affected by
the matter. The material reduction in flow through the Sanitary Canal in
1925, when it averaged about 8,250 cubic feet per second, caused by low
lake levels, developed dangerous sanitary conditions, and has conclusively
shown that reduction below the amount named in the permit, cannot safely
be required until the sewage treatment plants in the course of construction
by the city, are further advanced. The authorizing of an instantaneous
maximum not to exceed 11,000 cubic feet per second was due to the fact
that at times the flood discharge of the Chicago River is as high as 10,000
cubic feet per second and that the flow through the canal should then be
large enough to produce a slope characteristic of a flood of that volume.
Otherwise, the sewage carried by the river will be swept into the lake and
pollute the city water supply. The supply is not filtered, and such pollution
would be so extensive that it could not be counteracted by chemical
treatment.
The permit issued by the Secretary of War provides for the installation of
controlling works to prevent such flood discharges into the lake but the
execution of the complete program required by the permit will be very
costly, and it is felt that the installation of sewage disposal plants should
have first attention in order sooner to reduce diversion. For these reasons,
the paragraph of the permit relating to the controlling works does not
require the installation of these works until 1929. Preliminary investigations
concerning the installation have been made and it is expected that detailed
plans will be prepared during the ensuing year. No difficulty in the
completion of these works prior to the expiration of the permit is
anticipated.
In connection with the question of progress made toward the reduction of
diversion, I may state that the permit of March 3, 1925, assigned
supervision of the program for installing sewage treatment works to the
District Engineer at Chicago. He has recently reported that the progress
made by the city in carrying out the program is satisfactory. It is understood
that the schedule of expenditures adopted for this purpose by Chicago is as
follows:

1925 $17,789,000
1926 12,733,000
1927 9,379,000
1928 10,215,000
1929 1,370,000
The average sanitary flow through the drainage canal in 1925, after the
deduction of about 1,277 cubic feet per second used by the city of Chicago
for domestic purposes, was about 7,000 cubic feet per second. The
installation of water meters was provided for by appropriations made by the
City Council in January of this year, and consequently it may be expected
that in the near future there will be a reduction in the consumption of water
used for domestic purposes.
The Bill “Authorizing the construction, repair, and preservation of certain
public works on rivers and harbors, and for other purposes” containing a
provision authorizing the improvement of the Illinois River, was not
enacted into law during the session of Congress which recently closed. It is
understood that the Bill will be taken up for consideration shortly after the
next session of Congress convenes in December.
While this Government is glad to give the Canadian Government the factual
information requested by Your Excellency, it is not prepared to admit the
conclusions stated in Your Excellency’s notes of February 5, 1926 and May
1, 19267 as to the legal status of the withdrawal of waters from Lake
Michigan. It does not, however, deem it necessary to enter into a discussion
of this phase of the question at the present time.
The United States is prepared to discuss, as suggested in Your Excellency’s
note of May 1, 1926, the outstanding questions affecting the Great Lakes
and their waterways with a view to arriving at joint engineering solutions of
those questions and the protection and development of great waterway
resources for the mutual benefit of both countries.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

 

i

“ See undated note No. 299, p. 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc.
417).

711.4216 M 58/110
[Document 420]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, November 16, 1926.
No. 711
SIR: With reference to correspondence ending with your note No. 711.421
M. 58/82 of February 20th last,8 relative to the publication of certain
correspondence between the United States Government and the Canadian
Government, relating to the diversion of water from Lake Michigan by the
Sanitary District of Chicago, I have the honour to inform you that I am in
receipt of a communication from the Governor-General of Canada
informing me that the Dominion Government are desirous of publishing the
following additional documents on this subject:
(1) Sir Esme Howard’s note No. 91 of February 5th, 1926.
(2) Mr. Chilton’s note No. 291 of April 28th, 1926.
(3) Mr. Chilton’s undated note No. 299 which was received by the
State Department on May 1st, 1926.
(4) State Department note No. 711.4216 M 58/96 of May 18th,
1926.
(5) State Department note No. 711.4216 M 58/80/97 [sic] of July
26th, 1926.
In addition to the above correspondence, the Canadian Government desire
to publish the text of the enclosed despatches8 which His Majesty’s
Embassy addressed to the Governor-General of Canada on May 4th and
July 30th, 1926, respectively, notifying the Canadian Government of the
despatch to the United States Government of the undated note from the

Embassy No. 299 referred to under (3) above, and transmitting to the
Canadian Government a copy of State Department note of July 26th last
referred to under (5).
I have the honour to request that you will be so good as to notify me at your
earliest convenience whether the United States Government are prepared to
agree to the simultaneous publication of these papers in the United States
and Canada. Inasmuch as the Canadian Parliament is summoned to meet on
December 9th next, Lord Willingdon informs me that the Canadian
Government consider that it would be desirable to agree to that date as a
suitable one for the simultaneous release of the papers in both countries.
I have [etc.]
H. G. CHILTON
8 Not printed.
8 Not printed.

711.4216 M 58/110
[Document 421]
The Acting Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, November 26, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 711 of
November 16, 1926, relating to the publication of certain correspondence
between the Department and the Embassy in regard to the diversion of
water from Lake Michigan by the Sanitary District of Chicago.
The proposal made by the Canadian Government that the correspondence
be made public simultaneously in the United States and Canada on
December 9, 1926, has been referred to the authorities of this Government
directly concerned with the matter to which the correspondence relates, and
I shall be glad to inform you at the earliest date possible of the views of this
Government in regard to that proposal.
Accept [etc.]
JOSEPH C. GREW

711.4216 M 58/110
[Document 422]
The Secretary of State to the British Chargé (Chilton)
WASHINGTON, December 7, 1926.
SIR: I am pleased to refer to your note Number 711, of November 16, 1926,
and to Mr. Grew’s reply of November 26, 1926 regarding the publication of
certain correspondence between the Department and the Embassy relating
to the diversion of water from Lake Michigan by the Sanitary District of
Chicago and to submit the following observations: It appears to this
Government that the report of the Joint Board of Engineers on the St.
Lawrence Waterway Project9 greatly alters the understanding of the
situation with respect to diversions from the Great Lakes watershed and that
it would be undesirable to publish the correspondence which was based
upon at least a partial misapprehension of the facts.
It has been the impression, at least in many parts of Canada and the United
States, that the fall of some thirty inches in Lake levels which has proved so
burdensome to shipping interests was very largely due to the diversion at
Chicago. The report of the Joint Board of Engineers shows that only a small
part of the fall in lake levels has been due to that diversion.
 
Thus the report of the Joint Board of Engineers demonstrates that instead of
the Chicago diversion being in any major degree responsible for the
lowering of lake levels it has been responsible therefor to only a minor
degree. So far as the diversion at Chicago together with other artificial
diversions, including those into Canada, contributes to the lowering of the
lake levels the effect can, according to the report, be corrected by the
construction of compensatory works. With the question reduced to the
dimensions indicated in the joint report, it seems to this Government that it
would be advisable to suspend publication of the correspondence referred to
in your note and to enter upon a further discussion of the practical question

of providing compensatory works as recommended by the Joint Board of
Engineers.
In view of this greatly altered understanding of the matter this Government
considers that no good purpose would be served by a further publication of
previous correspondence but that it should be possible to arrive at a
complete understanding of the situation by a discussion of the practical
remedies now before us.
I shall be grateful if you will cause the views of this Government to be
brought to the attention of the Canadian Government.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
9 Report of Joint Board of Engineers on St. Lawrence Waterway Project,
Dated November 16, 1926 (Ottawa, F. A. Acland, 1927).

China:

Contents

Civil 
war 
in 
North 
China:1
International naval demonstration at
Taku; overthrow of the Provisional
Government of Tuan Chi-jui
1 For previous correspondence concerning civil war in North China, see
Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 588 ff.
[423] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 18, 1926—7 p.m. [Received February 18—2:19 p.m.]
893.00/7097: Telegram
[424] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 2, 1926—4 p.m. [Received March 2—9:25 a.m.]
893.00/7138: Telegram
[425] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 3, 1926—1 p.m. [Received March 3—9:37 a.m.]
893.00/7139: Telegram
[426] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 4, 1926—noon. [Received March 4—7:34 a.m.]

893.00/7142: Telegram
[427] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 8, 1926—noon. [Received March 8—4:58 a.m.]
893.00/7162: Telegram
[428] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 9, 1926—9 p.m. [Received March 9—5:40 p.m.]
893.00/7166: Telegram
[429] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Washington, March 10, 1926—2 p.m.
893.00/7166: Telegram
[430] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 10, 1926—7 p.m. [Received 10:30 p.m.]
893.00/7169: Telegram
[431] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 12, 1926—7 p.m. [Received March 12—7:15 p.m.]
893.00/7174: Telegram
[432] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 13, 1926—4 p.m. [Received March 13—9:12 a.m.]

893.00/7176: Telegram
[433] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 13, 1926—9 p.m. [Received March 13—4:30 p.m.]
893.00/7177: Telegram
[434] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 15, 1926—5 p.m. [Received March 15—11:20 a.m.]
893.00/7181: Telegram
[435] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 16, 1926—5 p.m. [Received March 16—2:55 p.m.]
893.00/7189: Telegram
[436] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 18, 1926—7 p.m. [Received March 18—3:22 p.m.]
893.00/7201: Telegram
[437] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 18, 1926—9 p.m. [Received March 18—7:25 p.m.]
893.00/7202: Telegram
[438] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, March 19, 1926—6 p.m.

893.00/7201: Telegram
[439] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 22, 1926—7 p.m. [Received March 22—2:15 p.m.]
893.00/7217: Telegram
[440] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 23, 1926—7 p.m. [Received March 23—5:33 p.m.]
893.00/7222: Telegram
[441] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 24, 1926—3 p.m. [Received March 24—10:07 a.m.]
893.00/7223: Telegram
[442] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 26, 1926—7 p.m. [Received March 26—9:35 a.m.]
893.00/7229: Telegram
[443] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 3, 1926—5 p.m. [Received April 3—10:30 a.m.]
893.00/7274: Telegram
[444] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 7, 1926—noon. [Received April 7—2:34 a.m.]

893.00/7279: Telegram
[445] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 10, 1926—5 p.m. [Received April 10—12:20 p.m.]
893.00/7289: Telegram
[446] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 12, 1926—3 p.m. [Received April 12—8:47 a.m.]
893.00/7308: Telegram
[447] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 15, 1926—2 p.m. [Received April 15—11:58 a.m.]
893.00/7329: Telegram
[448] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 15, 1926—8 p.m. [Received April 15—11:10 a.m.]
893.00/7328: Telegram
[449] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 19, 1926—6 p.m. [Received April 20—4 a.m.]
893.00/7334: Telegram
[450] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 20, 1926—8 p.m. [Received April 20—12:28 p.m.]

893.00/7335: Telegram
[451] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 21, 1926—6 p.m. [Received April 21—10:50 a.m.]
893.00/7336: Telegram
[452] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 4, 1926—6 p.m. [Received May 4—11:48 a.m.]
893.00/7373: Telegram
[453] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 14, 1926—7 p.m. [Received 8:05 p.m.]
893.00/7397: Telegram
[454] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, May 17, 1926—3 p.m.
893.00/7397: Telegram
[455] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 18, 1926—6 p.m. [Received May 18—11:17 a.m.]
893.00/7402: Telegram

893.00/7097: Telegram
[Document 423]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, February 18, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received February 18—2:19 p.m.]
81. My number 549, December 28, 8 p.m.2
1. I am reliably informed that Premier Hsu has hurriedly
abandoned office, has submitted his resignation, which has been
refused according to Chinese practice, and has been granted leave
of absence; and that the probabilities are he will not resume his
functions. His whereabouts is unknown. Is being variously
reported from credible sources that he has taken refuge in the
Legation Quarter and has gone for a rest to Tongshan hot springs.
2. I am also reliably informed that immediate cause of Hsu’s
disappearance was fear of action which General Lu Chung-lin,
commander in chief of the Metropolitan Garrison, and the
Minister of War had threatened to take against him because of his
failure to supply these respective militarists with the sums they
demanded. In the case of Lu the Ministry of Finance was able to
give him only eighty thousand dollars instead of million which
had been promised to him. I am inclined to believe this
information since it appears that the Kuominchun3 are attempting
to secure funds from any and every source to finance them in
their defence in the campaign against them upon which Wu Pei-
fu,4 Chang Tso-lin,5 Chang Tsung-chang in Shantung, and Li
Ching-lin south of Tientsin, with probable pro-Wu adherence in
Shensi are believed to be embarking.
3. The First Kuominchun based on Kalgan, formerly commanded
by Feng Yu-hsiang and possibly still under his actual leadership to
whom General Lu Chung-lin is attached, must bear the brunt of

any such campaign since it is the best organized and most
efficient of the four so-called Kuominchun.
4. While advices are meager concerning Wu’s movements against
Honan and the flank movements in the same direction by his
Shantung and Shensi adherents, there are many indications that a
Chihli-Fengtien alliance has been brought about for the purpose
of crushing Kuominchun in general and Feng in particular, that is
to say, the radical militarist element in North China. Sun Ch’uan-f
ang’s6 position vis-à-vis this alliance, which is of the first
importance, seems undetermined although it would not appear
likely that Wu would have started his campaign without
satisfactorily assuring himself at least of Sun’s neutrality.
5. A factor which may or may not have been accidental that is
greatly to Wu’s advantage is the death of General Hsiao Yao-nan,
Tupan of Hupeh, who was reported several days ago to have died
from heart failure. While nominally one of Wu Pei-fu’s principal
partisans, Hsiao has been notoriously uncertain in his allegiance
and has caused Wu much anxiety. Wu has appointed one of his
chief and most trusted lieutenants, General Chen Chia-mo,
Military Governor of Hupeh and another of his adherents,
General Tu Hsi-chun, Civil Governor of the Province. Thus far no
official confirmation of these appointments has been mandated by
the Chief Executive.
6. While a vigorous campaign by the allies, if such a relationship
has been established, would not seem likely until weather
conditions more favorable in the spring, yet Kuominchun forces
are not united and their general collapse without a strenuous fight
is possible. In such an event even the phantom government now
existing at Peking may collapse unless Wu and Chang decide to
retain Tuan7 as a figurehead. In any event the tenure of the
present Cabinet precarious.
MACMURRAY

2 Ibid. , p. 627.
3 Nationalist armies which had been under the control of Marshal Feng
Yuhsiang, whose resignation was accepted Jan. 9, 1926.
4 Former commander of Chihli troops who had been defeated in the civil
war of 1924.
5 General in control of Manchuria.
6 Military overlord of the Provinces of Kiangsu, Kiangsi, Chekiang, Fukien,
and Anhwei.
7 Tuan Chi-jui, Provisional Chief Executive of the Chinese Republic.

893.00/7138: Telegram
[Document 424]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 2, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received March 2—9:25 a.m.]
107. Following transmitted to commander in chief, United States Asiatic
Fleet:
“1. Under date of March 1st, American consul Tsingtau
reports departure from that port for Taku of expedition
consisting of naval transport Hwaichia and two
merchant transports with about 5,000 troops as well as
war vessels Haichi, Haishen, Chuyu and Tung Hsiang
and that a further force of about 5,000 reported to have
left Tsingtau yesterday for Taku by way of Weihsien
and Chefoo, owing to insufficient transport by sea from
Tsingtau.
2. With a view to the probability of repetition of
incidents such as the search of the West Jessup,8
recommend the immediate despatch of destroyer to
Taku in addition to continuance of ships at Chefoo and
Tsingtau.”
MACMURRAY
8 While anchored at Taku Bar on Feb. 5, the S. S. West Jessup of the United
States Shipping Board Emergency Fleet Corp. was boarded and searched by
the commander of the Chinese gunboat Chin Hai.

893.00/7139: Telegram
[Document 425]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 3, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received March 3—9:37 a.m.]
108. My 81, February 18, 7 p.m. New civil war is now in full swing.
Ostensible issue one between radical and antiradical forces. Former are so-
called National Armies and now control Government and Tientsin and are
supported by Government in Canton and Soviets; latter are allied forces of
Wu Pei-fu and Chang Tso-lin and possibly Sun Ch’uan-fang. Forces of Wu
now pressing attack along Peking-Hankow Railway, travel on which to
points south of Chengchow now closed. Forces of Chang Tso-lin in
Shantung attacking Tientsin from south and invading Honan from east.
Railroad travel south of Tientsin and from Tientsin on Peking-Mukden
Railroad closed. Peking-Tientsin rail communication in immediate danger
of being closed. Probability of heavy fighting with further destruction of
railroad, financial straits and weakness of Government, and general disorder
throughout country make possibilities of situation extremely grave.
Respectfully request repetition to Navy and War Departments. Repeated to
Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7142: Telegram
[Document 426]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 4, 1926—noon.
[Received March 4—7:34 a.m.]
109. My 108, March 3, 1 p.m. and my 107, March 2, 4 p.m.
1. Following to Shanghai in reply to inquiry as to practicability of sea route
from Shanghai to Tientsin and Peking.
“March 4, 10 a.m. Your March 3, 3 p.m.
(1) The sea route from Shanghai to Tientsin which has
been normal may be interfered with or even become
dangerous owing to the arrival off Taku Banks on the
afternoon of March 3rd of a Chinese naval expedition
from Tsingtau should it eventuate that this force is
hostile to Kuominchun. Thus far the allegiance of
expedition not definitely known. I shall telegraph
further when the situation develops.
(2) Two trains daily each way are still in operation
between Tientsin and Peking although trains are often
late. It is not unlikely that this train service will shortly
be interrupted in view of the approach of Li Ching-lin
forces toward Tientsin from the south and credible
reports of continued advance of Wu Pei-fu in Honan
and commencement of Fengtien attack from the north
toward Tientsin which may result in fighting in the
vicinity of Tientsin and Peking.
(3) In using this information you should take care not to
cause undue alarm.”

2. Consul general, Tientsin, in reporting facts set forth in paragraph (1) of
quoted telegram stated U. S. S. Preston would proceed to Taku from
Shanghai.
3. Credibly reported that Wu Pei-fu has captured Chengchow, Honan,
important junction point of Peking-Hankow and Lung-Hai Railroads and
that Chang Tso-lin has captured Lanchow.
4. Repeated to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7162: Telegram
[Document 427]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 8, 1926—noon.
[Received March 8—4:58 a.m.]
115. My 107, March 2, 4 p.m. and paragraph 2 my 109, March 4, noon.
1. Destroyer Preston which arrived off Taku morning March 7th
and is standing outside bar reports early this morning troops have
been disembarked at daylight at the mouth of Hai Ho, that heavy
firing is in progress between fort and cruisers covering landing.
Consul general, Tientsin, telephoned March 8, 10 a.m., that
bombardment is on south side since it alone armed, that two of
cruisers have departed, leaving only one to carry on attack which
has taken up a position in the channel preventing pilots getting
out or in and thus completely stopping navigation. No American
merchantmen due until 17th, but apparently the position of the
Chinese cruiser would prevent destroyer from proceeding to
Tangku if presence there became necessary.
2. American consul general, Tientsin, further states that it is
credibly reported, though not yet officially announced, that troops
have been disembarked at Pehtang, north of Tangku, who have
cut Peking-Mukden Railway and that it is believed any
disembarkation in force will take place at the above point. All
quiet at Tientsin.
3. Please inform Navy and War Departments at the request of
attachés.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7166: Telegram
[Document 428]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 9, 1926—9 p.m.
[Received March 9—5:40 p.m.]
119. My 115, March 8, noon.
1. Consul general at Tientsin reports that he has been informed by
the local authorities that a series of 10 electrically controlled
mines has been placed in Taku Channel near Spit Point buoy
about 1 mile from Taku Forts where the channel is only some 500
feet wide and that pilots have been notified shipping would not be
allowed in or out. The port of Tientsin is thus completely closed.
2. Gauss further reports that, while bombardment of Taku position
by Fengtien cruiser is still going on intermittently, the main
movement of Tsingtau naval expedition appears to have resolved
itself into a disembarkation at Pehtang about 7 miles north of
Tangku where a considerable force has already been landed which
has cut Peking-Mukden Railway at that point and is there
engaged in fighting the Kuominchun. In the circumstances
communication between Peking and the sea is entirely
interrupted, contrary to the letter and spirit of articles 8 and 9 of
the protocol of 1901.9
3. There is to be a meeting of the representatives of protocol
powers tomorrow morning, March 10th, to consider what if any
steps should be taken in this regard. As it may be necessary for
me to assume a definite position then or at a subsequent meeting,
I respectfully submit the following: While the situation at
Takunhas been hitherto somewhat undefined and might have
afforded ground for accusations of an unneutral attitude on the
part of the powers if they had demanded cessation of obstructions

to 
sea 
communications 
in 
and 
out 
of 
Tientsin, 
the
acknowledgment of Kuominchun in placing mines to prevent
such communications has clarified matter, so that I consider that a
display of international naval force for the purpose of enforcing
the protocol is practicable and necessary. I believe that such
action is highly expedient not only for the immediate purpose of
protecting American life and property against the disastrous
possibilities of mine field and bombardment, international or
otherwise, by the Fengtien naval forces and the Taku Forts, but
also in order to maintain the American and foreign treaty position
wherever feasible in the rear-guard action which the treaty powers
are now being forced to conduct in China—a practicability which
the more difficult land situation in respect to the recent
international train incidents did not permit. If unable to refer to
the Department for previous approval or instruction at the time
when the question comes up for decision, I shall take the position
that the interested powers should join in using their naval forces
for the purpose of enforcing a demand that both sides in the
present hostilities refrain from action dangerous to foreign life
and property in connection with the port of Tientsin. Before
agreeing to this I shall make every effort to explore with my
colleagues the possibilities of less drastic action as regards
Central Government’s ability to cope with the situation.
4. I feel the more satisfied of the soundness of position indicated
above in view of the Department’s telegram 214, September 8, 5
p.m., 192410 in connection with enforcement of neutrality of
Whangpoo River at Shanghai. In the present instance there is the
further dominant consideration of the protocol with its provisions
concerning communication between Peking and the sea. Indeed in
view of the interruption of rail communication on every line out
of Peking except to Tientsin, Peking is completely cut off from all
transportation facilities until the port of Tientsin is again open.
5. Repeated to commander in chief, United States Asiatic Fleet.
MACMURRAY

2 Foreign Relations , 1901, appendix (Affairs in China), p. 312.

10 Foreign Relations, 1924, vol..,_p.371.

893.00/7166: Telegram
[Document 429]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 10, 1926—2 p.m.
57. Your telegram No. 119, March 9, 9 p.m. Attitude proposed by you in
paragraph 3 is approved.
GREW

893.00/7169: Telegram
[Document 430]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 10, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received 10:30 p.m.]
120. My number 119, March 9, 9 p.m., third paragraph.
1. In pursuance of discussion taken at this morning’s meeting Senior
Minister is today addressing to the Minister for Foreign Affairs following
note:
“On behalf of my colleagues and myself, the diplomatic
representatives of the protocol powers, I have the honor to bring
to Your Excellency’s most earnest attention that, according to the
statements of the local Chinese authorities at Tientsin, a series of
10 electrically controlled mines has been placed in the Taku
Channel near Spit Point buoy where the channel is only some 500
feet wide and that the pilots have been notified that shipping will
not be allowed in or out. The port of Tientsin is thus completely
closed to the sea. It further appears that the Tsingtau naval
expedition and the Kuominchun forces stationed on the site of the
south Taku Forts continue an artillery duel which of itself
prevents the safe navigation of the Taku Channel, while hostilities
between the [Kuominchun] and the Fengtien forces have cut the
railways between Tientsin and Chinwangtao.
In the circumstances, communication between Peking and the sea
is entirely interrupted, in violation of the provisions of the
protocol of 1901. The diplomatic representatives aforementioned
protest most urgently against this state of affairs and demand that
the Government of China bring about the immediate cessation, by
both of the mutually hostile factions of the armed forces of China,
of these acts of obstruction to open communication to the sea

through the Taku Channel, reserving to themselves to collaborate
for the protection of foreign shipping and for the maintenance of
free access to the port of Tientsin, should the Chinese
Government fail to take forthwith action to that end in fulfillment
of the purposes of the protocol of 1901.”
The Senior Minister is also addressing, mutatis mutandis, to the Senior
Consul at Tientsin with a view to representations to Kuominchun
headquarters and at Mukden and Tsinanfu for communication to Fengtien
[and?] Shantung headquarters the following instruction:
“Please communicate to Chinese military authority that
diplomatic representatives have urgently protested against the
closing of the port of Tientsin to the sea by the military action
being carried on at Taku and have demanded the immediate
cessation by both of the military hostile factions of the Chinese
armed forces of these acts of obstruction, reserving to themselves
to collaborate for the protection of foreign shipping and for the
maintenance of free access to the port of Tientsin, should the
Chinese Government fail to take forthwith action to that end in
fulfillment of the purposes of the protocol of 1901.
You should add that an identical communication is being
addressed to the headquarters of both contending parties and that
the protective measures indicated above would be applied against
either party without discrimination.”
2. Reported to commander in chief.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7174: Telegram
[Document 431]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 12, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received March 12—7:15 p.m.]
123. Your telegram 57, March 10, 2 p.m.
1. Chinese authorities of neither faction have taken steps to restore
unimpeded navigation although several British and Japanese shipping
companies have made private arrangements with the military forces for
clearance of ships both inwards and outwards in individual instances in all
cases subject to boarding and search.
2. The action taken in the circumstances indicated in the following telegram
I am sending to commander in chieitem:
“The five interested Ministers today agreed to telegraph their
respective naval authorities as follows:
‘On 10th of March the Senior Minister in behalf of the
protocol powers notified the Chinese Government of
the necessity of removing obstacles to the freedom of
navigation in and out of Tientsin, either by the placing
of mines or by gunfire, reserving their right to take
action themselves to that end for the maintenance of the
protocol of 1901 in case the Chinese Government failed
to accomplish this forthwith.
Through the consular bodies at Tientsin and at Mukden
and Tsinanfu, similar notifications have since been
conveyed to the respective headquarters of the forces
engaging in hostilities at the entrance of the harbor of
Tientsin.

Inasmuch as no effect appears to have been given as yet
to the demand of the protocol powers, the American,
British, French, Italian and Japanese Ministers,
representing the countries having naval forces at
Tientsin, have agreed that it is desirable that, unless free
navigation has been restored in time for vessels in and
out of Tientsin by the morning tide on Saturday March
13th, the naval commanders should notify the military
authorities in command of the fort at Taku and the naval
officer in command of the Tsingtau flotilla to the
following effect:
In order to maintain the general treaty right[s] of
international commerce and the particular right of free
access from the Capital to the sea, as provided by
protocol of 1901, the powers concerned demand that:
(1) All hostilities in the channel from Taku Bar to
Tientsin must be discontinued; (2) all mines or other
obstructions must be removed; (3) all navigation signals
must be restored and not further molested; (4) all
combatant vessels must remain outside Taku [Bar] and
refrain from interference with foreign shipping; and (5)
all searches of foreign vessels except by the customs
authorities must be discontinued.
If satisfactory assurances on these points have not been
received by the morning tide of Monday, the naval
authorities of the foreign powers will proceed to take
such measures as they may find necessary for the
purpose of removing or of suppressing any obstruction
to the free and safe navigation of the channel between
Tientsin and the sea.
The five Ministers above mentioned nevertheless
consider it desirable that the naval forces should not,
unless in case of absolute necessity, resort to gunfire
unless further advised.’

In view of State Department’s approval of naval action in case of
necessity I recommend that you authorize U.S.S. Asheville and
U.S.S. Preston to cooperate with naval forces of other
nationalities at Tientsin for the purpose set forth above.”
3. Repeated to Tientsin.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7176: Telegram
[Document 432]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 13, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received March 13—9:12 a.m.]
125. My number 123, March 12, 7 p.m. Naval commanders at Tientsin have
found it necessary because of practical difficulties to request delay of one
day in making the contemplated notification to Chinese military and naval
authorities. I have approved.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7177: Telegram
[Document 433]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 13, 1926—9 p.m.
[Received March 13—4:30 p.m.]
127. My number 125, March 13, 4 p.m.
1. Yesterday afternoon despite arrangements which had been
made between Japanese consulate general at Tientsin and the
military authorities at Taku for the entry of two Japanese
destroyers, the latter were fired upon while passing the fort and
returned the fire thereafter, retiring outside the bar. Four Japanese
were wounded of whom three were officers including commander
of destroyer flotilla of four vessels which had arrived off Taku
Bar from Port Arthur.
2. A secretary of the Foreign Office who called upon me this
morning to convey General Lu Chung-lin’s appreciation of
impartial attitude of the American and British authorities in the
present Taku situation stated that General Lu had described the
incident as a Chinese sentry having fired blank cartridges at the
Japanese leading destroyer since she was not complying with the
arrangements made as to hour of passage through the channel and
that the Japanese had thus fired upon the fort without sufficient
provocation. There seems no doubt of the fact that the Chinese
military at Taku knew that the vessels were Japanese destroyers
passing through according to arrangement since the incident
occurred at 3:40 p.m. The vessels were flying squadron identified
by [identification?] flags and were preceded by a steam launch
with a Chinese officer from the port on board who had landed
from the boat sufficiently in advance of firing by Chinese for a
preliminary report to the authorities.

3. On the evening of the same day, March 12th, the Foreign
Office protested orally to the Japanese Minister, expressing the
hope that such an incident would not be repeated. This afternoon,
on receipt of full advices, Japanese Minister called on Vice
Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is in charge of the Foreign
Office, and protested in turn against the action of the Chinese
military at Taku, reserving possible later proposals to Chinese
Government in respect to settlement of the incident and
demanding that Chinese Government meanwhile instruct local
Chinese military authorities to take immediate definite and most
effective steps to avoid repetition of such regrettable occurrences.
4. I understand that arrangements are being made locally at
Tientsin for a Japanese destroyer to proceed there today.
5. Copy mailed to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7181: Telegram
[Document 434]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 15, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received March 15—11:20 a.m.]
130. My 123, March 12, 7 p.m., and 125, March 13, 4 p.m.
1. Proposed action has been further postponed by the failure of Japanese
naval force at Tientsin to receive necessary authorization from home
government. That having now been received, the folio wingidentic telegram
is being sent by five Ministers concerned to respective naval
commanderitem:
“The Japanese Government having agreed to the joint action by
the foreign naval commandants at Tientsin, which formed the
subject of the identic telegram addressed by the American,
British, French, Italian and Japanese Ministers to their respective
naval commanders on March 12th, the five Ministers request that
their commanders at Tientsin will now arrange to deliver as soon
as possible the notification to the Chinese military authorities in
command of the forts at Taku and the naval officer in command
of the Tsitsihar [Tsingtao] flotilla in the terms prescribed in the
aforesaid telegram.
The five Ministers suggest that the notification to the Chinese
commander of the Tsitsihar [Tsingtao] flotilla could be delivered
by the officer commanding H. M. S. Carlisle at about the same
time as the foreign naval commanders in Tientsin arrange to
deliver the notification to the Chinese military authorities at Taku.
The five Ministers desire to leave their naval commanders full
discretion to choose the time for the delivery of the notification
and suggest that an interval of from 36 to 48 hours should be

given for compliance by Chinese on both sides. The five
Ministers request that they may be kept informed of the decision
reached in this matter.”
2. I shall telegraph date of proposed delivery of notification as soon as I am
informed thereof, at which time it is proposed to communicate program
simultaneously to the Chinese Government and to the press.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7189: Telegram
[Document 435]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 16, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received March 16—2:55 p.m.]
134. My 130, March 15, 5 p.m.
1. Following is substance of message dated March 15, 12:30 a.m., from
United States ship Asheville at Tientsiitem:
“Naval commanders of American, British, French, Italian and
Japanese war vessels at Tientsin decided night of March 15th as
follows:
Notification to be delivered to senior officer present of the
Tsingtau flotilla at 4 o’clock Tuesday, March 16, 1926, by the
captain of H. M. S. Carlisle; notification to be delivered to
military authorities at Taku Fort at same time by commanders of
French cruiser and Italian man-of-war, period for compliance to
expire at noon Thursday, March 18th. Ministers also informed
that if the commanding officer of Taku Fort fails to comply with
terms of notification being sent, it is possible that use of foreign
garrisons from Tientsin will be necessary to ensure compliance.”
2. The subject matter of the last sentence was considered at a meeting this
morning of the Ministers concerned who have sent the following
communication to their respective naval commanders at Tientsin:
“The five Ministers have duly considered the message from their
five naval commandants conveying their opinion that, if the
commander of the Kuominchun forts at Taku fails to comply with
the terms of the notification, it is possible that the use of the

foreign garrison at Tientsin will be necessary to ensure
compliance.
The Ministers in reply wish to state that they did not contemplate
either the use of the foreign garrison at Tientsin or the
employment of naval landing forces to ensure compliance with
the five demands embodied in their notification.
The five Ministers, who are hopeful that the exclusion of the
Tsingtau flotilla from entering the channel will make easy the
compliance of the Kuominchun with the demands made upon
them, consider it highly undesirable to make use of land forces
and would not be prepared to seek from their Governments,
except as a last resort, the necessary authorization to that end.”
3. The statement in paragraph 2 of my 123, March 12, 7 p.m., beginning at
the subquote as follows: “On March 10th” through the subquote, omitting
last paragraph commencing “the five Ministers above mentioned
nevertheless consider, etc.,” is being communicated to the Chinese
Government by the Senior Minister this afternoon and simultaneously given
to the press in accordance with paragraph 2 of my 130, March 15, 5 p.m.
 
4. Insert “Bar” after Taku in fourth demand in statement aforementioned.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7201: Telegram
[Document 436]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 18, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received March 18—3:22 p.m.]
137. My 134, March 16, 5 p.m.
1. In view of satisfactory assurances from the commander of
Tsingtau flotilla and from Kuominchun authorities at Tientsin, as
well as from the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, I have informed our
naval authorities that no further naval action is required in
connection with the opening of communications between Tientsin
and the sea.
2. The following is the substance of a note, dated March 17th,
received last evening by the Senior Minister from the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs, to wit: Foreign Office stated it had immediately
forwarded to the competent military authorities Senior Minister’s
note of March 16th communicating to it the notification which
naval commanders of the several powers in Tientsin had
transmitted to both Chinese “belligerent parties” in Taku. “In
conformity with the stipulations of the protocol of 1901 the free
communication between Peking and the sea must remain
unobstructed, a principle which the Chinese Government has
always respected.” Then follow excuses for restrictions upon
navigation as a result of warfare near Taku and statement that
Chinese forces had been doing everything possible to restore free
communication between Peking and the sea. The note thereafter
complains of the impatience of the protocol powers and the fixing
of a time limit for a reply to their demands which the Chinese
Government cannot recognize as equitable. It then states that
competent Chinese military authorities have been authorized to
take the proper measures with regard to the five demands and

requests ministers with naval forces at Tientsin to authorize their
naval commanders in Tientsin to enter into relations with local
military authorities in order that they may find together proper
ways and means for maintenance of communication to the sea.
The note closes with the statement that it is essential that no
recourse should be had to extreme methods, especially in view of
the friendly relations which exist between China and the foreign
powers.
3. Fuller report to follow.
4. Repeated to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7202: Telegram
[Document 437]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 18, 1926—9 p.m.
[Received March 18—7:25 p.m.]
138. 1. On the afternoon of March 17th representatives of Kuomintang
demonstration besieged the Foreign Office in the endeavor to force the Vice
Minister to approve a draft prepared for the purpose by the Soviet Embassy
in reply to the demands of the powers concerning Taku incident, instead of
the note which was actually sent by the Foreign Office to the Senior
Minister, as reported in paragraph 2 of my 137, March 18, 7 p.m.
Demonstrators also visited the Chief Executive’s residence, and participants
claim that some of them were bayoneted by the bodyguard when attempting
to force entrance. This morning another demonstration was organized and
about two thousand attempted to force entrance into the Chief Executive’s
office. The bodyguard, forewarned, first repelled demonstrators with
cudgels and subsequently about half past 1, apparently without other
warning, fired into the crowd. Seemingly accurate reports state 17 were
killed and about 40 wounded. Bodyguard are not regular Kuominchun
troops but remnants of Fengtien force.
2. Demonstrations yesterday and today were against the demands of the
protocol powers relative to Taku matter. Japan and Great Britain especially
singled out, but the slogans included cancelation of the protocol and
eviction of the protocol ministers. Demands of protocol powers were
represented as a threat of war against China. Demonstrations were directed
also against the present Government and Tuan in particular. …
3. City apparently quiet. Acting head of police is reported, from reliable
official sources, to have issued special instructions for the protection of
foreign residents.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

MiacMurray

893.00/7201: Telegram
[Document 438]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 19, 1926—6 p.m.
67. Your 134, March 16, 5 p.m., and 137, March 18, 7 p.m. I learn with
much gratification that forceful action has not been necessary to settle
question of maintaining protocol status of Tientsin. I think that in general it
should be our policy not to use force of arms to enforce treaty rights unless
such action is necessary in order to protect the lives of Americans.
KELLOGG

893.00/7217: Telegram
[Document 439]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 22, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received March 22—2:15 p.m.]
143. My 141, March 20, 5 p.m.11
1. Mandate was issued March 20th in deference to popular
indignation at the numerous deaths on March 18, which, while
insisting on guilt of the radical leaders and the justifiability in
principle of the measures taken by the military and police,
nevertheless directs the Ministry of the Interior to grant solatiums
to any innocent persons injured and directs Ministries of War and
Justice to investigate whether the measures taken were
unnecessarily severe.
2. Ex-Premier Wang Shih-chen has issued a circular telegram
proposing termination of hostilities roughly based on restoration
of status quo before present war. On the 20th, leaders of
Kuominchun 
issued 
circular 
telegram 
accepting 
Wang’s
suggestion and announcing intention on the part of the
Kuominchun to retire to the northwest. A responsible
Kuominchun officer today at luncheon informed British Minister
and me that this force had withdrawn from the conflict. I learn
that orders for the withdrawal of fronts south and north of
Tientsin were issued on the 19th instant. Troop withdrawals from
these fronts have been continuous during the past two days.
Whether the Paotingfu-Peking area will be evacuated entirely
without struggle seems not yet determined but total evacuation
Chihli Province seems probable. I am informed that Feng left for
Urga for Europe on March 20th.

3. On March 18th a group of prominent ex-officials including Sun
Pao-ch’i issued the text of a telegram to Governor Yen of Shansi
and General Sun Ch’uan-fang, asking that they mediate in the war
between Kuominchun and Chang-Wu alliance. Governor Yen has
lately made threatening military dispositions on Peking-Hankow
and Peking-Suiyuan Railways that probably had their part in
bringing about Kuominchun withdrawal. Same group issued text
of a circular telegram same date to leaders of both factions in the
war urging them to compose their differences. Kuominchun
leaders have issued text of reply acceding to the proposal in
principle. Feng’s name not mentioned in lists of signers of
telegrams.
4. The Cabinet submitted their resignations to Tuan on the 20th
instant but the resignations were rejected. I consider nevertheless
that a reconstitution of the Cabinet must necessarily take place
before long. Only five members are functioning. Tuan will
probably remain as for the present.
5. Please send to the War and Navy Departments.
6. Copy to Tokyo by mail.
MACMURRAY
11 Not printed.

893.00/7222: Telegram
[Document 440]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, March 23, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received March 23—5:33 p.m.]
146. My telegram No. 143, March 22, 7 p.m.
1. According to reliable authority General Lu Chung-lin, who for
some time has commanded both the police and the Kuominchun
precautionary troops guarding Peking, had a heated conversation
last night with the Prime Minister and the Chief Executive in
which he declared that none of his command would take any
action against agitations by students or other demonstrators and
finally demanded the disarming of the Chief Executive’s
bodyguard of 4,600 men. Although this demand was refused, the
Prime Minister immediately afterwards took refuge in the
Legation Quarter.
2. This morning the Vice Minister, who is in charge of the Foreign
Office, approached the Senior Minister with the statement that
serious fear was felt by the authorities for the safety of Peking.
They are uncertain whether the Kuominchun forces will remain in
Peking but are afraid that they will evacuate without notice, thus
leaving the city to be protected by the bodyguard of the Chief
Executive and the police force which is believed to have been
demoralized very seriously by changes which General Lu has
made in the personnel and by lack of pay for a number of months.
This fear is so great that the Senior Minister was asked by the
Vice Minister whether it would not be possible to entrust the
Legation Guards with the policing of the southeastern part of the

Tartar City. In this section are the Legation Quarter and most
foreign residences.
3. The Vice Minister also asked whether the diplomatic corps
could not take the initiative in demanding the exclusion of Peking
from the field of military operations and its neutralization, action
similar to that in 1924 at Shanghai.12 The Vice Minister said any
such suggestion or request made by the foreign representatives
would be gladly supported by the Chamber of Commerce and
other representative Chinese organizations.
4. General Lu has communicated to the diplomatic corps by a
roundabout way his ability and willingness to adequately protect
the city, but he makes the condition that a loan be arranged.
5. A meeting of interested Ministers today considered these
questions. While they did not definitely refuse, they thought it
would not be possible to have the Legation Guards undertake the
policing of any part of the city. They also felt unable to discuss
the matter of the loan which General Lu desired. They felt also
that it would not be wise to take any initiative with respect to the
neutralization of Peking. They did, however, authorize the Senior
Minister to contact representatives of the Chamber of Commerce
with a view to the possibility of giving support to any initiative
which that organization might take in regard to asking for the
establishment of a police force to replace the protective force
which the dominant military faction placed in control of the city.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
MACMURRAY
12 See Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 363, 370 , 377 , and 380 .

893.00/7223: Telegram
[Document 441]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 24, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received March 24—10:07 a.m.]
147. My 108, March 3, 1 p.m., and my 146, March 23, 7 p.m., paragraph 2.
1. Chang Tso-lin’s forces having captured Lanchow, despatched
columns toward Tientsin and overland toward Peking, forcing
evacuation by National Army [of] Tientsin and adjacent area.
National Army is now hastily retiring on Peking. Tientsin is now
occupied by Li Ching-lin’s troops.
2. Sun Ch’uan-fang is still inactive. Hunan has been seized by
forces allied with Canton Government. Wu Pei-fu’s campaign is
stationary.
3. Railroad traffic has been interrupted since the 22nd, but an
effort has been made this morning to run a train from Peking to
Tientsin, with what success I am not yet informed.
4. I have heard on reliable authority that National Army leaders
are endeavoring to effect a compromise with Chang Tso-lin for
the establishment in Peking of coalition government to the
exclusion of Wu Pei-fu.
5. Please repeat [to] War and Navy Departments as at request of
military and naval attaches.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7229: Telegram
[Document 442]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 26, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received March 26—9:35 a.m.]
153. My number 147, March 24, 3 p.m.
1. Information just received from British military attaché is to the
effect that Li Ching-lin’s forces have advanced from Tientsin and
that fighting between them and the Kuominchun is now in
progress at Hwangtsun, some 10 miles south from Peking.
2. I have just been informed by Lu Chung-lin that the First
Kuominchun has established line of defense around Peking and
that any attempt on the part of the enemy to penetrate the line will
be resisted. Lu states he will hold Peking until its fate shall have
been determined by peace negotiations. He announces ultimate
intention to retire from the capital but assures me he will not do
so precipitately, and he undertakes responsibility for peace and
order.
3. Eight well-known ex-officials of high standing have been
endeavoring to mediate between the contending factions. Lu’s
messenger assured me Kuominchun leaders and Chang Tso-lin
had indicated willingness to accept this mediation but Wu Pei-fu
had not. The messenger stated Wu was fully occupied in Hupeh
and Honan and would be unable to conduct an offensive against
the Kuominchun.
4. Please repeat to War and Navy Departments.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7274: Telegram
[Document 443]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 3, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received April 3—10:30 a.m.]
164. My 153, March 26, 7 p.m.
1. Politico-military situation is still confused and offers little
tangible or authoritative material on which to base judgment.
2. I am informed from two separate highly credible sources that,
at a recent conference at Tangshan among Chang Tso-lin, Li
Chinglin and Chang Tsung-ch’ang, it was definitely decided to
pursue campaign against the Kuominchun until they were
eliminated.
3. Lu Chung-lin and that portion of the First Kuominchun under
his command, seem to be the focus of the present negotiations
among the various factions. According to well-informed Chinese
and foreigners, Wu Pei-fu, on the one hand, is dickering with Lu
Chung-lin in an effort to gain the latter’s allegiance and at the
same time strengthen his own position immeasurably by
becoming associated with probably the best army in China and
obtaining control of Peking. Tuan, for his part, is believed to be
negotiating with Lu with a view to Lu’s joining Anfu clique and
thus rehabilitating it by the addition [of] his personality and the
armed forces under his command, a step which would continue
Tuan and his adherents in possession of Peking and of the
Government while constituting a powerful third party which
could align itself either with Chang or Wu on an independent
basis or oppose either of these leaders with reasonable promise of
success should the latter policy seem preferable. Such
negotiations among the various factions are doubtless responsible

for the present stalemate. Consistent reports, however, continue to
be received that the Fengtien forces are advancing against the
Kuominchun.
4. This is confirmed by bombing of Peking yesterday morning
and this morning. On April 2nd three bombs were dropped from
an aeroplane flying at a great height which exploded near the
Hsichihmen13 wounding or killing at least one person, official
reports being difficult to obtain. One or more aeroplanes circled
over Peking at 10 a.m. and 10:30 a.m. this morning. Bombs were
dropped inside walls of Peking as follows: On first flight, 6 in and
around North Lake in the Tartar City, 3 of which failed to
explode; on second flight, 4 in a line from east to west about one-
third of a mile south of southern boundary of the Legation
Quarter, that is, the south wall of the Tartar City. Altogether 10
bombs were dropped but little damage was done and no one
injured.
5. American newspaper correspondents inform me that they
understand their reports of yesterday’s bombing were deleted by
the censor. They would appreciate the Department’s bringing the
facts of yesterday’s and today’s bombing to the notice of the
principal news associations having agencies in Washington.
6. The city seems calm despite aeroplane attack and the
uncertainty of the present state of affairs.
MACMURRAY
13 The railroad station near the northwestern gate to the Inner City.

893.00/7279: Telegram
[Document 444]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 7, 1926—noon.
[Received April 7—2:34 a.m.]
166. My 164, April 3, 5 p.m.
1. Bombs were dropped on Peking by an aeroplane again on 4th
and 5th instant, but without serious results. Consequent upon a
decision taken at a diplomatic meeting yesterday Senior Minister
addressed note to the Minister for Foreign Affairs expressing
concern at the danger threatening the Legations and the lives and
properties of their nationals in Peking due to outbreak of
hostilities in the Capital. While reaffirming their neutrality, the
foreign Ministers reminded the Chinese Government of its
responsibility to protect foreigners as well as to avoid further
interruption of the Customs Conference. The note recalled the
note of September 25, 1924, regarding air raids over Peking14
and, in protesting against flight of aeroplanes over the Diplomatic
Quarter, held the Chinese Government responsible for any
possible injuries to the life or property of foreigners concerned
throughout the city. Note closed with an expression of sympathy,
with an appeal made by various Chinese public organizations for
the cessation of air raids.
2. Indications persist that Wu Pei-fu and Lu Chung-lin are
negotiating an alliance, but it is also possible that the other armies
of the Kuominchun may unite to eject the First Army from
Peking. Secret negotiations are in progress and almost any
regrouping of factions seems possible.
MACMURRAY

14 See telegram No. 364, Sept. 26, 1924, from the Chargé in China, Foreign
Relations, 1924, vol. I, p. 379.

893.00/7289: Telegram
[Document 445]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 10, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received April 10—12:20 p.m.]
170. My 166, April 7, noon.
1. Senior Minister has just officially circularized his colleagues to
the effect that former officers of ex-President Tsao Kun had called
to communicate the fact that Marshal Tuan had been placed under
restraint in his residence; that Tsao Kun had been freed and would
resume previous office; that General Lu Chung-lin had placed
him [self?] under the command of Marshal Wu Pei-fu; and that
General Chang Chih-chiang in Kalgan was in agreement with this
action on the part of the Kuominchun which had originated [sic]
growing discontent with Marshal Feng. Soon afterwards Senior
Minister was informed by Y. L. Tong of Lu’s office who had just
given the same information to this Legation that Tuan had
resigned; that his bodyguard had voluntarily disbanded; that Lu
was holding himself responsible for peace and order in the
capital; that Marshal Wu would be invited to come to Peking; and
that Tsao Kun had been freed.
2. A proclamation has been issued to [by?] General Lu, synopsis
of which follows: Tuan since assuming office as Chief Executive
has brought untold injury to the nation, especially in settling the
gold franc question arbitrarily and in killing large numbers of
students. He is detested by the people and has surrounded himself
with remnants of corrupt Anfu Party. He has violated laws and
stirred up wars. This army on behalf of the nation and the people
cannot but employ the most drastic measures to put an end to his
actions. It has restored His Excellency Tsao Kun to liberty and
has telegraphed to Commander in Chief Wu Pei-fu to come to

Peking at once to assume control of the whole situation. Troops
and police will continue to bear responsibility for the maintenance
of peace and order in Peking. The proclamation ends with a
warning against the spreading of rumors and exhorts all classes to
pursue customary affairs.
3. From Anfu and independent Chinese and foreign sources of
highest credibility I have been informed that coup d?etat has not
been entirely successful; that the combination between Wu and
Kuominchun has not been effected; that Tuan’s bodyguard has
taken defensive positions at his house and at the Cabinet offices
and President’s Palace and that he himself took refuge in Legation
Quarter midnight last night.
4. The Legation was first aware of the coup d’état early this
morning when the city gates were closed and telephone service
interrupted. Gates have now been opened and telephone service
resumed. There are many extravagant rumors afloat. A report has
even reached me from an ordinarily credible source that Marshal
Feng has returned to Peking and taken charge.
5. It is too early yet to determine definitely what has actually
taken place or how Chang Tso-lin, whose troops are reported to
be closing in more and more on Peking, will react to the coup
d’état if it has been successful.
6. All quiet in Peking.
7. American newspaper correspondents here state that their
reports to the United States have been either suppressed or
emasculated. Please give principal American news associations
above information.
8. Please inform War and Navy Departments.
9. Repeated to Tokyo and commander in chief, Asiatic Squadron.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7308: Telegram
[Document 446]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 12, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received April 12—8:47 a.m.]
171. My 170, April 10, 5 p.m.
1. The situation is still undetermined. Kuominchun leaders have
not received a reply from Wu Pei-fu, which lends credence to the
report that coup d’état was executed without the prior definite
conclusion of an arrangement between them and Wu, possibly as
a last resort by them to force Wu into an alliance or some form of
association with them.
2. Peking remains quiet but heavy artillery and small arms fire
was heard to the south for several hours during night of April 10th
and early morning of 11th. Gunfire continues to be heard
intermittently in that direction. A report from Tungchow states
heavy firing heard to north and east.
3. Aeroplane attack resumed yesterday morning, nine bombs
being dropped resulting in injury to two Chinese, the Peking-
Suiyuan Railway yard apparently being the objective. During
aeroplane attack this morning more than a dozen bombs dropped.
American citizen, Roy Chapman Andrews, had very narrow
escape at Hsichihmen station when several bombs spattered
freight car under which he had taken refuge. Five Chinese killed
there, four men and one child. Casualties in other parts of city
reported but not tabulated. In neither instance did planes fly over
Legation Quarter (see my 166, April 7, noon).
4. It now seems fairly certain that Tuan is in a private foreign
residence in the Quarter.

5. Please repeat to War and Navy Departments.
6. Repeated to commander in chief, Asiatic Fleet.
7. Copy by mail to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7329: Telegram
[Document 447]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 15, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received April 15—11:58 a.m.]
177. My telegram number 171, April 12, 3 p.m.
1. Such government as may be said to exist in China is in
abeyance, with the Provisional Chief Executive, his Prime
Minister and all but four of the Cabinet in hiding. On the 10th two
telegrams were circulated to the provincial authorities in the name
of the Cabinet to the effect that as consequences of the coup
d’état “not only did it become quite impossible to transact any
public business, but law and order in the capital could not be
maintained,” and that “the Cabinet has temporarily ceased to
function.” On the 12th the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Finance,
Justice and Education and acting heads of other ministries met
and circularized all military and civil governors to the effect “the
central organization (i. e. the Cabinet) is of crucial importance
and no interruption to it of even a day can be permitted. Until
political affairs are settled it is of course our duty temporarily to
maintain the status quo” This has been explained to Senior
Minister in behalf of the Minister for Foreign Affairs to mean that
while not acting as a cabinet the several remaining ministers and
heads of ministries will continue at their posts for the purpose of
carrying 
on 
the 
necessary 
routine 
of 
their 
respective
organizations. The Prime Minister, April 13th, addressed to the
Senior Minister a letter in which while stating that “the
Government has temporarily ceased to function,” he said,
“although the rebellious forces of the one locality of Peking have
made it temporarily impossible for the Chief Executive Tuan to
exercise his functions and power, this does not signify that he has
resigned his position.”

2. The whole status of the Provisional Government remains
indeterminate pending an outcome of political intrigues and
military operations now in progress. It is credibly reported that
there are internal dissensions within both Fengtien and
Kuominchun ranks which complicate still further the process of
mutual bargaining by all parties for the loyalty of one and another
element. So-called Fengtien-Shantung allies have for some days
been making a concentrated attack upon the Kuominchun
defenders of Peking along an arc stretching from southwest to
northeast at a distance of from 10 to 30 miles from the city. There
are today some indications that the Kuominchun forces are
beginning a general retreat towards Nankow. At the instance of
prominent Chinese residents and commercial organizations there
has been formed an unofficial committee of public safety
comprising 10 members (most of them former Prime Ministers
including Wang Shih-chen and W. W. Yen) to assume
responsibility for order in the city in the event of interregnum.
3. Kail communication with Hankow [Nankow?] has been closed
since March 6th and with Tientsin since March 24th. Limited
passenger and postal service with Tientsin was maintained by
motor until 5 days ago since which time Fengtien forces beyond
Tungchow have been firing on all cars attempting to pass. A party
of Americans in a motor bearing an American flag was yesterday
turned back by machine-gun fire, fortunately harmless.
4. While some degree of progress in work of Customs Conference
continues to be made through informal discussions and through
consultations among the experts, no regular meetings permitted in
the absence of any actual governmental [apparent omission] and
C. T. Wang (who has taken refuge in one of the foreign
concessions in Tientsin) and all the other Chinese delegates and
commissioners, with the exception of Yen and Tsai, have in fact
disappeared. Apart from the fact that it has been notified that such
investigations would not be welcome in the territory giving
adherence to so-called Canton Government, Extraterritoriality
Commission has thus far found it impossible to visit any other

city in pursuance of its plan of investigations, by reason of
interruption of all means of transportation elsewhere than to the
Gobi Desert.
5. Copy by mail to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7328: Telegram
[Document 448]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 15, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received April 15—11:10 a.m.]
178. My telegram number 177, April 15, 2 p.m.
1. Tungchow was occupied this morning by Fengtien troops.
Kuominchun is withdrawing from Peking and has turned over
control of police to committee of safety.
2. Repeated to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7334: Telegram
[Document 449]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 19, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received April 20—4 a.m.]
185. My 178, April 15, 8 p.m. and 177, April 15, 2 p.m.
1. Metropolitan area has been entirely evacuated by the First
Kuominchun since the 16th, these forces having retreated on
Nankow with little loss in men and munitions. The Ninth Division
under General Tang Chih-tao, originally part of the Fengtien
armies from which it deserted, refused to withdraw with the
Kuominchun and entered Peking, imposing itself upon the
committee of safety as part of the local police force. It is currently
reported that the Fengtien forces are pursuing the First
Kuominchun with the object of destroying them or at least
securing the greater part of the Peking-Suiyuan Railway.
2. There appears to be increasing friction between the Ninth
Division and the Fengtien troops encamped around and outside
the city, many of whom are beginning to trickle in in small
groups. It is understood that entrance into Peking of Chang
Hsueh-liang and other Fengtien leaders awaits settlement of the
status of the Ninth Division.
3. Tuan Chi-jui having emerged from hiding has resumed office
as has the Cabinet its functions. Tuan has issued mandate which
states in essence that he is ready to retire as soon as leaders of the
country so decide. It is generally considered that his tenure of
office is apt to be of short duration.
4. Jealousies in respect of appointments to administrative
positions in Peking have already appeared as between Chang and

Wu factions, these appointments being made apparently without
any regard to Tuan although technically there is again a
government here; practically the situation remains as confused as
before.
5. Train service with Tientsin was partially resumed on the 17th.
6. Please repeat to War and Navy Departments at the request of
respective attachés.
7. Repeated to Tokyo by mail.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7335: Telegram
[Document 450]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 20, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received April 20—12:28 p.m.]
189. My 185, April 19, 6 p.m., paragraph 3.
1. Tuan again took refuge in the Legation Quarter last evening
and left by train today for Tientsin guarded by Fengtien troops.
The Cabinet which handed in its resignation en bloc yesterday has
apparently ceased to function.
2. Please repeat to War and Navy Departments.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7336: Telegram
[Document 451]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 21, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received April 21—10:50 a.m.]
190. My telegram number 189, April 20, 8 p.m.
1. Tuan, before leaving, issued mandates that appeared today
accepting resignations of the Premier, concurrent Minister of War,
the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Communications and the
Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs. He appointed the Minister for
Foreign Affairs concurrently Acting Premier. In a final mandate
he announced his retirement from office and instructed the
Cabinet to assume the powers and act on behalf of the Provisional
Chief Executive.
2. I am reliably informed that the Minister for Foreign Affairs has
consented to continue temporarily if Foreign Office functions. At
most, only three Cabinet Ministers remain.
3. Two officers appointed by Fengtien faction are now
functioning in command of police and so-called precautionary
troops. They comprise the only evidence of actual authority in
Peking.
4. I learn from apparently trustworthy source that Lu Chung-lin,
with his portion of the First Kuominchun, will shortly
amalgamate with Wu Pei-fu and that this will probably precipitate
early hostilities between Wu and Chang Tso-lin.
5. Attempts by Fengtien troops to force acceptance of military
notes is producing financial panic in Peking while numerous
outrages by these troops in the surrounding region are reported.

6. In order to avoid expense, may I assume that telegrams of this
nature containing general information regarding political and
military affairs are repeated to the War and Navy Departments.
7. Copy to Tokio by mail.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7373: Telegram
[Document 452]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 4, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received May 4—11:48 a.m.]
201. My telegram number 190, April 21, 6 p.m.
1. Under date of May 1st ex-President Tsao Kun sent a circular
telegram to Cabinet, Senate and House of Representatives of
1924, to the military and civil, and to public bodies throughout
the country, which amounted in substance to a resignation in
favor of the 1924 Cabinet, which he stated should resume the
affairs of government and in accordance with law take over the
duties of the President.
2. W. W. Yen, the Premier, and so the head of the 1924 Tsao Kun
cabinet, issued a circular telegram on May 2nd expressing his
own unwillingness to comply with the suggestion of Tsao Kun.
3. In the latter regard I was informed this morning by General Chi
Hsieh-yuan, Marshal Wu Pei-fu’s close adviser and representative
at present in Peking, that it was expected Yen would eventually
consent to head a regency cabinet government which it was hoped
could be established within a few weeks. According to Chi, who
stated that Chang Tso-lin and Wu were solidly in accord, the plan
is to hold a parliamentary election in the near future for the
constitution of such a body which would then proceed to elect a
President. I was given to understand likewise by Chi that Chang
continues as formerly to be in favor of the Tariff Conference and
that Wu is now like minded although originally opposed to the
Conference in view of the probability then existing that any
moneys resulting therefrom would only find their way into the
pockets of the Tuan government.

4. Chi also expressed himself to the effect that the Wu-Chang
alliance was pursuing its intention of eliminating the Kuominchun
by continuing the attack in the direction of Kalgan.
5. Repeated to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7397: Telegram
[Document 453]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 14, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received 8:05 p.m.]
208. My 201, May 4, 6 p.m.
1. As foreshadowed in paragraph 3 of the above telegram the
following mandates, dated May 13th, appeared today bearing
Presidential seal, “by the Cabinet acting,” and countersigned by
Yen as Premier: (a) Relieving of their portfolios all members of
Yen 1924 cabinet except Yen, Premier, Wellington Koo, Minister
of Foreign Affairs, and Chang Kuo-kan, Minister of Justice; (b)
transferring Koo to be Minister of Finance; (c) appointing Alfred
Sze Minister of Foreign Affairs, Cheng Ch’ien, Interior, Chang
Ching-hui, War, Tu Hsi-kwei, Navy, Wang Ch’ung-hui,
Education, Yang Wen-kai, Agriculture and Commerce, Chang
Chih-tan, Communications; (d) directing Yen to act concurrently
as Minister of Foreign Affairs pending arrival of Sze.
2. An announcement with Cabinet seal has likewise been
promulgated, stating that in view of President Tsao Kun’s circular
telegram of resignation May 1st, the Cabinet would henceforth
perform duties of President as provided by law.
3. Although Cabinet appointees include representatives of Sun
Ch’uan-fang, Chang Tso-lin and Wu Pei-fu, the support of Sun
and Chang is not assured and I understand Wu’s support is more
nominal than effective. Lacking thus all real power it is hard to
see what substantial results will follow appearance of these
mandates except such recognition as may be accorded by the
foreign powers, although in my opinion the new Cabinet
possesses scarcely more than a color of legality. There is no other

more qualified claimant to authority and I see no prospect of
emergence of a government for a long time to come if this attempt
fails. I respectfully request authorization in my discretion to deal
with the Yen cabinet on a de facto basis if it gives satisfactory
assurances as to the observance of treaty rights and if the
representatives of principal power[s] decide to act likewise.
4. A week ago Yen issued a circular telegram boldly giving as the
condition of his heading a cabinet, universal support of a policy
of troop disbandment, restoration of Central Government
revenues and restoration of transportation facilities. I have seen
no evidence that the provincial militarists have pledged support to
this policy and Yen seems to have displayed courage if not
temerity in attempting his task of reviving a government under
these conditions.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7397: Telegram
[Document 454]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, May 17, 1926—3 p.m.
99. Authority requested in Paragraph 3 of your No. 208, May 14, 7 p.m.
granted.
KELLOGG

893.00/7402: Telegram
[Document 455]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 18, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received May 18—11:17 a.m.]
214. My 208, May 14, 7 p.m.
1. On May 15 Yen addressed an identic note to the Legations
stating that Alfred Sze had been appointed by Presidential
mandate Minister for Foreign Affairs and that pending his arrival
Yen himself was appointed temporarily concurrently Acting
Minister. This morning the Legations received a second identic
note dated May 15 but actually written on the evening of May 17.
The second note was prompted by remarks made to Yen by the
Senior Minister. It recalled that President Tsao was prevented, by
political changes on October 23, 1924, from further carrying out
the duties of his office and that Tuan thereupon temporarily
administered Government, vacating his office in April last. The
note continues that President Tsao had issued a circular telegram
on May 1 last, turning over the duties of the Presidential office to
be administered by the Cabinet as provided by law. After
reporting widespread insistence, the note states that the Cabinet
on May 13 entered upon the performance of the functions of the
President’s office as aforesaid. The hope was expressed that since
the present governing Cabinet had been constituted in due legal
continuity, foreign relations would be consolidated [sic] and the
present international conferences prove successful.
2. At a meeting of the interested Ministers this afternoon it was
decided to acknowledge receipt of the first note severally in third-
person communications but to wait until a cabinet under Yen
actually assumes office before dealing with that administration in
any other routine matters; in the meantime the Senior Minister is

to intimate to Yen that in any case his government would be
expected to assume explicitly the existing treaty and other
international obligations of the Chinese Government.
MACMURRAY

Invasion of the Yangtze Valley by the
Southern 
Nationalist 
forces 
and
measures taken for the protection of
American interests
[456] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 26, 1926—noon. [Received July 26—7:55 a.m.]
893.00/7529: Telegram
[457] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 30, 1926—7 p.m. [Received July 31—12:56 a.m.]
893.00/7541: Telegram
[458] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 5, 1926—noon. [Received August 5—5:40 a.m.]
893.00/7543: Telegram
[459] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 17, 1926—10 a.m. [Received August 17—6:14 a.m.]
893.00/7560: Telegram

[460] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 24, 1926—6 p.m. [Received August 24—2:40 p.m.]
893.00/7580: Telegram
[461] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 25, 1926—3 p.m. [Received August 25—9:25 a.m.]
893.00/7581: Telegram
[462] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 27, 1926—3 p.m. [Received August 27—7:50 a.m.]
893.00/7584: Telegram
[463] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 30, 1926—4 p.m. [Received August 30—9 a.m.]
893.00/7587: Telegram
[464] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 30, 1926—5 p.m. [Received August 30—11:48 a.m.]
893.00/7590: Telegram
[465] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 1, 1926—noon. [Received September 1—5:51 a.m.]
893.00/7596: Telegram

[466] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 1, 1926—7 p.m. [Received September 1—1:45 p.m.]
893.00/7597: Telegram
[467] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 2, 1926—5 p.m. [Received September 2—8:50 a.m.]
893.00/7606: Telegram
[468] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 3, 1926—2 p.m. [Received September 3—8:15 a.m.]
893.00/7609: Telegram
[469] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 4, 1926—11 a.m. [Received September 4—8:17 a.m.]
893.00/7611: Telegram
[470] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 7, 1926—3 p.m. [Received September 7—6:49 a.m.]
893.00/7615: Telegram
[471] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 8, 1926—5 p.m. [Received September 8—8:35 a.m.]
893.00/7616: Telegram

[472] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 8, 1926—6 p.m. [Received September 8–—2:30 p.m.]
893.00/7618: Telegram
[473] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 10, 1926—noon. [Received September 10—4:04 a.m.]
893.00/7619: Telegram
[474] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 11, 1926—noon. [Received September 11—7:55 a.m.]
893.00/7623: Telegram
[475] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 11, 1926—4 p.m. [Received September 11—8:05 a.m.]
893.00/7624: Telegram
[476] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 13, 1926—5 p.m. [Received September 13—1:30 p.m.]
893.00/7630: Telegram
[477] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 14, 1926—5 p.m. [Received September 14—11:20 a.m.]
893.00/7636: Telegram

[478] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, September 14, 1926—5 p.m.
893.00/7636: Telegram
[479] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 15, 1926—11 a.m. [Received September 15—7:44 a.m.]
893.00/7642: Telegram
[480] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 15, 1926—3 p.m. [Received September 15—8:45 a.m.]
893.00/7644: Telegram
[481] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 15, 1926—5 p.m. [Received September 15—10:05 a.m.]
893.00/7645: Telegram
[482] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
[Washington,] September 15, 1926.
893.00/7650
[483] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 16, 1926—10 a.m. [Received September 16—5:54 a.m.]
893.00/7648: Telegram

[484] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 17, 1926—4 p.m. [Received September 17—8:15 a.m.]
893.00/7652: Telegram
[485] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 18, 1926—1 p.m. [Received September 18—11:20 a.m.]
893.00/7655: Telegram
[486] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 19, 1926—noon. [Received September 19—6:50 a.m.]
893.00/7657: Telegram
[487] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 20, 1926—4 p.m. [Received September 20—2:50 p.m.]
893.00/7659: Telegram
[488] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 21, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 4:30 p.m.]
893.00/7661: Telegram
[489] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 21, 1926—6 p.m. [Received September 21—5:11 p.m.]
893.00/7662: Telegram

[490] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, September 22, 1926—1 p.m.
893.00/7661: Telegram
[491] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 23, 1926—1 p.m. [Received September 23—8:30 a.m.]
893.00/7667: Telegram
[492] Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With
the Portuguese Minister (D’Alte)
[Washington,] September 23, 1926.
893.00/7680
[493] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 24, 1926—4 p.m. [Received September 24—3:10 p.m.]
893.00/7670: Telegram
[494] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 25, 1926—1 p.m. [Received September 25—8:20 a.m.]
893.00/7672: Telegram
[495] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 29, 1926—3 p.m. [Received September 30.]
893.00/7698: Telegram

[496] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 30, 1926—10 a.m. [Received September 30—6:25 a.m.]
893.00/7694: Telegram
[497] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 2, 1926—5 p.m. [Received October 2—9:46 a.m.]
893.00/7701: Telegram
[498] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 5, 1926—10 a.m. [Received October 5—8:09 a.m.]
393.1163/62: Telegram
[499] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 5, 1926—1 p.m. [Received October 5—8:20 a.m.]
893.00/7703: Telegram
[500] The Secretary of the State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 5, 1926—8 p.m.
393.1163/62: Telegram
[501] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 7, 1926—5 p.m. [Received October 7—7:32 a.m.]
893.00/7706: Telegram

[502] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 5, 1926—noon. [Received October 8—9:25 a.m.]
893.00/7709: Telegram
[503] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 9, 1926—3 p.m. [Received October 9—5:29 a.m.]
893.00/7733: Telegram
[504] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 9, 1926—2 p.m.
893.00/7733: Telegram
[505] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 10, 1926—3 p.m. [Received October 10—7:15 a.m.]
893.00/7734: Telegram
[506] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 12, 1926—5 p.m. [Received October 12—10: 05 a.m.]
893.00/7738: Telegram
[507] The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
Washington, October 13, 1926.
893.00/7746

[508] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 13, 1926—4 p.m. [Received October 13—9:35 a.m.]
393.1163/65: Telegram
[509] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 15, 1926—11 a.m. [Received October 15—3: 50 a.m.]
893.00/7748: Telegram
[510] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 18, 1926—11 a.m. [Received October 18—5:56 a.m.]
893.00/7752: Telegram
[511] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 21, 1926—5 p.m. [Received October 21—9:45 a.m.]
893.00/7772: Telegram
[512] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 6, 1926—11 a.m. [Received November 6—5: 03 a.m.]
893.00/7809: Telegram
[513] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 8, 1926—noon. [Received November 8—2:48 a.m.]
893.00/7810: Telegram

[514] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 29, 1926. [Received January 4, 1927.]
893.00/7988
[515] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 29, 1926—4 p.m. [Received November 29—8:44 a.m.]
893.00/7881: Telegram
[516] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 30, 1926—7 p.m. [Received November 30—10:48 a.m.]
893.00/7886: Telegram
[517] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 1, 1926—11 a.m. [Received December 1—2:50 a.m.]
893.00/7889: Telegram
[518] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 1, 1926—4 p.m. [Received December 1—7:32 a.m.]
893.00/7887: Telegram
[519] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 1, 1926—5 p.m. [Received December 1—8:42 a.m.]
893.00/7888: Telegram

[520] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 4, 1926—noon. [Received December 4—6:16 a.m.]
893.00/7896: Telegram
[521] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 7, 1926—3 p.m. [Received December 7—10:40 a.m.]
893.00/7910: Telegram
[522] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 9, 1926—11 a.m. [Received December 9—7: 48 a.m.]
893.00/7923: Telegram
[523] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 11, 1926—1 p.m. [Received December 11—7:17 a.m.]
893.00/7930: Telegram
[524] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 15, 1926—3 p.m. [Received December 15—7:20 a.m.]
893.00/7941: Telegram
[525] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 17, 1926—10 a.m. [Received December 17—2:32 a.m.]
893.00/7952: Telegram

[526] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 17, 1926—11 a.m. [Received December 17—4:28 a.m.]
893.00/7953: Telegram
[527] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 17, 1926—5 p.m. [Received December 17—9:15 a.m.]
898.00/7951: Telegram
[528] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 19, 1926—10 a.m. [Received December 20—6:03 a.m.]
893.00/7960: Telegram
[529] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, December 23, 1926—11 a.m.
893.00/7960: Telegram
[530] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 28, 1926—10 a.m. [Received December 28—4: 58 a.m.]
893.00/7978: Telegram
[531] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, December 30, 1926—noon.
893.00/7978: Telegram

893.00/7529: Telegram
[Document 456]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 26, 1926—noon.
[Received July 26—7:55 a.m.]
304. Following from American consul general at Canton:
“July 23, noon. I assume Changsha and Hankow consuls are able
to keep you advised respecting military situation. Canton army
appears to be advancing rapidly and local leaders are now
predicting early capture of Hankow and Wuchang. General
Chiang15 of Whampoa Cadets is expected to leave Canton in a
few days for Hunan.”
MACMURRAY
15 Chiang Kai-shek, commander in chief of the Cantonese Northern
Expedition; also known as Chiang Kai-shih and Chiang Chung-cheng.

893.00/7541: Telegram
[Document 457]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 30, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received July 31—12:56 a.m.]
311. Legation’s 304, July 26, noon. Following telegram has been received
from the American consul general at Canton:
“July 29, 2 p.m. Referring to telegram of July 23, noon.
Cantonese authorities now predict capture of Hankow and
Wuchang in 10 days. General Chiang of Whampoa Cadets has left
Canton for the Hunan front.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7543: Telegram
[Document 458]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 5, 1926—noon.
[Received August 5—5:40 a.m.]
317. Referring to my 311, July 30, 7 p.m. Following from American consul
general at Hankow:
“August 4, 11 a.m. Your July 31, 6 p.m. Believe this to be another
Cantonese boast. No probability that they will reach Hankow.
Sun16 is throwing heavy reenforcements into Kiangsi, and Wu17
is sending two more divisions to Yochow where his naval forces
are known to be. Will keep you informed of any developments.”
MACMURRAY
16 Sun Ch’uan-fang, Tupan of Anhwei, Chekiang, Fukien, Kiangsi, and
Kiangsu.
17 Wu Pei-fu, commander of allied armies which overthrew the Provisional
Government of Tuan Chi-jui. See pp. 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 423] ff.

893.00/7560: Telegram
[Document 459]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 17, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received August 17—6:14 a.m.]
328. My 317, August 5, noon. Following from American consul at
Changsha:
“Chiang Kai-shih arrived this morning. There is no serious
fighting. Earty renewal of drive toward Hankow is not unlikely.
Department has not been informed.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7580: Telegram
[Document 460]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 24, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received August 24—2:40 p.m.]
347. 1. Following is summary of telegram of August 23, 1 p.m., received
from American consul general at Hankow: Southern forces under Chiang
Kai-shek having captured Milo and Pingkiang are advancing in general
direction of Yochow and Wuchang and are within about 80 miles of latter
place and may capture Yochow at any moment. While capture of Wuchang
is not imminent, inadequacy of numbers of retreating troops and their low
morale coupled with shortage of munitions and supplies have caused them
steadily to lose ground, and control of territory between Hankow and
Canton may be decided in 1 or at most 2 weeks. Arrival of Wu Pei-fu,
Hankow, momentarily expected, and his followers there express confidence
that he will master situation, in which view Lockhart18 concurs. It appears
trains being held at Yochow for purpose of evacuating Wu’s troops to
Wuchang. Chinese in Hankow are particularly concerned lest situation has
been permitted to go too far and possibility of Cantonese domination not
relished.
2. I am further reliably informed that the Southern forces have now reached
a point midway between Yochow and Hankow.
MACMURRAY
18 Frank P. Lockhart, consul general at Hankow.

893.00/7581: Telegram
[Document 461]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 25, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received August 25—9:25 a.m.]
348. Consul general at Hankow reports August 24, 4 p.m., that Cantonese
troops have captured Yochow and have advanced a considerable distance
towards Wuchang, causing some concern there. Three regiments of Sun
Ch’uan-fang’s troops have arrived off Wuchow and more are reported en
route.
American consul, Changsha, reports August 23, 2 p.m., that Canton troops,
having taken Yochow, are proceeding towards Hankow immediately.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7584: Telegram
[Document 462]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 27, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received August 27—7:50 a.m.]
357. My telegram number 348, August 25, 5 [3] p.m. Following excerpt
from telegram dated August 26, 3 p.m., from the consul general at Hankow:
“Marshal Wu arrived last night and is bringing with him three
divisions of troops some of whom have already arrived. Sun
Ch’uanfang’s troops are also arriving and a concentrated attack
will shortly be made on the Cantonese forces who made some
advance since yesterday. A more hopeful atmosphere prevails
among the allies now that Wu has arrived and reenforcements are
being put in the field. Local bankers and merchants are somewhat
agitated because of the rumored levy of 2,500,000 on them for the
support of his army.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7587: Telegram
[Document 463]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 30, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received August 30—9 a.m.]
359. Following from American consul general, Hankow, which has been
repeated to commander in chief, United States Asiatic Fleet:
“August 29, 5 p.m. Vincent19 telegraphs that he received official
notice August 27 that Siang and Yangtze Rivers between
Changsha and Hankow have been mined and that he has filed a
protest, I have not yet received such a notice. General situation
substantially unchanged except many unarmed soldiers, some
wounded, passing through concessions, many refugees, others;
passing down river, Great quantities personal and household
effects coming into the concessions, much Red propaganda being
disseminated. Hankow Herald, American, editorially demanding
despatch of destroyers here. British cruiser arriving tomorrow. So
far good order has been maintained, but, since there is evident
desire on the part of some Americans that American force be sent
here as precautionary measure, especially since there is a
possibility of looting by disgruntled soldiers, it is suggested that
at least additional units be made available to come here on short
notice. In this connection British naval vessels are convoying
their merchantmen, and similar service for American vessels may
be requested. Wu Pei-fu is at the front near Hoshengchiao which
is about 30 miles from Hankow.”
MACMURRAY
19 John C. Vincent, vice consul at Changsha.

893.00/7590: Telegram
[Document 464]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 30, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received August 30—11:48 a.m.]
360. 1. Following from American consul general at Hankow:
“August 27, 5 p.m. I have been informed through the
Commissioner of Customs here that the commander of the
Cantonese forces at Yochow on August 25th served notice that all
foreign warships must stop at Chenglingki in order to be visited
by his men, since he fears that Marshal Wu’s gunboats may fly
foreign flags to disguise themselves, and that if the vessels do not
stop, his men will re upon them until they do stop. Have
communicated this information to our local naval authorities, who
state that of course notice will be disregarded. It is assumed that
the Changsha consulate has been informed through the Customs
there and that it has made an appropriate reply. Wu crossed the
river here this morning en route to the front where heavy
reenforcements have been counted on. Generally believed that
Cantonese will be unable to make any further advance unless
their present fighting strength is augmented. Many Chinese from
Wuchang and other points across the river have come to the
foreign concessions here in the past few days for refuge and to
store their valuables.”
2. In reference to which I have telegraphed as follows to American consul
general at Canton:
“August 30, 4 p.m. American consul general at Hankow reports
that he has been informed through Commissioner of Customs
there that commander of Cantonese forces at Yochow on August
25th served notice that all foreign warships must stop at

Chenglingki in order to be visited by his men, since he fears that
Marsnal Wu’s gunboats may fly foreign flags to disguise
themselves, and that if the vessels do not stop, his men will fire
upon them until they do so. Lockhart further telegraphs that he
has communicated this information to local American naval
authorities, who state that of course the notice will be
disregarded.
3. [sic] You should bring this state of affairs immediately to the
attention of the Cantonese authorities, expressing my surprise that
such an attitude should be adopted on their part with which
American public vessels obviously cannot fall in. You will request
that notice be canceled in order that no untoward incidents may
arise for which Cantonese authorities would be responsible. In
making this communication to Cantonese authorities you should
assure them that we will make every effort to prevent misuse of
American flag in the manner indicated.”
4. Both of above messages have been repeated to commander in chief,
United States Asiatic Fleet.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7596: Telegram
[Document 465]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 1, 1926—noon.
[Received September 1—5:51 a.m.]
362. My 357, August 27, 3 p.m.
1. Following from American consul general, Hankoitem:
“August 31, 10 a.m. Wu Pei-fu has suffered serious setback at the
hands of the Southerners and has fallen back early this morning.
Southern troops now very near Wuchang. Admiral Hough20
returning today via commercial transport. Isabel in Shanghai for
overhauling; Polos and Portage [Pigeon?] now here. Suggest that
destroyers be sent here at once as a precautionary measure since
there is some danger of looting from the retreating forces. Local
American community requests this measure of security.
2. I concur in suggestion regarding despatch of destroyers to Hankow and
have so informed commander in chief, United States Asiatic Fleet,
repeating to him Lockhart’s telegram aforementioned.
MACMURRAY
20 Rear Admiral Henry H. Hough, U. S. N., commander of the Yangtze
Patrol.

893.00/7597: Telegram
[Document 466]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 1, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received September 1—1:45 p.m.]
366. My 360, August 30, 5 p.m. Following from American consul general at
Hankow:
“Concessions here overcrowded with refugees. Frightened
Chinese from the native city still coming in, creating great
concern and resulting in much confusion. They are much alarmed,
not at the prospect apparently of the Southern troops arriving but
of looting by Northern troops. In case of trouble in the
concession, foreign volunteer forces and naval units will be
utilized, in cooperation with the Chinese authorities, in protecting
life and property. Chinese authorities have made such a request of
the foreign consuls. Wu is known to be in desperate straits across
the river and this is having an unfavorable reaction here.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7606: Telegram
[Document 467]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 2, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received September 2—8:50 a.m.]
369. My 362, September 1, noon. Commander in chief informs me that
prior to receipt of suggestions that additional naval forces be sent to
Hankow, two destroyers were dispatched from Chefoo for that port at
request of Rear Admiral Hough, commander of Yangtze Patrol.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7609: Telegram
[Document 468]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 3, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received September 3—8:15 a.m.]
372. My 366, September 1, 7 p.m. Following from American consul general
at Hankow:
“Urgent. September 3, 7 a.m. Heavy sustained attack started from
Pagoda Hill on Wuchang this morning at 4 o’clock. Heavy
artillery, machine-gun and rifle fire plainly heard here and visible.
Bombardment still continues but now somewhat reduced.
Distance from Pagoda Hill to Wuchang about one mile. Volunteer
forces and naval units were called out here at 6:40 this morning.
Much excitement but as yet no actual trouble reported on this side
of river. Will telegraph later.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7611: Telegram
[Document 469]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 4, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received September 4—8:17 a.m.]
373. My 372, September 3, 2 p.m. Following two telegrams from American
consul general at Hankow:
“September 3, 9 a.m. Bombardment of Wuchang still in progress.
Intermittent firing towards Wuchang side in the river by Chinese
gunboat immediately opposite concessions and special districts.
Still no outbreak reported on this side of the river but intense
excitement prevails. Volunteer forces and naval units at their posts
as a precautionary measure. Flood of Chinese rushing into the
concessions and special districts for protection has been stopped.
Believe that the situation is in hand if no trouble encountered
from defeated soldiers or agitators. All business at a complete
standstill. No report of Americans killed or wounded at Wuchang,
but telephone message just received [from] American Church
General Hospital states that it has been struck more than 20 times
by shells and bullets. Department has not been informed of this or
the previous telegrams.”
“September 3, noon. Elcano21 has just arrived, was fired upon by
troops, presumably Cantonese, on left bank 7 miles below
Hankow, struck 4 times by rifle bullets but did not return fire.
British shipping between here and Ichang and Changsha stopped
until further orders; convoys not available. Firing immediately
adjacent to Wuchang continues. Fairly reliable evidence that
Cantonese are in danger of [omission?] attack from Sun Ch’uan-
fang’s troops near Changsha. Wu is still holding Wuchang.”
MACMURRAY

TT

21 UJ. S. gunboat in the Yangtze Patrol.

893.00/7615: Telegram
[Document 470]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 7, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received September 7—6:49 a.m.]
376. My 373, September 4, 11 a.m.
1. Following telegram from American consul general, Hankoitem:
“September 6, noon. My September 6, 10 a.m. Special
administration district director has just sent a representative to me
to say that Hanyang Arsenal has been surrendered and that terms
of peace are shortly to be arranged. Wu’s officers and men are
understood to be determined to make no further resistance. Wu
only is anxious to continue the war. Actual peace terms are now
understood to be under discussion.”
2. Above telegram in continuation of telegram September 5, 10 a.m.,
reporting heavy fighting around Wuchang on that date and announcing
presence of Southern troops just above Hanyang Arsenal on Hankow side of
river.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7616: Telegram
[Document 471]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 8, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received September 8—8:35 a.m.]
379. 1. A conversation with British Legation has confirmed following
information: Two British gunboats and an armed merchant ship manned by
4 naval officers and 60 bluejackets were heavily fired upon and compelled
to retreat down river after an unsuccessful attempt to release two British
merchant vessels which were being illegally detained at Wanhsien by
General Yang Sen. Commander and 3 other officers of armed merchant
ship, British marines, killed and it is believed 13 other British enlisted men
of the force wounded. During the course of the engagement the British
vessels fired into the town causing apparently considerable damage by fire.
A French gunboat was hit by Chinese shore batteries during fighting.
British Minister expressed considerable apprehension lest reprisals be taken
against officers of merchant vessels held by Yang Sen, not all of whom
apparently succeeded in escaping during the engagement.
2. Sir Ronald Macleay22 yesterday intimated that the naval authorities
might renew with larger force the attempt to release these vessels.
MACMURRAY
22 British Minister in China.

893.00/7618: Telegram
[Document 472]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 8, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received September 8–—2:30 p.m.]
381. My 376, September 7, 3 p.m. The following two telegrams from
American consul general at Hankow:
“September 6, 9 p.m. Wu Pei-fu left Hankow shortly after 7
tonight for kilometres 10 north of Hankow accompanied by
several trains of loyal troops. He stated that he will attempt to
return to Hankow when reenforcements from the North arrive.
His ability to return seems doubtful however.”
“September 7, 10 a.m. In his retreat northward last night Wu was
accompanied by 294 cars of troops, others were being loaded to
follow, and large numbers retreated northward on foot. Some
looting by soldiers on foot. Evacuation of Hankow by Wu and his
soldiers before daylight this morning is understood to have been
demanded 
by 
the 
Cantonese 
yesterday 
afternoon, 
and
arrangements were hastily made. Many of Wu’s soldiers
disarmed. Practically no machine-gun and rifle fire at Wuchang
last night but intermittent artillery fire throughout the night.
Wuchang apparently is still in the hands of the Northerners but it
is inconceivable that these can hold it indefinitely. Hanyang
Arsenal now completely in the hands of Southerners. Wu’s main
difficulty seems to have been the disloyalty of some of his
principal officers and his troops. His gunboats which were
operating opposite the, concessions for several days and drawing
the fire of the Cantonese have left for down river.
Generally believed that Cantonese will consolidate their position
between here and Canton with a view to carrying the campaign

northward.
Intense excitement in native city last night but no serious trouble
reported.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7619: Telegram
[Document 473]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 10, 1926—noon.
[Received September 10—4:04 a.m.]
386. Following telegram has been sent to commander in chief, United
States Asiatic Fleet:
“September 10, noon. British Minister has received reports
regarding anti-British feeling at Chungking and has requested that
in the absence of British naval vessel at Chungking, any
American gunboat there might assist British subjects in the event
of need for evacuation or otherwise. I should be grateful if you
could comply with this request, so notifying me in order that I
may advise the British Legation accordingly.”
MAYER

893.00/7623: Telegram
[Document 474]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 11, 1926—noon.
[Received September 11—7:55 a.m.]
388. My 386, September 10, noon. Commander in chief has instructed
commander of South China [Yangtze?] Patrol to give necessary protection
and assistance to British subjects at Chungking in the absence of British
business interests [naval vessel?] there.
MAYER

893.00/7624: Telegram
[Document 475]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 11, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received September 11—8:05 a.m.]
391. 1. Following from American consul, Swatow:
“September 10, noon. Authorities have officially advised that
principal channel at the entrance to Swatow Bay has been mined
and issued 5 regulations governing ship movements, including
one calling for notice 1 day in advance of arrival of foreign naval
vessel. Regulations affecting naval forces are being referred to
higher naval authorities by the American naval officer in
command here.
Request instructions as to whether I should inform local
authorities in case Admiral declines to recognize regulations.
Writing in full.
Conditions quieter during the last few days.”
 
2. I have requested Chamberlain23 to radio at once more complete
information regarding regulations issued by Swatow authorities governing
shipping movements.
MAYER
23 Culver B. Chamberlain, vice consul at Swatow.

893.00/7630: Telegram
[Document 476]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 13, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received September 13—1:30 p.m.]
394. Legation’s 390, September 11, 3 p.m.24 Following from American
consul general, Hankow:
“September 12, 3 p.m. No firing on foreign vessels since Friday
afternoon. Protest had previously been filed by consular body;
and at my direction Huston25 made oral representations Friday
afternoon to General Tang, commander of the Cantonese forces in
this area, protesting the firing, and the General agreed to [issue?]
order forbidding firing on foreign vessels within his jurisdiction.
Stated officially that commission form of government will
eventually be instituted.
Conditions in Hankow gradually improving. Wanhsien incident
still a lively topic of discussion and speculation. British flagship
Hawkins with commander in chief of Asiatic Fleet has arrived.
Volunteer forces and naval units still ashore but may be
withdrawn from special district and French Concession tomorrow
if situation continues to improve.
Wuchang still holding out and negotiations for settlement
continuing.”
MAYER
24 Not printed.
25 Jay C. Huston, consul at Hankow.

893.00/7636: Telegram
[Document 477]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 14, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received September 14—11:20 a.m.]
400. Legation’s 391, September 11, 4 p.m.
1. Upon receipt of more detailed information regarding regulations issued
by Swatow authorities, I telegraphed him26 as follow:
“Pending further instructions on any additional action which may
be required, you should protest in concert with your colleagues
concerned, or alone if necessary, on general treaty grounds
against regulation calling for 1 day’s notice in advance of arrival
of foreign naval vessels.”
 
British Legation states it is taking similar action.
2. After consulting by telegraph with commander in chief and acting upon
his suggestion, I telegraphed American consul at Swatow as follow:
“September 14, noon. Regarding 24 hours’ advance notice
regulation I consider after consultation with commander in chief
that notice upon arrival channel entrance should be sufficient. You
should likewise reserve the right for our vessels to leave at night
in an emergency after due notice to the authorities.”
3. I agree with commander in chief that mining the entrance to Swatow
Harbor might be accepted without protest, provided the authorities there
made reasonable arrangements for the safe ingress and egress of foreign
vessels, since we cannot entirely ignore the actual although not technical

belligerency of the contending forces. As similar situations are apt to arise, I
should appreciate the Department’s instructions in this general regard.
MAYER
26 i. e., the American consul at Swatow.

893.00/7636: Telegram
[Document 478]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, September 14, 1926—5 p.m.
192. Your 400, September 14, 5 p.m. Instructions to consul at Swatow
referred to in paragraph 2 are approved. See in this connection your 447 of
October 16, 7 p.m., 1925, and Department’s 308 of October 29, 6 p.m.27
GREW
27 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 746 and 747 .

893.00/7642: Telegram
[Document 479]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 15, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received September 15—7:44 a.m.]
403. Following telegram has been sent to the American consul general at
Canton:
“September 15, 11 a.m. 1. The American consul at Swatow has
informed me that the Chinese authorities there have mined the
principal channel at the entrance to Swatow Bay and have issued
certain regulations governing ship movement in that regard. After
consultation with the commander in chief of the United States
Asiatic Fleet, I have directed Chamberlain to protest against the
regulation requiring that foreign naval vessels before entering the
port shall five 1 day’s notice of their arrival to local army
headquarters. I have likewise directed him to reserve the right for
our naval vessels to leave at night in an emergency after due
notice to the authorities.
2. Obviously our naval authorities cannot comply with the
unreasonable regulation requiring notification of arrival as
described above and must reserve the right to enter or leave the
harbor at night after due notice, both of the regulations concerned
being in contravention of treaty rights. You should bring these
considerations immediately to the attention of the Canton
authorities, requesting them to issue to the Swatow military
command instructions responsive to my protest and reservation
above mentioned.
3. Please inform commander South China Patrol for information
commander in chief.

artment informed.”

4. Dep
Maver

893.00/7644: Telegram
[Document 480]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 15, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received September 15—8:45 a.m.]
407. My 402, September 14, 7 p.m.28
1. Following from American consul general at Hanko:
“September 14, 11 a.m. Extremely heavy attack on Wuchang
began last night at 12 o’clock and continued for 1 hour preceded
by an aeroplane bombing about dusk, resulting, it is said, in some
loss of property among civilians. City has now been besieged 12
days, much of the time under intense artillery and machine-gun
fire. Conditions gradually improving in Hankow.
Establishment of government in Hankow extremely slow due
largely to failure to take Wuchang and persistent rumors that
Cantonese troops formerly belonging to Wu are wavering in their
allegiance as between the North and the South. I foresee many
difficulties in dealing with the new authorities, and I should like
instructions as to my official relations with them. Until otherwise
instructed I shall maintain informal contact only conducting as
little correspondence as possible and avoiding any act which
might seem to denote a recognition of the new regime.”
2. I have telegraphed Lockhart approving his proposed attitude toward new
authorities as set forth in the last sentence, second paragraph, of his
telegram aforementioned.
MAYER

28 Not printed.

893.00/7645: Telegram
[Document 481]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 15, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received September 15—10:05 a.m.]
408. 1. Following sent to American consul, Chungking, for information
commander in chief:
“At request of British Minister you are instructed to extend
unofficial good offices in behalf of British interests during
temporary absence of British consul.”
2. British Minister explained that his consul at Chungking will be absent
from his post for a short time as he is to accompany second British
expedition Wanhsien in connection with release of two British merchant
vessels still in the hands of Yang Sen (see Legation’s number 379,
September 8, 5 p.m.).
3. British Legation informs me that while this expedition is to be sent, it is
hoped that Yang Sen will agree to release of the ships so that no further
bloodshed may ensue. British Legation however states that they are going
through with the affair until boats are released by Yang Sen, either
voluntarily or otherwise.
MAYER

893.00/7650
[Document 482]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
[WASHINGTON,] September 15, 1926.
Conversation.
The Italian Ambassador, Nobile Giacomo de Martino.
The Secretary of State.
Mr. Nelson T. Johnson present.
Subject: Attitude of United States Government towards question of
coöperation with British Government in firmer policy in China.
The Italian Ambassador called to see the Secretary under instructions from
his Government to inquire as to the attitude of this Government towards the
question of cooperation with the British Government in firmer action in
China. The Ambassador stated that Mr. Mussolini’s telegram to him
indicated by its wording that some suggestion may have come to him that
the British and American Governments contemplated joint action. The
Secretary informed the Italian Ambassador that the British Government had
not approached him with regard to joint action in connection with the
Wanhsien affair on the Yangtze. The Secretary stated that this Government
has not given any consideration to the question of joint action; that it had
considered that the affair at Wanhsien was very much an affair between
Great Britain and China. He stated that standing instructions to our naval
forces in the Far East empowered them to give every possible protection to
American life and property and that he understood that cooperative
arrangements existed between the naval forces of the several Powers
whereby each naval force extended protection in an emergency to the lives
of other friendly nationals when the naval forces of those nationals were not

present, and recited the incident of the assistance given to British wounded
by an American naval vessel near Hankow. He stated to the Ambassador
that this Government not only did not contemplate any joint action but that
he believed that there was hardly any occasion for joint action at the present
time.
N[ELSON] T. J[OHNSON]

893.00/7648: Telegram
[Document 483]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 16, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received September 16—5:54 a.m.]
410. My 407, September 15, 3 p.m. Following from American consul
general, Hankow:
“September 15, 3 p.m. American gunboat Pigeon was fired upon
by Southern shore battery offshore Chenglingki yesterday
afternoon. Pigeon returned fire with machine gun. No casualties
reported from Pigeon.
Four commercial vessels which could be used in case evacuation
of foreigners at Chungking should become necessary are now at
or near that place. Conditions reported quiet there yesterday.
From Saturday noon to yesterday noon 81 cars of Southern troops
moved northward. It is definitely established that Sun Chuan-
fang’s troops have employed Southerners at Wusüeh on left bank
of Yangtze above Kiukiang. Considerable concentration of Sun’s
troops at Kiukiang. Wuchang is still holding out, consequently
British Admiral in command of the Yangtze Patrol sailed on the
Bee for up river yesterday afternoon in connection with Wanhsien
incident.”
MAYER

893.00/7652: Telegram
[Document 484]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 17, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received September 17—8:15 a.m.]
413. My 410, September 16, 10 a.m. Following from American consul
general, Hankow:
“September 16, 4 p.m. American volunteer forces and naval units
will be withdrawn this afternoon; small naval guard at the
consulate general.
French gunboat Balny fired upon by shore battery at Chenglingki
Tuesday afternoon and returned the fire with 75-millimeter gun.
Plight of inhabitants in Wuchang gradually growing worse as they
are cut off from the outside world. Have made arrangements
through the military authorities to send limited food supplies by
mail to Americans there.”
MAYER

893.00/7655: Telegram
[Document 485]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 18, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received September 18—11:20 a.m.]
414. My 413, September 17, 4 p.m. Following from American consul
general at Hankow, which, although delayed in transit, contains information
of interest for the Department:
“September 10, noon. Palos and Pigeon convoyed by destroyer
Stewart for 7 miles above Hanyang, left Hankow this morning at
7 o’clock for up river accompanied by merchantmen Iling,
American, and Changsha, British. At 7:30 in proceeding past
Hanyang, now occupied by Southern forces, all vessels were fired
upon by machinegun and rifle fire; Palos and Pigeon hit about 30
times each and destroyer hit many times. Palos returned fire with
machine gun; and destroyer, after returning fire with rifles and
machine guns for about 10 minutes, silenced the shore fire with a
4–inch shell. No casualties on naval vessels. No report on
merchantmen. Destroyer Stewart in returning to Hankow was
hailed by British merchantman Kiang Wo, which had on board
injured officers and men from Wanhsien attack and they were
transferred to the Stewart and brought to Hankow, since Kiang Wo
did not wish to be subjected to shell and rifle fire while wounded
were on board. Stewart was not fired upon in passing Hanyang on
return trip. Palos and Pigeon proceeding upstream. Pigeon will
proceed halfway to Ichang; and Palos will proceed to Chungking
if possible to support Monocaoy.
Although but little gunfire heard at Wuchang last night, city is
still in the hands of Northerners. Negotiation for its surrender still
in progress.

Fighting yesterday afternoon between retreating Northern soldiers
and pursuing Southerners near Hengtien. Two aeroplanes passed
over Hankow flying northward this morning.
Good order still being maintained in the concessions, but scores
of lower-class Honanese have been brutally murdered by
Hupehese of similar class in native city within the last two days.
This trouble is subsiding now.
Business almost at a complete standstill; practically all Chinese
banks and big shops still closed. Money situation very serious,
medium of exchange being confined principally to foreign
banknotes, military notes being issued.
River transportation demoralized, as practically all ships
including big passenger carriers are being fired upon above and
below Hankow. The situation of the foreigner is becoming
increasingly difficult.
Admiral Williams29 will communicate to you details of Wanhsien
incident.”
MAYER
29 Rear Admiral Clarence S. Williams, commander in chief, U. S. Asiatic
Fleet.

893.00/7657: Telegram
[Document 486]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 19, 1926—noon.
[Received September 19—6:50 a.m.]
416. My 414, September 18, 1 p.m. Following from American consul
general at Hankow:
“September 18, 3 p.m. Intermittent gunfire and aeroplane attacks
on Wuchang continue. Bombs have been dropped in various parts
of Wuchang, resulting in some loss of life and property damage.
Shrapnel from antiaircraft guns in Wuchang have fallen in
Hankow concessions.
Hankow side quiet. British and French forces still on duty,
Japanese withdrawn several days ago.
Southern troops still making advances northward, now
understood to be well into Honan. Sun Ch’uan-fang troops and
Southerners have had several engagements in Kiangsi near the
Hunan border but without appreciable fighting on either side.
British [sic] firing on river steamers and naval vessels in this
immediate vicinity for several days.”
MAYER

893.00/7659: Telegram
[Document 487]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 20, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received September 20—2:50 p.m.]
418. My 416, September 19, noon. Following three telegrams from
American consul general, Hankow:
“September 19, 3 p.m. American gunboat Pigeon was fired upon
by rifle and machine-gun batteries at 11 o’clock this morning
while passing Hanyang. Three enlisted men wounded but not
seriously. Commander estimates that vessel was struck
approximately 100 times. He promptly returned fire with machine
gun. Vessel was attacked from both Hanyang and Wuchang sides,
the latter perhaps from outside the wall.
I assume that you are keeping the Department informed fully
concerning developments here. It would be helpful if the Legation
or the Department could give me some indication of its policy
towards the new regime and the unreasonable attitude which it
has assumed toward foreign interests, or whether the handling of
the situation in cooperation with the naval authorities as the
changing conditions may arise is to be left to my discretion. There
are possibilities of far-reaching consequences involved.”
“September 19, 3 p.m. I have received today the following letter
dated September 18th from the Commissioner of Foreign Affairs:
‘It is urgent that the military operations at Wuchang and
Hankow should be settled. I am now in receipt of an
instruction from the commander in chief of the National
Revolutionary Army directing me to circularize the
gunboats of the various countries promptly to sail down

river to a comparatively distant place and not to anchor
in the river in the vicinity of the war zone at Wuhan in
order to avoid danger and to prevent misunderstanding.
Aside from notifying other parties concerned thereof I
beg to request that you in turn notify the various
(American) gunboats to act accordingly.’
Obviously the American ships now here will not be withdrawn. I
am disposed to make either no acknowledgment or a simple
acknowledgment, adding that the request cannot be complied with
in view of treaty right of American vessels to navigate the inland
waters without let or hindrance. Have you any instructions?
Notice has also been received that hereafter, without the sanction
of the headquarters of the commander in chief of the National
Revolutionary Army, no huchao shall be issued to cover the
export of money and foodstuffs, the purpose of the order being to
conserve food and stabilize the money market which is now in a
deplorable state.
Navy telegram dated last night states that Mei Chuen, American
vessel, en route to Ichang with foreign refugees, mostly British;
that very large demonstration took place yesterday both sides of
the river and that foreign houses on hill looted; much anti-British
and increasing antiforeign feeling; that American and British
subjects safe.
Another aeroplane bombing attack on Wuchang yesterday
afternoon. Planes dropped propaganda circulars on Wuchang and
Hankow, offering big rewards for capture of Military Governor
and Civil Governor, dead or alive, and $30 each to soldiers giving
themselves up.”
“September 19, 5 p.m. There will be repeated to you by Admiral
Williams a telegram from Admiral Hough, commenting on and
giving a resume of a notice communicated to me by the
Commissioner of Foreign Affairs, forbidding the navigation of the

Yangtze from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. in the Hankow-Wuchang-Hanyang
war zone and serving notice that all vessels will be fired upon by
artillery if they fail to stop on signal for search at certain places
designated during daylight hours.
While I object in principle to applying such restrictions to
commercial vessels, the shipping companies concerned—as they
have been doing at Chenglingki for some days—seem to prefer to
have their vessels searched rather than to subject them to artillery
fire or to have them convoyed and thereby perhaps draw fire from
shore batteries. I therefore doubt the advisability of requesting or
compelling commercial vessels to disregard the notice if they
prefer, under the peculiar circumstances prevailing now along the
river, to have their vessels stopped and searched.
With reference to naval vessels it seems to me that American
prestige, to say nothing of the undoubted right of such vessels to
navigate the Yangtze freely and without molestation, demands a
complete disregard of the regulations. This of course will require
for the safety of the officers and men and the vessels themselves
the return of any fire directed against them.
Your instructions requested.”
Instructions from the Legation for the American consul general at Hankow
as requested and comment to the Department on the state of affairs as set
forth in the above telegrams, are now under consideration. I shall shortly
telegraph to the Department my conclusions.
MAYER

893.00/7661: Telegram
[Document 488]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 21, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received 4:30 p.m.]
422. My 418, September 20, 4 p.m.
1. I have given most careful consideration to the three telegrams mentioned
in my 418, September 20, 4 p.m., as well as to the telegram from Admiral
Hough to Admiral Williams, referred to in the first paragraph of Mr.
Lockhart’s September 19, 5 p.m., which maintains the differentiation
between commercial vessels and ships of war as regards observance of the
navigation regulations.
2. I agree in general terms with Lockhart’s and Admiral Hough’s opinion. In
relation commercial vessels, there are seemingly insurmountable practical
difficulties to our compelling them to refuse to comply with the navigation
regulations and to take the risk of running the so-called blockade or to
accept convoy which would be very difficult to supply and tactical[ly] as
difficult to make effective should the Chinese actually employ artillery fire
from the banks of the river. There is likewise the important consideration
that American shipping apparently prefers to comply with the regulations,
as do the other foreign shipping interests concerned, and that a defiance of
the regulations would not meet with their approval and therefore not have
their cooperation. I greatly deplore the necessity for the conclusion set forth
above since I foresee increasing difficulties for our shipping on the Yangtze,
if not a total loss, in the near future, when it may be driven from the river by
the restrictions which the Chinese will in all probability increasingly
impose. A determined opposition to terminate present regulations, were it
practicable, might defer the case envisaged above. [Apparent omission] be
the greater of two evils. …

3. [Paraphrase.] I feel that in the situation which faces us we must either
retain our warships on the Yangtze by forced [by force of] arms if necessary,
or else remove them entirely. I must favor the former alternative, as the
latter is unthinkable at this time. I have arrived at this conclusion fully
realizing the consequences which may follow. I have instructed our consul
general at Hankow as follows: [End paraphrase.]
“September 21, noon. Your two telegrams of September 19, 3
p.m.; and September 19, 5 p.m. Repeat of telegram from Admiral
Hough to Admiral Williams mentioned in first paragraph of your
September 19, 5 p.m., also received.
(1) In the circumstances you describe, I entirely concur
with paragraph No. 2 of your September 19, 5 p.m., and
consider it inadvisable to request or compel commercial
vessels to disregard the notice forbidding navigation of
the Yangtze during certain designated hours in the so-
called war zone and that commercial vessels shall stop
on a signal for search at certain designated places and
times on penalty of being fired upon by artillery if they
fail to comply.
(2) While I generally agree with your point in the last
paragraph of your telegram of September 19, 5 p.m.,
with reference to naval vessels, I believe it would be
advisable after consultation with Admiral Hough if he
so agrees, for him to tell the local military authorities
that our war vessels will endeavor to comply with the
restrictions on navigation during the night when
practicable, but should emergency arise they must
disregard this regulation; that we must however
continue to place full responsibility upon the Cantonese
authorities for any firing upon American war vessels
which may be transvering [traversing?] the so-called
war zone or otherwise.
(3) You should therefore reply to the Commissioner of
Foreign Affairs to the following general effect: that the

Government of the United States considers extremely
drastic the regulations concerning the navigation of the
Yangtze from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. in the so-called war zone
and those concerning search at certain places during the
daylight hours on penalty of artillery fire if there has
been failure to stop on signal, which are contrary to
treaty provisions, but is willing, with due reservation of
the treaty rights involve[d] and as a purely temporary
measure, not to prevent commercial vessels flying the
American flag to comply [from complying?] with these
regulations, should they so desire. On the other and, the
American Government will not direct its war vessels to
comply with the above regulations, and more especially
with the circular from the commander in chief of the so-
called National Revolutionary Army requesting such
vessels promptly to sail down river to a comparatively
distant place, and not to anchor in the vicinity of the
war zone at Wuhan, in order to prevent danger and
avoid misunderstanding. The Government of the United
States desires to bring immediately and forcibly to the
attention of all the Chinese authorities concerned their
grave responsibility should any untoward incident arise
from an effort to put these regulations into effect, with
which it is obviously impossible for American men-of-
war to comply.”30
4. Pursuant to the Legation’s policy as expressed in the Legation’s 360,
August 30, 5 p.m., and 403, September 15, 11 a.m., I am instructing the
American consul general at Canton to protest vigorously with the
authorities there against the navigation regulations and request their
cancelation or [apparent omission] on the Yangtze appear to have
determined not to comply with the regulations as to their ships of war. No
definite information is available regarding British attitude.
6. [sic] I regret exceedingly that the exigencies of the situation prevented
my referring preliminarily to you for instructions. I earnestly trust you
approve the action taken.

7. Commercial attaché requests that his department be informed of general
conditions on the Yangtze.
MAYER
30 The consul general at Hankow telegraphed to the Minister in China on
Sept. 26 the text of a note which he had delivered to the Chinese
Commissioner for Foreign Affairs embodying the substance of this
paragraph (file No. 893.00/7832).

893.00/7662: Telegram
[Document 489]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 21, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received September 21—5:11 p.m.]
423. My 422, September 21, 4 p.m., paragraph No. 4. The following
telegram has been sent to American consul general at Canton:
“Urgent. September 21, 5 p.m.
1. The American consul general at Hankow has informed me of
the receipt of a notice from the Commissioner for Foreign Affairs
there forbidding the navigation of the Yangtze from 6 p.m. to 6
a.m. in the so-called Hankow-Wuchang-Hanyang war zone and
that all vessels will be fired upon by artillery if they fail to stop on
signal for search at certain designated places during daylight
hours. The Commissioner for Foreign Affairs has likewise sent
Mr. Lockhart the following letter dated September 18:
‘It is urgent that the military operations at Wuchang and
Hankow should be settled. I am now in receipt of an
instruction from the commander in chief of the National
Revolutionary Army directing me to circularize the
gunboats of the various countries promptly to sail down
river to a comparatively distant place and not to anchor
in the river in the vicinity of the war zone at Wuhan in
order to avoid danger and to prevent misunderstanding.
Aside from notifying other parties concerned thereof I
beg to request that you in turn notify the various
(American) gunboats to act accordingly.’

I have instructed Mr. Lockhart to reply to the Commissioner of
Foreign Affairs to the following effect:
‘You should therefore reply to the Commissioner of
Foreign Affairs to the following general effect: that the
Government of the United States considers extremely
drastic the regulations concerning the navigation of the
Yangtze from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. in the so-called war zone
and those concerning search at certain places during the
daylight hours on penalty of artillery fire if there is a
failure to stop on signal, which are contrary to treaty
provisions, but is willing, with due reservation of the
treaty rights involved and as a purely temporary
measure, not to prevent commercial vessels flying the
American flag to comply [from complying?] with these
regulations, should they so desire. On the other hand,
the American Government will not direct its war vessels
to comply with the above regulations, and more
especially with the circular from the commander in
chief of the so-called National Revolutionary Army
requesting such vessels promptly to sail down river to a
comparatively distant place, and not to anchor in the
vicinity of the war zone at Wuhan, in order to prevent
danger and avoid misunderstanding. The Government
of the United States desires to bring immediately and
forcibly to the attention of all the Chinese authorities
concerned their grave responsibility should any
untoward incident arise from an effort to put these
regulations into effect, with which it is obviously
impossible for American men-of-war to comply.’
I have also informed the consul general at Hankow that I believe
it advisable after consulting with Admiral Hough that if the latter
so agrees he should tell the local military authorities that our war
vessels will endeavor to comply with the restrictions on
navigation during the night, when practicable, but should
emergency arise they must disregard this regulation.

2. You should immediately communicate to the Acting Minister
for Foreign Affairs the attitude we have necessarily adopted vis-à-
vis these regulations as evidenced by my instructions to Lockhart,
which you may give in substance to Chen.31 You should then
protest vigorously against these regulations, leaving an aide-
mémoire stressing their drastic nature as regards commercial ships
and the impossibility of compliance therewith in respect of our
war vessels and request that Chen telegraph at once to the military
authorities to cancel or at least radically revise the regulations in
question. Invite his particular attention to the temporary
concession we have made regarding our commercial ships and the
effort which our naval authorities will undoubtedly make to
comply with restrictions on navigation during the night.
3. At the same time please express forcibly verbally to the Acting
Minister of Foreign Affairs my astonishment that these
regulations should have been issued, particularly those requiring
the visit and search of our war vessels and the request that our
warships leave the Hankow area, which appear of an entirely
provocative character since obviously we could not be expected
to comply therewith.”
MAYER
31 Eugene Chen, Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Canton
Government.

893.00/7661: Telegram
[Document 490]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, September 22, 1926—1 p.m.
203. Your 422, September 21, 4 p.m. In general the Department after
consultation with Navy Department approves your instructions. However, I
think it would be well also to inform the Chinese authorities that the
American war vessels represent a friendly nation, that they are acting
strictly within treaty rights and not in any way interfering with the
contending factions but are there for the purpose of protecting American
citizens and property as they have a right to do. Obviously the presence of
American naval vessels can be of no disadvantage or danger to either
faction and it is the expectation of the American Government that both sides
will give these ships the friendly cooperation in protecting American
citizens to which they are entitled.
[Paraphrase.] We do not understand British attitude unless paragraph 6 of
commander in chief’s telegram September 20th32 is misquoted to us. It
states that the British intend to comply with the regulations both with their
merchant ships and the naval transport service. We were not aware that they
had any naval transport service on the Yangtze. Do British intend to comply
with their naval vessels? If they do intend to comply with their naval
vessels, it will probably embarrass position of our naval vessels in same
area. Communicate foregoing to commander in chief. [End paraphrase.]
KELLOGG
32 Not printed.

893.00/7667: Telegram
[Document 491]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 23, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received September 23—8:30 a.m.]
426. Legation’s 379, September 8, 5 p.m. Following from American consul
general at Hankow:
“September 22, 4 p.m. Mei Chuen has arrived at Ichang from
Chungking with about 70 refugees aboard, mostly British.
Daily aeroplane attacks on Wuchang continue, peace negotiations
having been broken off.
American naval officer at Ichang reports that Wanhsien case has
been amicably settled. Probable that second expedition will not
proceed above Ichang. Details of settlement unknown beyond
immediate release of two seized ships.”
MAYER

893.00/7680
[Document 492]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State of a Conversation With
the Portuguese Minister (D’Alte)
[WASHINGTON,] September 23, 1926.
The Portuguese Minister called on me and asked what the condition was in
China. I told him that conditions were not good, especially along the Yang
Tze River; that the Cantonese army had captured Hankow and Hanyang and
were now besieging Wuchang; that the latter was a walled city and so far as
I have been advised, it had not yet been captured. He wanted to know
whether, if one of our gunboats were fired on, we would return the fire. I
told him they had only been fired upon once or twice. Two soldiers had
been wounded and I understand they returned the fire and they probably
would in the future. He said their concession at Macao, south of Canton,
had been fired on and they had returned the fire. I told him that I understood
that all of the Powers represented at Peking who were interested in China
had agreed that they would not compel their merchant ships to refuse
search; that they did not approve it and there was no recognition of the
Cantonese as legal belligerents and, therefore, no recognition of their right
to search merchant vessels. Nevertheless, if the merchant vessels insisted
they would rather be searched and comply with the orders than to have a
convoy, we did not feel like objecting to it or compelling them not to
comply but this is no recognition of the Cantonese right of search. He said
that if they fired on other warships and on the concessions, he wondered if
it would not be best for all the Powers to unite and return their hostilities or
oppose the attack. I told him I doubted if there was any necessity for the
Powers to unite; that each one was there with its own gunboats and forces
in order to protect their citizens and I doubted very much if the Cantonese
would go to the extent of bombarding concessions; that I thought the firing
on these ships was a desultory firing by lawless Chinese soldiers who took
pot shots for the fun of it. He said that he believed that was true. I am under
the impression that he wished to be informed as to our view as to joint

action. He did not press the matter and I did not give him any
encouragement nor did I answer his inquiry other than to say I did not think
it was necessary.

893.00/7670: Telegram
[Document 493]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 24, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received September 24—3:10 p.m.]
430. My 426, September 23, 1 p.m. Following two telegrams from
American consul general, Hankow:
“September 23, noon. Following from American consul at
Chungking:
‘September 20, noon. It is reported that the Chungking
military authorities are arranging to support General
Chiang Kai-shih, thus giving increased freedom to
radical Kuomintang organization here. Please inform
Legation.’
Information of a similar character yet unconfirmed is coming in
concerning the military situation at Ichang.
Practically all labor activities suspended all day yesterday in
Hankow; participation in large mass meeting and parade in
celebration advent of Kuomintang into Hankow. The day passed
quietly after much speech making and wide distribution of
propaganda pamphlets.
2. Additional American destroyers arriving this afternoon.” And
“September 23, 4 p.m. American destroyers Truxton and Peary
arrived today and were not fired upon. Destroyers Pillsbury and
Ford were sent down river to escort them past danger zone
established immediately outside Hankow port limits.

Mei Yung, Standard Oil Company motorboat, fired upon
yesterday up river near Shasi and quartermaster, presumably
Chinese, killed. This attack is believed to have come from
Northern soldiers now in that vicinity.
Sun Ch’uan-fang arrived yesterday at Kiukiang. Estimation of
number of Sun’s troops recently arrived and passed through
Kiukiang ranging from 60,000 to 100,000.”
MAYER

893.00/7672: Telegram
[Document 494]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 25, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received September 25—8:20 a.m.]
432. My 422, September 21, 4 p.m. American consul general, Hankow, in
telegram dated September 22, 1 p.m., just received, states that in note dated
September 20th Commissioner for Foreign Affairs refers to his previous
note conveying instruction from commander, Cantonese army, regarding
withdrawal of foreign gunboats to lower river and states that it was meant to
refer to river below Wuchang and Hanyang and did not mean “the river
below the whole port of Hankow because gunboats anchoring within the
boundaries of the concessions will not be endangered by the military
operations.” In view of the foregoing explanation, Lockhart is making no
reply to Commissioner of Foreign Affairs to this and the previous note on
this subject.33
MAYER
33 Lockhart did, however, present a note of protest. See footnote 30, p. 637
[Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489].

893.00/7698: Telegram
[Document 495]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 29, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received September 30.]
438. Department’s 203, September 22, 1 p.m.
1. Despite persistent efforts within past 10 days I have been
unable to get from the British Legation any conclusive
information on the subject of the compliance of their naval
authorities with the Yangtze navigation regulations.
2. I am informed, however, … that the British naval authorities on
the Yangtze have agreed with Cantonese to stop British war
vessels on signal and receive a courtesy visit by a Chinese officer
at Chenglingki.
MAYER

893.00/7694: Telegram
[Document 496]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 30, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received September 30—6:25 a.m.]
439. My 432, September 25, 1 p.m. Following from American consul
general at Hankow:
“September 28, 4 p.m. Cantonese authorities have laid small
mines electrically controlled at Chenglingki. Vessels from Ichang
must stop 2 miles above Kweiyinchow Spit from Changsha off
the creek in Changsha Village and from Hankow off Lienhuatang.
After stopping, vessels will be met, examined and guided by
military launch through the dangerous area. Mines are buoyed to
indicate position and two have been fired off the bund at
Chenglingki by way of demonstration to local inhabitants.
American merchant vessels will endeavor to meet regulations, but
naval vessels exercising due caution in the navigation of the area
involved will not stop and allow inspection.
No American vessels fired upon for more than a week,
notwithstanding several have passed danger zones. I shall call to
the attention of the Commissioner of Foreign Affairs the notes
quoted in my telegrams September 21, 6 p.m., and September 23
[22, 1 p.m.?] and say that it is not understood that any [apparent
omission] will be made to apply the inspection regulations at
Chenglingki to naval vessels.
The situation at Wuchang remains unchanged. Large bodies of
Sun Ch’uan-fang troops on both banks of the river a few hours
this side of Kiukiang. Situation at Kiukiang for several days has
been rather tense. Gunboat Pigeon proceeding there today.
Hankow quiet. British volunteers withdrawn yesterday. Some of

the native banks have reopened but business remains practically
at a standstill.”

Mhaver

893.00/7701: Telegram
[Document 497]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 2, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received October 2—9:46 a.m.]
447. My 438, September 29, 3 p.m. Following from American consul
general at Canton:
“October 1, 1 p.m. In accordance with your telegram of
September 21, 5 p.m., I filed protest with Eugene Chen on
September 25th, to which he has now replied. The substance has
been telegraphed to Commander in Chief Chiang Chung-cheng
for his information and action.
Chen declines to admit the regulations restricting navigation on
the Yangtze are in violation of the treaties. He declares that as war
is now raging in the Wuhan area foreign men-of-war should
withdraw as requested, stating he also expresses the hope that
American men-of-war will comply with the regulations to
proceed to certain designated places, anchor and notify the
military authorities of their nationality in order that appropriate
action may be taken. Despatch will be forwarded with copies of
correspondence”.
MAYER

393.1163/62: Telegram
[Document 498]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 5, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received October 5—8:09 a.m.]
453. My 288, July 17, 4 p.m.34 Telegrams received by Legation from
Eglund, American missionary at Shihlipu near Sianfu, dated September
30th, report that situation there desperate. Legation was requested to take
immediate steps to evacuate foreigners of whom 29 appear to be Americans
who are detained within city. American consul general, Hankow, has
reported that owing to inaccessibility of Sianfu it is impossible to afford
relief from Hankow.
I have sent telegram[s] to commander[s] of the besieging army and of
beleaguered forces inside the city asking them to afford every facility to
American missionaries to leave Sianfu. Have also made representations to
Foreign Office. It is extremely doubtful however that these measures will
bring about any tangible result. I recommend and request authorization to
send an American military officer attached to Legation to Sianfu with
instructions and authority to take all necessary steps [and] practicable
measures for rescue of American missionaries there, his necessary
expenses, estimated to be about $500 gold, to be defrayed by Department of
State.
 
It will be recalled that similar action was taken successfully in case of Mrs.
Kilen—see the Department’s telegram number 7, January 5, 6 p.m., 1924,35
and previous pertinent correspondence.
MAYER

34 Not printed.
35 Not printed.

893.00/7703: Telegram
[Document 499]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 5, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received October 5—8:20 a.m.]
454. My 448, October 2, 6 p.m.35
1. Following from American consul general, Hanko:
“October 4, 5 p.m. Two destroyers convoyed gunboat Elcano
from Hankow to point shortly above Chenglingki. Gunboat
Pigeon from Ichang joined them there, and the three vessels
returned here this afternoon. None of them fired upon either at
Wuchang or at Chenglingki, going or returning, which seems to
indicate more moderate attitude of the Cantonese towards
American naval vessels.
Aeroplane attacks again yesterday and intermittent firing
throughout the night and today. General situation there and at
Hankow unchanged. Sun Ch’uan-fang’s troops making some
advance towards Hankow near Hwangshihkang.”
2. Unofficial reports from reliable source are to the effect that Sun Ch’uan-
fang’s forces are being successful all along the line and that the position of
the Cantonese is becoming increasingly hazardous.
MAYER
35 Not printed.

393.1163/62: Telegram
[Document 500]
The Secretary of the State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, October 5, 1926—8 p.m.
218. Tour 453, October 5, 10 a.m. Your recommendation approved. Five
hundred dollars allowance granted. Draw on Secretary of State. Render
separate account.
KELLOGG

893.00/7706: Telegram
[Document 501]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 7, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received October 7—7:32 a.m.]
459. My 447, October 2, 5 p.m. Following from American consul general at
Canton:
“October 5, 1 p.m. Local authorities have declared martial law in
Boca Tigris and Whampoa Fort areas and forbid all vessels to
pass during the night. I shall protest as formerly but I am being
guided by your telegram of September 21, 5 p.m., especially with
respect to merchant ships. Despatch will be forwarded.”
Telegram of September 21, 5 p.m., above referred to, was repeated to the
Department in the Legation’s 423, September 21, 4 [6] p.m.
MAYER

893.00/7709: Telegram
[Document 502]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 5, 1926—noon.
[Received October 8—9:25 a.m.]
461. My 454, October 5, 1 p.m. Following from American consul general at
Hankow:
“October 7, noon. Authentic reports indicate that there is taking
place a rapid evacuation of Sun Ch’uan-fang’s troops from
Kiukiang. Sun Ch’uan-fang himself is said to be proceeding down
river on a Chinese gunboat followed by many transports filled
with soldiers. Many troops presumably from Anhwei are crossing
to the north side of river at Kiukiang. Southern troops are on the
outskirts of Kiukiang. Many Sun troops on the river between here
and Kiukiang have been withdrawn below Kiukiang. Destroyer
Ford sent to Kiukiang yesterday; Pigeon also there. Inform naval
attaché that one Chinese cruiser at Kichow and three gunboats
and two transports at Wusueh.
Many refugees, mostly women and children, are being evacuated
from Wuchang daily; estimated 20,000 to 30,000 have already
come out. Careful and conservative estimates indicate as many as
50 women and children, all Chinese, have been killed by being
trampled to death in the rush through the gates to board the rescue
vessels, otherwise Wuchang is quiet and no reports of Americans
being wounded.
Hankow quiet but big demonstration and parade being organized
for October 10th and British will land bluejackets tomorrow as a
precautionary measure.”
MAYER

893.00/7733: Telegram
[Document 503]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 9, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received October 9—5:29 a.m.]
465. My 471 [461], October 8, noon. Following from American consul
general, Hankow:
“October 8, 4 p.m. My October 7, noon. Sun Ch’uan-fang is still
at Kiukiang on one of his gunboats, and the movement of his
troops out of Kiukiang did not reach large proportions. A
considerable number were removed but there has been as yet no
complete evacuation. Cantonese are now very near the city, and
decisive developments are expected there shortly.
Conditions in Wuchang have been greatly exaggerated; American
visitors there yesterday confirm considerable loss of life among
women and children by being trampled to death at the gates, but
practically no deaths from starvation. All Americans safe and
well. Movement of refugees out of the city practically ceased as it
is understood that Northern and Southern factions are close to
settlement of the issue by compromise.”
MAYER

893.00/7733: Telegram
[Document 504]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, October 9, 1926—2 p.m.
224. Press reports dreadful suffering civilian population in Wuchang. You
are instructed to correspond with Lockhart in the endeavor to ascertain
whether we can be of assistance.
Your 465, October 9, 3 p.m., just received. Should situation of civilian
population in Wuchang become such as to seem to justify it, it is suggested
that consular body in Hankow endeavor to arrange armistice, during which
some means of relief might be devised. Red Cross would be disposed to
assist in case of necessity. Wire your recommendation.
KELLOGG

893.00/7734: Telegram
[Document 505]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 10, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received October 10—7:15 a.m.]
467. Your 224, October 9, 2 p.m. No action seems required in view of
following telegram from American consul general, Hankow:
“October 9, 3 p.m. Terms of surrender of Wuchang have been
agreed upon between Northern and Southern commanders except
removal and disposition of small guns still in dispute. Terms
contemplate incorporating armed Northerners into Southern army
under General Liu Tso-lung with certain guarantees for their pay;
arrangements to be made for their safe evacuation and
transportation to Kotien and Ocheng a few miles down the river.
When the one obstacle to complete agreement is removed
evacuation will begin.
Situation at Kiukiang substantially unchanged. No withdrawal of
troops being made and Sun still on boat in the harbor.”
MAYER

893.00/7738: Telegram
[Document 506]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 12, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received October 12—10: 05 a.m.]
472. My 467, October 10, 3 p.m. Following from American consul general,
Hankow:
“October 11, 11 a.m. My October 9, 3 p.m. Notwithstanding
agreement for the surrender of Wuchang had almost been
reached, Southern army under Generals T’ang Sheng-chi and
Teng Yen-ta captured the city yesterday morning. Through a ruse
Southerners passed through one of the principal gates and
attacked the defenders of other gates and shortly thereafter the
Southerners were within the walls in large force. Northerners in
the rout discarded their arms, uniforms and other accoutrements
and attempted to escape from the city by other gates which were
still intact. The Northerners who had been atop the walls came
down into the city and followed the example of the defenders of
the gates. Estimated by eyewitnesses several hundred casualties.
Many dead still lying about the streets late yesterday afternoon,
and the streets were littered with discarded paraphernalia.
General Liu Yu-chun who was a refugee in the home of an absent
American in Boone University compound was captured by the
invading army and his fate is still unknown although rumors
persist that he was promptly court-martialed and shot. Am
seeking confirmation of this.
Tupan Chen Chiao-mo is understood to have escaped to this side
of the river.

Cantonese are reassuring the people by proclamation and
propaganda. Order is being restored. Disarmed soldiers are being
given the option of joining Southern army or being given their
freedom. Many are joining the Southerners. Wuchang was scene
of great turmoil and excitement throughout all of yesterday and
not until the late afternoon was order being brought out of chaos.
Conditions much improved this morning. All Americans safe but
some of their houses thoroughly searched.
Approximately 9,000 Northern soldiers arrived at Kiukiang
yesterday from up river, indicating a gradual withdrawal from the
region between Hankow and Kiukiang.
Although trouble was expected by reason of parades and
demonstrations here yesterday on the 15th anniversary of the
founding of the Republic, no untoward event occurred.”
MAYER

893.00/7746
[Document 507]
The British Chargé (Chilton) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, October 13, 1926.
No. 602
SIR: I have the honour to inform you of the receipt by His Majesty’s
Government of a report from the British Commander-in-Chief, China, of
which the following is an extract:
“While Steamship Kiangwo with wounded from Wanhsien was
approaching Hankow she was heavily fired at between Wuchang
and Hanyang and after being turned back twice retired above
Hanyang and anchored. Thereupon United States ship Stewart
which had just escorted a convoy past the same place, where they
also had been fired on, went alongside Kiangwo and took off the
wounded and British passengers and brought them to Hankow.
The wounded were efficiently transported to destroyer and treated
with great courtesy. This prompt action in relieving them from the
anxiety of being again fired on was most considerate and much
appreciated.”
I have been instructed to inform you of the extreme gratification with which
His Majesty’s Government learnt of the above, and I have much pleasure in
conveying to you, and through your kind intermediary, to the interested
authorities of the United States Government, an expression of the cordial
thanks of His Majesty’s Government for the prompt and considerate action
of the Officer Commanding the United States Ship Stewart.
I have [etc.]
(For H. M. Chargé d’Affaires)
G. H. THOMPSON

393.1163/65: Telegram
[Document 508]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 13, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received October 13—9:35 a.m.]
476. My 453, October 5, 10 a.m. British Legation have received a telegram
from British missionary near Sianfu, dated October 12th, indicating that all
British and American missionaries who desired to leave are safely out of
Sianfu. American military officer will not therefore proceed to Sianfu
unless report proves incorrect.
MAYER

893.00/7748: Telegram
[Document 509]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 15, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received October 15—3: 50 a.m.]
481. My 472, October 12, 5 p.m. Following from American consul general,
Hankow:
“October 14, 3 p.m. French gunboat Alerte fired upon yesterday
near Wusüeh, killing one sailor, seriously injuring another. Alerte
fired upon again below Hankow this morning but no casualties.
Fire returned both times.
Conditions at Wuchang continue to improve. Shops are opening
and food supplies ample. About 400 bodies inside and outside
walls in crude coffins now awaiting burial. All Northern troops
evacuated.
No change in the situation at Kiukiang.”
MAYER

893.00/7752: Telegram
[Document 510]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 18, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received October 18—5:56 a.m.]
488. My 481, October 15, 11 a.m. Following from American consul
general, Hankow:
“Commissioner of Foreign Affairs has notified me that inspection
station at Liuchiamiao below Hankow has been withdrawn in
view of capture of Wuchang. Station at Yingwuchow near
Hanyang will be continued however. Notwithstanding British
have submitted to inspection of the merchantmen, several such
vessels have been vigorously fired upon without warning below
Hankow by Southern troops this week.
Iping, American merchant vessel, heavily fired upon between
Shasi and Ichang Tuesday. Chinese soldiers boarded Iping at
Ichang on the 14th and endeavored to force ship to sail. Armed
guard from Elcano promptly cleared ship of soldiers. Sailing
temporarily suspended.
Fighting in progress north, east and west of Kiukiang and
considerable anxiety now being felt there.
Unconfirmed rumors of concentration of Northern troops just
about [above?] Sinyang for drive on Southerners.
Three additional French gunboats arriving Sunday with French
admiral.
Telegraph lines out of commission for 3 days from 13th.”

Mhaver

893.00/7772: Telegram
[Document 511]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 21, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received October 21—9:45 a.m.]
503. Following from American consul general, Hankow:
“October 20, 4 p.m. Commissioner of Foreign Affairs here was
informed last night that Central Executive Committee at Canton
has approved proposed removal of capital from Canton to
Wuchang.
Southern forces are very close to Nanchang on three sides and
decisive fighting is imminent. This and uncertainty of situation in
Chekiang has made even more delicate Sun Ch’uan-fang’s
position in the Kiukiang area.”
MAYER

893.00/7809: Telegram
[Document 512]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 6, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received November 6—5: 03 a.m.]
533. Following from American consul general at Hankow:
“November 5, noon. American naval radio from Kiukiang 11:30
last night stated that city captured by Southerners. Northerners
offered but little resistance, and evacuation of the city was in
progress. Considerable firing in the neighborhood of railway
station and desultory firing in other parts of native city. British,
Japanese and American naval units landed yesterday afternoon as
a precautionary measure for the protection of foreigners in the
Concession. No trouble reported in Concession. Large number of
junks loaded with soldiers passing downstream from Kiukiang
and there are 12 steamers and 4 gunboats on the river below
Kiukiang at the entrance of Po-yang Lake. Many Northern troops
have crossed river at Kiukiang to north bank and French report
states that Sun Ch’uan-fang has left for Nanking. This report is
unconfirmed by American authorities. Gunboats Isabel and
Pigeon and destroyer Truxton now at Kiukiang. Latest report
from British sources states Northerners counterattacking at
Kiukiang.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7810: Telegram
[Document 513]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 8, 1926—noon.
[Received November 8—2:48 a.m.]
534. My 553 [533], November 6, 11 a.m. Following from American consul
general, Hankow:
“November 6, 1 p.m. American naval radio from Kiukiang this
morning states city quiet and completely occupied by Southern
troops, practically all Northerners having been evacuated down
river. Japanese and American landing forces withdrawn. Fighting
reported in vicinity of Wusüeh.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7988
[Document 514]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 29, 1926.
[Received January 4, 1927.]
No. 834
SIR: Supplementing the Legation’s despatches No. 780 of October 6, 192637
and No. 794 of October 27, 192637 relating to the navigation of American
owned vessels on the Upper Yangtse, I have the honor to invite the attention
of the Department to despatch No. 132 of October 22, 1926 from the
Consulate at Chungking to the Legation, copies of which appear to have
been transmitted to the Department;37 also to the Legation’s telegraphic
reply of November 24 to this despatch, a copy of which is respectfully
enclosed herewith.
A careful consideration of the conditions now existing along the Upper
Yangtse as described in Mr. Adams’ reports has caused the Legation to feel
that the cessation of navigation by American owned vessels for the time
being would obviate the risk of the possible occurence at any time of
incidents seriously detrimental to the relations between China and the
United States and that such cessation would consequently tend to safeguard
the general interests of Americans in China. The Legation has not, however,
formed the opinion that it is as yet necessary to take steps looking toward a
complete suspension of navigation. It appears that there is a considerable
amount of American capital invested in shipping in this part of China which
would be affected by such a course of action. Moreover, inasmuch as the
operation of these vessels would appear, from a legal standpoint, not to
differ from the conduct of any other kind of legitimate American business in
China, there would not seem to be any legal authority whereby their
operation could be terminated so long as the shipping companies concerned
are carrying on business in accordance with the stipulations of the treaties

between China and the United States. In its consideration of this matter, the
Legation has reference, of course, to the conduct of enterprises in which
there is a substantial American interest and not to those concerns from
which protection might properly be withheld by reason of their failure to
possess other than a slight or nominal American interest.
On the premises outlined above, the Legation assumes that American
owned vessels of the character specified will, unless obstacles to a
profitable operation become too formidable, continue to ply on the Upper
Yangtse and that the American Consular and Naval officers in that part of
China will continue to be faced with perplexing questions severely testing
their intelligence and soundness of judgment. In this connection, the
Legation desires to commend the ably reasoned report of the Commanding
Officer of the U. S. S. Monocacy to the Commander of the Yangtse Patrol,
dated October 1, 1926, a copy of which is attached to the despatch from the
Consulate at Chungking of October 22, 1926, above mentioned.
In view of the chaotic conditions now prevalent on the Upper Yangtse, the
Legation has come to the conclusion that, not only the employment of
armed guards on American owned vessels, but also the unvarying use of
naval force to prevent the transportation of Chinese soldiers and other
unneutral services, may at any time be the cause of incidents of a character
prejudicial to the good relations between China and the United States. In
using the expression “unvarying use of naval force”, the Legation has in
mind a policy by which American naval vessels are, whenever necessary, to
use force to prevent unneutral services regardless whether such action may
bring on possibly serious conflict with Chinese military or naval forces. The
Legation sees no reason why American vessels should not, as discretion
may dictate, endeavor to prevent unneutral services when such action may
be taken without the likelihood of involving serious results. As indicated in
its telegram of November 24 to Mr. Adams, the Legation agrees with the
Consul’s view that the only practicable method of protecting the American
flag on the Upper Yangtse under existing conditions is the temporary
suspension of sailings during disturbed periods. This recommendation
would not be made if it seemed possible under present circumstances to
afford adequate naval protection to American owned vessels in the exercise
of their treaty rights. But the lesson of the Wanhsien incident of September

5 last is that naval vessels of a type capable of navigating the Yangtse
Rapids, and under the tactical disadvantage of the conditions of navigation
in a comparatively narrow channel with a swift current, are not a match for
shore batteries; and it is thus a physical impossibility for them to afford
adequate protection to shipping against Chinese forces in the event that the
latter are in a mood of recklessness as to possible ulterior developments. It
appears that, subsequently to the Wanhsien incident, the American naval
authorities brought about the suspension of sailings from Ichang by reason
of the fact that the Commissioner of Customs at that port, upon request, was
willing to withhold clearances of the American owned vessels; also that on
one occasion the Commissioner of Customs at Chungking withheld the
clearance of a vessel at the instance of the American Consul. The
Department will note the tentative expression of opinion on the part of the
Legation in its telegram to Mr. Adams, that, except in some outstanding
emergency demanding that ordinary considerations be set aside, a Consul
would be exceeding the scope of his authority in attempting to regulate
sailings through bringing pressure to bear upon a Commissioner of Customs
for the purpose of inducing him to withhold clearances to American owned
vessels during periods when the Consul deemed it inadvisable for such
vessels to operate. The Legation would be glad to receive an expression of
the Department’s opinion with respect to the question of the responsibility
of the Consul, should he make such a request, and also with respect to the
propriety and advisability of his so doing in the event that there should
appear to be no legal obstacle to that course of action.
With reference to the question raised by Mr. Adams whether he should
attempt to control sailings in emergencies by warning the American
steamship companies in his district that the operation of their vessels would
result in the withdrawal of Consular protection so far as concerns events
arising out of such disapproved action, the Department will note that the
Legation has substantially authorized Mr. Adams to adopt that course, if
necessary, in dealing with the American steamship companies concerned, at
the same time safeguarding himself from any commitment with respect to
his attitude in matters which, by reason of their contingent character, belong
in the category of hypothetical cases. Should the Department feel that the
Legation has given Mr. Adams an undue degree of latitude in this particular,
or that such action might fairly be open to criticism as an attempt to exert an

unwarranted degree of control over the rights of individuals in the conduct
of their private business, it is requested that the Legation be promptly
advised by telegraph. The Legation has been led to authorize the Consul at
Chungking to take the action indicated only by reason of the very
precarious nature of the situation on the Upper Yangtse, and by the feeling
that every rightful effort should be made to forestall, if possible, the
repetition of any such incident as the unfortunate conflict at Wanhsien on
September 5 last between the British naval and Chinese military forces.
Should the American shipping companies concerned be unwilling to co-
operate in a policy dictated by a consideration for the general welfare of
American interests in China, or should conditions on the Upper Yangtse
reach a state in which apparently any operation whatsoever of American
owned shipping would be hazardous to American interests, it would of
course be necessary for the Legation to consider further what measures may
be taken to meet the situation. It is hoped, however, that the negotiations
between the Chinese and British authorities with regard to the settlement of
the Wanhsien incident may serve to protect all foreign owned shipping on
the Upper Yangtse from the enforced performance of unneutral services.
The Legation would welcome a full expression of the Department’s views
with respect to the various phases of the urgent problem presented by the
situation now existing with respect to American owned shipping on the
Upper Yangtse.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[Enclosure—Telegram]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Consul at Chungking (Adams)
[PEKING,] November 24, 1926—5 p.m.
1. Your despatch No. 132, October 22nd.38 The Legation agrees
with your view that the suspension of sailings during disturbed
periods is the only practicable method of protecting the American
flag on the Upper Yangtze from violation under existing

conditions. The Legation is, however, of the tentative opinion
that, except in some outstanding emergency demanding that
ordinary considerations be set aside, you would be exceeding the
scope of your authority in attempting to regulate sailings through
bringing pressure to bear upon the Commissioner of Customs for
the purpose of inducing him to withhold clearances to American
owned vessels during periods when you deemed it inadvisable for
such vessels to operate. This question, however, is being referred
to the Department.
2. With reference to the question raised in your despatch No. 69,
March 2nd,38 whether the Legation desired you to attempt to
control sailings in emergencies by warning American steamship
companies that the operation of their vessels would result in the
withdrawal of Consular protection so far as might concern events
arising out of such disapproved action, the Legation does not
believe that you would be justified in a categorical statement that
you would withhold protection in the event of any incident which
might take place in the future and which would therefore be of a
hypothetical character. You are authorized, however, to inform
American shipping companies operating in your district that,
while reserving a complete freedom of decision with respect to
your attitude in any given case that may arise, you do not propose
to extend the protection of the American Government, and they
may not expect to receive such protection, in the event that the
companies operate their vessels during periods when such
operation would unduly imperil the vessels themselves, the
general interests of American citizens in China, or the relations
between the United States and China.
3. It is to be hoped that the good sense of the American
companies concerned will persuade them to co-operate in a
course which will accord with the general welfare and that you
may thus have no occasion to warn them in the sense indicated.
MACMURRAY

/ Not printed.
/ Not printed.
/ Not printed.
38 Not printed.
38 Not printed.

893.00/7881: Telegram
[Document 515]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 29, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received November 29—8:44 a.m.]
585. 1. Following from American consul general, Hankow:
“November 27, 4 p.m. With armed soldiers marching in groups of
from one hundred to five hundred through the foreign concessions
almost daily, strikes in many lines of industry, threatened strike of
the police in the foreign concessions and special districts and a
general feeling of unrest and uncertainty, the foreign communities
at Hankow are greatly concerned over possibility of the situation
and especially inadequacy of foreign naval force. Due to the low
water, last American destroyer left yesterday, lea vine: three small
gunboats here. British destroyers probably leaving Monday; and
French, 
Italians 
and 
Japanese 
have 
only 
small 
force.
Representative Americans are insistent that more adequate
protection be afforded even to the point of sending several
destroyers and keeping them here through the winter. There is a
possibility also of the port being so completely tied up soon that
the question of food supply will be serious and that stringent
measures will be necessary to protect the port. While not disposed
to magnify the gravity of conditions I think the Legation and the
Department should know that the situation here is becoming more
involved daily and that not only are the Chinese likely to lose
complete control but that [a] foreigner may also not be able to
protect himself.”
2. Commander in chief ordered U. S. S. Pope and U. S. S. Truxton to
Hankow, November 28th. Due to falling river they will be obliged to
remain there until early spring.

Hankow informed.
MracMierray

893.00/7886: Telegram
[Document 516]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 30, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received November 30—10:48 a.m.]
587. 1. Consul at Foochow telegraphed November 29 that retreating
Northern forces had reached Foochow and trouble might be expected.
Governor had intimated that local authorities could not afford protection to
foreign lives and property and, although subsequently retracted by him, the
making of this statement occasions apprehension. Consul suggested that an
American warship be held in readiness to proceed there and stated that
other consuls were taking similar action. He again telegraphed November
30, 11 a.m. as follows:
“Fukien navy joining 23rd mixed brigade under the command of
Li Sheng-chun have turned over to the South. Fighting now in
progress here between the forces above mentioned and those of
Chiang. I request the despatch American warship as soon as
possible.”
2. I have transmitted his request to commander in chief with my
endorsement.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7889: Telegram
[Document 517]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 1, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received December 1—2:50 a.m.]
589. My 585, November 29, 4 p.m. Following from American consul
general, Hankow:
“November 29, 3 p.m. My telegram of November 27, 4 p.m.
Strike against the Japanese has been amicably settled but general
situation unimproved. British naval forces were landed today to
reenforce the Concession police and enforce the Concession
regulations. All processions and armed forces will not be allowed
to come into the British Concession unless permission has first
been obtained. Some British volunteers have also been called out.
French naval forces have also been landed to protect French
Concession. Due to the anxiety over the situation considerable
number of foreign women are preparing to leave the port. While
precautions are being taken against any untoward incidents, the
situation is very tense and the utmost is being done to avoid
serious trouble. American destroyers Truxton and Pope have been
ordered to return to Hankow. Several large demonstrations
yesterday.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7887: Telegram
[Document 518]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 1, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received December 1—7:32 a.m.]
591. My 589, December 1, 11 a.m. Following from American consul
general at Hankow:
“November 30, 11 a.m. Your November 29, 1 p.m. Pope and
Truxton with present force will afford adequate protection. British
sloop Magnolia arrived a few days ago and one British destroyer
departed, one still here but may leave because of low water. Effort
is being made to retain this very secret. Other nations not sending
reenforcements. Situation less tense today. Press packers’ and egg
packers’ strikes settled yesterday.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7888: Telegram
[Document 519]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 1, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received December 1—8:42 a.m.]
592. My 587, November 30, 7 p.m. Commander in chief has ordered
warship to proceed Foochow.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7896: Telegram
[Document 520]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 4, 1926—noon.
[Received December 4—6:16 a.m.]
596. My 591, December 1, 4 p.m. Following from the consul general at
Hankow:
“December 3, 3 p.m. My November 30, 11 a.m. Destroyers Pope
and Truxton now here together with U. S. S. Isabel, Pigeon and
Palos. British destroyer Woolston arrived this morning with small
contingent of marines. Other British destroyer which was being
held here has departed. French gunboat Algol arriving in a few
days. New British Minister Lampson arriving here Tuesday on a
naval vessel. Saburi40 also arriving in a few days.
General situation unchanged. While some strikes have been
amicably settled, many lines of industry still seriously affected by
labor troubles. Strike leaders and pickets by high-handed methods
are completely dominating the local authorities who are either
helpless or indifferent to curbing their activities. New regime’s
prestige and authority have been seriously impaired by recent
developments here. Eugene Chen and others mentioned in
Canton’s November 17, 10 a.m., to the Legation,41 are understood
to be at Nanchang and will arrive here probably next week. It is
hoped their coming may do something toward stabilizing a
situation which is giving the foreign as well as the Chinese
community much concern.”
Consul general at Canton in a telegram of December 3rd stated that Chen
had assured Lampson of courteous reception at Hankow.
MACMURRAY

40 Sadao Saburi of the Japanese Foreign Office, delegate to the Special
Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff.
41 Not printed.

893.00/7910: Telegram
[Document 521]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 7, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received December 7—10:40 a.m.]
601. My 596, December 4, noon. Following from American consul general,
Hankow:
“December 6, 11 a.m. British and French landing parties have
now been withdrawn. Situation much improved, measures
adopted have put a stop to armed soldiers and parades passing
through concessions. Saturday and Sunday passed quietly.
During the last few days large bodies of Southern troops have
arrived from down river. It is understood some of these have been
despatched up Hankow River and also small contingents up
Peking-Hankow Railway.
It seems now definitely established that Yang Sen42 has aligned
himself with the Southerners.”
MACMURRAY
42 Military leader in Szechwan.

893.00/7923: Telegram
[Document 522]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 9, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received December 9—7: 48 a.m.]
605. 1. The following is résumé of recent developments in the general
political and military situation: The Southern troops have steadily extended
their control until they are now in possession of all the territory to the line
including Fukien, Kiangsi, southwest Anhwei, Hupeh and Shensi. Plans of
Cantonese doubtless include securing possession of Chekiang and Shanghai
at an early date but it is improbable that invasion of North will be
undertaken until they have consolidated their position south of Yangtze. It is
currently reported that Szechuan leader, Yang Sen, now in vicinity of
Ichang, has shifted his allegiance to Cantonese.
2. Sun Ch’uan-fang has withdrawn his forces for defense of southern
Kiangsu and Chekiang, and at present time position of Anhwei is in the
balance. Shantung troops are advancing into Anhwei in support of Sun but
have thus far refrained from entering Kiangsu, doubtless realizing their
unpopularity with the people of that Province.
3. Kuominchun have split their force, the main body remaining in Suiyiian-
Paotow area, with a minor force in Shensi now threatening western Honan.
Feng Yu-hsiang43 is believed to be in Ningsia.
 
4. The policy of Northern or allied leaders for some months past has been
undecided and vacillating. A conference of Northern leaders was recently
held in Tientsin for the purpose of formulating united policy and making
plans to combat Cantonese. At this conference Chang Tso-lin was elected
commander in chief of a reorganized military coalition under the name of

“Ankuochun” or Pacification Army, while Sun Ch’uan-fang and Chang
Tsung-ch’ang were appointed vice commanders.
5. Coalition includes Fengtien, Shantung and Shensi troops, as well as the
forces operating under Sun Ch’uan-fang and Wu Pei-fu. Owing to the
doubtful loyalty of Wu’s subordinates, he is not, at least for the time being,
considered an important factor and it is possible that the plans of
Ankuochun contemplate his complete elimination.
6. It is believed that a lack of funds prevents immediate offensive on the
part of Coalitionists, although present defensive measures include
movement of troops into Anhwei and a gradual progression of troops down
Peking-Hankow Railway in order to forestall loss of Chengchow in case of
defection of Wu’s subordinates.
7. Although the Ankuochun is merely association of military leaders,
propaganda is already being disseminated to make it appear that this
organization is representative of major portion of Chinese people and that
its purpose is to deliver China from a “Red” menace and to protect foreign
lives and property. Plans of its leaders are thought to include early
installation of an administration in Peking which will seek recognition of
the powers.
Repeated to Tokyo by mail.
MACMURRAY
43 In control of the Kuominchun prior to his retirement in January 1926.

893.00/7930: Telegram
[Document 523]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 11, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received December 11—7:17 a.m.]
610. My 609, December 9, 4 p.m.44 Following from American consul
general, Hankow:
1. “December 10, 11 a.m. Eugene Chen and party arrived late
yesterday. Other high officials of the Cantonese Government
accompanied by approximately one hundred attachés have arrived
and affairs of new government will henceforth be conducted from
here. Not yet definitely decided whether offices will be
established on Hankow or Wuchang side of river. Most of higher
officials with their families and staffs now quartered in Terminus
Hotel in German [French] Concession, Hankow. Lampson is
seeing Eugene Chen today. Mayer45 expected today. Unless
otherwise instructed, will pay my respects to Chen, since I shall
necessarily be compelled to have certain official relations and
contacts with him and his government.”
2. “December 10, 2 p.m. My December 8, 11 a.m.45a All
employees of Standard Oil Company candle factory and number 2
oil installation now out on strike. Both plants which are outside
city limits and below Japanese Concession are being picketed but
no disorder thus far. As a precautionary measure American
gunboats now opposite each plant for the purpose of protection.”
3. Mayer arrived in Hankow December 10th.
MACMURRAY

44 Not printed.
45 Ferdinand L. Mayer, counselor of the American Legation in China.
45a Not printed.

893.00/7941: Telegram
[Document 524]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 15, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received December 15—7:20 a.m.]
615. Following from American consul general at Shanghai:
“December 14, 4 p.m. Fifteen hundred men being the vanguard
Southern forces have invaded Chekiang from Kiangsi and are
advancing unopposed on Hangchow. Declaration of independence
of Chekiang momentarily expected. If it is accompanied by
expulsion of Southern[ers], it is believed Sun Ch’uan-fang will
acquiesce; otherwise, Sun expected to move loyal forces into
Chekiang to meet Southern [forces]. His forces on Chekiang
border rapidly being strengthened.”
It is understood that Southern Nationalists will not assent to making
Chekiang a buffer region but are determined to occupy it.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7952: Telegram
[Document 525]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 17, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received December 17—2:32 a.m.]
616. Following from American consul general at Hankow:
“Standard Oil Company vessel Mei Foo heavily fired upon 13th
between Shasi and Ichang, presumably by Kweichow troops. No
casualties. Situation has suddenly become aggravated at Ichang
by appearance of the Kweichow and Cantonese troops in that
vicinity. General Yang Sen’s troops placed on Yangtze Rapids
steamers but subsequently removed at the request of commander
of the Elcano. Considerable firing in the city and harbor at Ichang
but tenseness of the last few days somewhat relieved today. Yang
Sen’s alignment now said to be uncertain. His troops restless and
disturbances of past few days attributed to dissatisfaction with his
wavering attitude. It is possible that situation in Upper Yangtze
will undergo decided change in the next few days, as Cantonese
and Kweichow troops are within 30 miles of city but on opposite
sides of the river.
Hankow situation has remained substantially unchanged for
several days.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7953: Telegram
[Document 526]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 17, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received December 17—4:28 a.m.]
617. My 615, December 15, 3 p.m. Following from American consul
general at Shanghai:
“December 16, 3 p.m. Southern vanguard entered Hangchow
yesterday morning and with the assistance of Chekiang officers
forced Civil Governor Ch’en Yi to abandon office. Southern or
allied Chekiang forces have cut railway and established
themselves south of Linping, while Marshal Sun and vanguard
have reached Changan and hostilities are imminent. Heavy
Southern reinforcements are already moving from western
Chekiang. Shanghai outwardly quiet at the moment.”
MACMURRAY

898.00/7951: Telegram
[Document 527]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 17, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received December 17—9:15 a.m.]
622. My 616, December 17, 10 a.m. Following from American consul
general at Hankow:
“December 16, 3 p.m. New Government gradually getting settled
and the general situation locally is clearing. Ministries Finance,
Foreign Affairs, and Communications will function from Hankow
and remainder of the Government from Wuchang.
Lampson has had several conferences with Eugene Chen and has
been waiting for three days for instructions from his Government,
exact nature of which I have not been able to learn. Thus far
Saburi has had no conference with Chen and seems to be waiting
for the situation to crystallize. He intimates that he will get in
touch with Chen when Lampson leaves.
I greatly appreciate your keeping me informed of your
recommendations to the Department. It is most helpful.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7960: Telegram
[Document 528]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 19, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received December 20—6:03 a.m.]
627. 1. The Legation has received from the consul general at Shanghai a
despatch relating to proposed defensive measures in case of a state of
emergency arising there, should the Shanghai region be invaded by the
Cantonese forces.
2. Informal meetings have been held by Council officials, consular
representatives, and senior naval officers. Council represents that such a
situation would require landing force of from four thousand to five
thousand men and states that having brought its views to the attention of the
interested consular representatives it considers that it would be absolved
from responsibility should the provision made be insufficient for the
protection of foreign life and property.
2. [sic] Gauss46 reports that he and Commander Armstrong, senior
American naval officer, are in agreement on certain points of which the
following is a brief summary: First, in the event of such an emergency, a
larger landing force will be required than on former similar occasions.
Second, size of landing force estimated by Council is larger than will be
likely to be required unless situation develops beyond that experienced at
other ports. Third, Nationalist Party and Kuomintang sympathizers and
agitators, apparently contemplate that the peak of their efforts against the
“imperialistic powers” shall be reached at Shanghai and they have therefore
recently eased the situation in Hankow. Fourth, the possibilities of the
situation suggest the desirability of plans for increasing naval landing forces
with a minimum of delay should occasion require; foreign naval forces now
in port are entirely adequate for the present situation, and it might be
unwise, at this time, to make any ostentatious display of extraordinary
defense preparations by the concentration in Shanghai of a large foreign

naval force. Fifth, “in landing United States naval forces it should definitely
be understood that they are landed for the protection of foreign life and
property and that they will not, except under orders of the higher American
authorities, be used to oppose any organized occupation of the International
Settlement by the armed forces of the Nationalist Government”. Sixth,
inclusion of foreign occupied areas to west and north of Settlement
boundaries within the defense area is as fully justified and necessary now as
in 1924 and 1925 in view of the large foreign population.
 
3. The Legation is in agreement with Gauss and Armstrong on all the
foregoing points although it does not consider that the defense of the extra
Settlement areas referred to would be justified at the imminent risk of
collision with organized Cantonese forces unless, first, defense of these
areas is a military necessity incidental to defense of the Settlements proper,
or, second, their occupation should prove necessary for the protection of
foreign residents, on which principle forces would be landed at any point
irrespective of its administrative or territorial status.
4. With regard, however, to fifth point, I am of the firm opinion that the
integrity of the International and French Settlements must be maintained
under any circumstances even should it mean collision with organized
Cantonese forces. Otherwise, occupation of other settlements, denunciation
of extraterritoriality and widespread and systematic disregard of foreign
lives and interests would in all probability be only a matter of time. Should
a landing force be required, I regard it as essential that its main objectives
and the scope of its responsibility should be definitely understood in
advance. Such a force should know which it is there for, the purpose of
protecting both the integrity of the Settlements and foreign life and property
or only the latter.
5. I request frank expression of the Department’s views on this matter, as
well as upon the other points which have been raised, in order that I may be
in a position to discuss the subject with my colleagues if and when occasion
demands.

6. Meanwhile, I am communicating by radio with the commander in chief,
suggesting continued consideration of the possible necessity of augmenting,
without delay, the present American landing force available at Shanghai in
the event of the state of emergency anticipated by council.
MACMURRAY
46 Clarence E. Gauss, temporarily consul general at Shanghai, in the
absence of Consul General Cunningham.

893.00/7960: Telegram
[Document 529]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, December 23, 1926—11 a.m.
307. Your 627, December 19, 10 a.m. Should an emergency arise at
Shanghai involving the necessity of landing force from American naval
vessels present, it must be definitely understood that this force is present for
the purpose of protecting American life and property at Shanghai. This
Government is not prepared to use its naval force at Shanghai for the
purpose of protecting the integrity of the Settlement and should any
question of this sort arise Department would desire to be consulted.
KELLOGG

893.00/7978: Telegram
[Document 530]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, December 28, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received December 28—4: 58 a.m.]
642. 1. I earnestly recommend that British, French, Italian, and Japanese
Governments be informed by the Department of its decision as stated in the
final sentence of your telegram No. 307, December 23, 11 a.m.
2. There seems to be a prime necessity for this action, both because the
other powers with naval forces at Shanghai would seem to be entitled to
know the attitude of the United States and because if they are not informed
there is the possibility that our Government might be criticized should the
other interested powers consider it expedient to take certain measures of
defense in a sudden emergency in order to protect the integrity of the
Settlement in a way in which our Government would not be ready to
cooperate.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7978: Telegram
[Document 531]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, December 30, 1926—noon.
312. Your No. 642 of December 28, 10 a.m. As other powers have made no
inquiries of the Department respecting this matter, will it not be sufficient
for you to inform your interested colleagues?
KELLOGG

Decision of the United States to await
developments before recognizing any
faction claiming to act with authority
for China
[532] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 27, 1926—9 a.m. [Received 1:45 p.m.]
893.01/213: Telegram
[533] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 16, 1926—noon. [Received June 16—5:46 a.m.]
893.00/7464: Telegram
[534] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 26, 1926—4 p.m. [Received June 26—10 a.m.]
893.00/7481: Telegram
[535] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, July 3, 1926—1 p.m.
151.096/126: Telegram

[536] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Canton, July 7, 1926.
893.01/224
[537] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 12, 1926—11 a.m. [Received August 12—9:28 a.m.]
893.00/7558: Telegram
[538] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 14, 1926—7 p.m. [2 p.m.?] [Received August 17—6:47
a.m.]
893.01/223: Telegram
[539] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 14, 1926—3 p.m. [Received August 17—7:35 a.m.]
893.01/225: Telegram
[540] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, August 24, 1926—2 p.m.
893.01/223: Telegram
[541] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 8, 1926—9 a.m. [Received September 8—8:20 a.m.]

151.096/128: Telegram
[542] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, October 1, 1926—5 p.m.
151.096/128: Telegram
[543] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 31, 1926—noon. [Received 10:10 p.m.]
893.01/235: Telegram
[544] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
[Washington,] November 11, 1926.
755.93/36
[545] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 17, 1926—10 a.m. [Received November 17—6:53 a.m.]
893.01/239: Telegram
[546] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 18, 1926—11 a.m. [Received December 18—7:04 a.m.]
893.01/244: Telegram
[547] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 18, 1926—3 p.m. [Received December 18—10:22 a.m.]

893.01/245: Telegram
[548] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 14, 1927—10 a.m. [Received January 14—4:38 a.m.]
893.01/253: Telegram
[549] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, January 15, 1927—6 p.m.
893.01/253: Telegram

893.01/213: Telegram
[Document 532]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, February 27, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received 1:45 p.m.]
93. 1. The Chinese Secretary of the British Legation called in behalf of the
British Minister on February 25th to consult me regarding the long-
established question of the customs at Canton. The opinion held by the
British Foreign Office, he stated, is gravitating in the direction of early
recognition of the Canton Government, and if independence was the desire
of the people of South China and if capacity for the maintenance of a
comparatively satisfactory separate administration was shown thereafter by
them, to continue to withhold recognition would not be right.
2. As suggested in my telegram 73, February 12, 8 p.m.,47 third paragraph, I
cannot but feel that the motive which impels the British Government to
make a decision so momentous is the hope that by placating the Canton
regime, the strike and boycott can be terminated. There is perhaps also the
hope of eventually placing British interests vis-à-vis the new government in
a position of special advantage. I myself am unable to perceive in regard to
Canton and other regions of South China that any basis exists for viewing
them as a political entity which is separate from the remainder of China.
While it is true that they have for several years maintained an autonomous
administration of their own with some degree of success, all along their so-
called independence has been a political fiction rather than a reality. A
faction which had been ousted from power has in a particular section of
China maintained its organization without considering itself actually
separate, in fact, from China as a whole. For example, in representing China
at Paris it participated with the Peking Government. At times it has claimed
that it was itself the sole legitimate government of China, and assembled the
rump parliament at Canton. From time to time it has sought by military

force to regain control of the country. Through personal representatives, its
leaders constantly continue informal relations with leaders of other factions.
In its territories it permits the Central Government to function with regard
to customs, wine and tobacco, salt, telegraphic and postal services
(although, except in the case of customs, the conversion of revenues to local
uses is acquiesced in by the Central Government).
3. The representative of the Government of China on the Commission on
Extraterritoriality, Dr. Wang Chung-lin [Wang Ch’ung-Jiui?], who is
himself a Cantonese, has just called on me for the purpose of making, in
behalf of the Canton Government, certain informal representations in the
pending customs question. He confirms my understanding that while they
claim complete independence, nevertheless the Canton authorities regard
themselves, while waiting for opportunity to extend throughout China their
influence in accord with the policies which Dr. Sun Yat-sen laid down, as
administering a portion of the territory of China.
4. Were the British to extend recognition to the Canton Government, the
Cantonese faction doubtless would be gratified by that action as tending to
strengthen greatly their influence in Chinese affairs. It would, however, lead
to these questions: could the British continue recognition of the
independence of a regime which lacks desire for separation from China, and
would the British withdraw the recognition they have given to the
government existing at Peking?
5. It is doubtful, when such recognition is considered from the standpoint of
British interests as a matter of expediency, whether it would be effective in
any case in conciliating those influences which are concentrating under
Russian guidance their attack upon Great Britain in line with what is a
considered antiforeign policy.
6. British recognition of Canton would condone the similar action taken by
Soviet Russia toward Mongolia. It would afford temptation at least for
encouragement of the secession of north Manchuria and Chinese Turkestan
by the Russians, of south Manchuria by the Japanese, and of Yunnan by the
French. While it might be possible to reconcile such action with the letter of
the Washington Treaty in regard to policies, such action would have the

effect of restoring the scramble for spheres of influence and for concessions
and, under new names, of recommencing the process of partitioning China.
MACMURRAY
47 Not printed.

893.00/7464: Telegram
[Document 533]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 16, 1926—noon.
[Received June 16—5:46 a.m.]
248. My telegram 214, May 18, 6 p.m.48
1. Yen49 cabinet has not yet functioned, as, in addition to Yen,
only the Ministers of the Navy and of Agriculture and Commerce
have assumed office.
2. I was informed by a representative of Chang Tso-lin
headquarters that Chang and Wu Pei-fu50 have, through
conferences of their delegates, practically agreed that the Yen
“governing cabinet” shall disappear and a new cabinet shall be
formed. Chang in times passed [past?] insisted that the election of
Tsao Kun51 … was unconstitutional and Chang is therefore
unable to recognize Yen’s status as Premier since he was
appointed by Tsao. My informant said Chang has left formation
of the cabinet to Wu. Constitutional issues are not to be raised,
which means apparently that the Provisional Constitution of 1912
will be revived. Chang’s proposal to Wu is that the former’s
political influence shall be supreme in Manchuria, Suiyiian,
Chahar, Jehol, Chihli and Shantung, and the latter’s everywhere
else. Wu has not published his acceptance of these proposals nor
indicated when he will meet Chang in Peking to confirm the
arrangements, but reports are current that Yen has ceased to
function and that he will be succeeded by former Minister of
Communications Chang Chih-t’an or by Wellington Koo.52
3. The joint campaign against the Kuominchun53 is being
prosecuted with renewed vigor but without substantial result.

Chang and Wu profess to be united in determination to eliminate
Kuominchun and with it Soviet influence in the North.
4. I consider the Chang-Wu alliance unstable and see little
prospect of China’s emerging in the near future from the present
military, political and financial chaos.
MACMURRAY
48 Ante, p. 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455].
49 Yen Hui-ch’ing (W. W. Yen), Premier and Acting Minister of Foreign
Affairs.
50 Chang Tso-lin and Wu Pei-fu were allied military leaders who overthrew
the Provisional Government of Tuan Chi-jui. See pp. 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc.
423] ff.
51 President of China, 1923–24.
52 Chinese Minister of Finance and former Minister of Foreign Affairs.
53 National armies, formerly controlled by Marshal Feng Yu-hsiang,
director general of the Northwestern Defense.

893.00/7481: Telegram
[Document 534]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 26, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received June 26—10 a.m.]
257. My telegram No. 241, June 7, 3 p.m.54
1. Eugene Chen has insisted upon being addressed as “Minister
for Foreign Affairs” as a condition precedent to dealing with
international questions including negotiations with the British on
the question of the Hongkong boycott. British and French consuls
general are doing so although the former has written him
officially that the use of this title is a matter of mere politeness
and that recognition is not to be implied therefrom. American
consul general is following this procedure. Mail report follows.
2. Canton telegraphs June 22, noon, as follow:
“Chen has now begun to sign section 6 certificates,55
instead of Commissioner of Customs, who appears to
have been designated by the last-recognized Peking
Government. Shall I decline to accept certificates
signed by Chen? I shall greatly appreciate definite
instructions in above matters, but, at the same time, I
would suggest the advisability of showing the Canton
Government as much consideration as possible since we
must deal with it as the de facto authority.”
3. Although not disposed to assume a needlessly antagonistic
attitude towards the Canton regime, I do not consider that we
would gain its favor or its respect by taking liberties with our
legal requirements in deference to Cantonese pretentions to a
governmental status.

MACMURRAY
54 Post, p. 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587].
55 Certificates of identification of Chinese coming to the United States
required by section 6 of the Chinese Exclusion Act of July 5, 1884 (23 Stat.
115).

151.096/126: Telegram
[Document 535]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, July 3, 1926—1 p.m.
135. Your 257, June 26, 4 p.m., 266 July 1, 1 p.m.56 Department is not
disposed to insist on issue of certificate of identity prescribed by Chinese
Exclusion Act of 1884 by appointee of Peking Government in view of
present disorganized condition of country and since title and personality of
official issuing certificate is largely a matter of technical formality, the
essential part of it being the Consular visa. Department considers, however,
that acceptance of certificate issued by one styling himself “Minister of
Foreign Affairs” should be avoided if possible. Department suggests that it
might be tactfully pointed out to Canton authorities that certificates in other
parts of China are issued by Commissioners of Foreign Affairs and that if
there is at present no one at Canton using this title certificates issued by a
provincial official of corresponding rank such as “Superintendent of
Customs” would be acceptable. Repeat to Canton and report action.
KELLOGG
56 Latter not printed.

893.01/224
[Document 536]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)57
CANTON, July 7, 1926.
No. 482
SIR: In connection with this Consulate General’s telegraphic correspondence
with the Legation respecting the form of address to be employed in relation
to Mr. Eugene Chen, I now have the honor to transmit a copy of an article
published in the semi-official Canton Gazette of July 5, 1926.
It will be observed that this publication was authorized by the Foreign
Office and that it embodies my letter of June 30 to Mr. Chen and his reply
of July 2. It is obvious, of course, that Mr. Chen’s reply was prepared
primarily for publication,—that he saw an opportunity to let the Powers
know his attitude with respect to recognition and made use of it.
As authorized by the Legation, my note to Mr. Chen was addressed as
follows:
“Honorable Ch’en Yu-jen,
Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Canton.”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Unless the Legation directs otherwise, I shall not make any reply to Mr.
Chen’s communication of July 2.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS

[Enclosure]
Article Published in the “Canton Gazette” July 5, 1926
The Foreign Office has authorised the publication of the following
statement: In view of the excellent relations now existing between the
Government at Canton and the American Consular authorities, the Acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs believes that no misunderstanding will be
created by the publication of the following letter, dated, June 30. from Mr.
Douglas Jenkins, American Consul General, to Mr. Chen Yu-jen (Eugene
Chen), Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, with the reply of the latter dated
July 2:
Sir: Adverting to this Consulate General’s dispatch of June 16 in
acknowledgment of your note of June 4, 1926,58 concerning the
abolition of the office of Commissioner of Foreign Affairs and the
intention of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to deal with all
international cases in the future, I have the honor to explain that
while this Consulate General is pleased to correspond directly
with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, it is of course understood
that recognition is not implied.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) Douglas Jenkins,
American Consul General
FOREIGN MINISTER’S REPLY
REPUBLIC OF CHINA
NATIONALIST GOVERNMENT
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
SIR: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
dated June 30, in which you explain—what has already been quite

clear and obvious to me—that recognition is not implied in your
despatch of June 16 acknowledging my note of June 4, which
notified you of the abolition of the Office of Commissioner for
Foreign Affairs and the decision of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs to deal with all international cases in the future.
Though in ordinary circumstances your letter might call for no
specific reply, I believe the best interests of the American people
and of the Chinese people as represented by my Government
would be served if I make the categorical statement that, while
my Government (which has stabilized an independent political
regime founded here nearly a decade ago and has unified a group
of territories larger in area than France and Italy combined, with a
population of 60,000,000 people) demands that it be treated with
respect, it neither desires nor expects from America and other
Foreign Powers the sort of recognition which even considerations
of political realism and international dignity have not prevented
them from granting to the phantom governments successively set
up in Peking by Mandarin squeezers, military plunderers and ex-
bandit chiefs. The Foreign Powers, apparently, have not yet
realised that Peking has long ceased to represent the Chinese
nation and that it is today but an organ of exploitation and plunder
in the hands of the Mandarinate and the Northern militarists. As
long as this fundamental fact remains ungrasped by the Foreign
Powers, the state of China must necessarily worsen and some of
the ominous possibilities of the situation may well become
realities.
With a clear apprehension of what it all means, my Government is
striving to forward the work of establishing the new equilibrium
between the Chinese system (i.e. the Chinese people in their
organization as a social and politico-economic aggregate) and the
altered environment brought about largely by foreign intercourse
and pressure. And though unrecognized but withal the only ruling
group in China at the moment that really governs, my
Government is not without hope of planting the foundation of a
great new structure of relations between China and America and

other friendly Powers which, while assuring the latter a friendly
and profitable market for their goods and services, will enable the
Chinese people to live in freedom and to work out the
modernisation of their country in terms of the best both in their
historic experience and individual culture and in the doctrinal
systems and material progress of the West.
I have etc.,
(Signed) Ch’en Yu-jen
Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
57 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general as an enclosure
to his despatch No. 582, July 7; received Aug. 11.
58 Not printed.

893.00/7558: Telegram
[Document 537]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 12, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received August 12—9:28 a.m.]
324. My 277, July 7, 5 p.m.59
1. The present so-called governing cabinet continues futile,
existing without power even in the capital. Its only important
occupation is the quest of money. On June 5th it requested release
of $1,000,000 for pay of the Peking garrison and police and, on
July 10th, of $300,000 maintenance of peace and order from
Customs funds. Interested Legations deny that any interest in the
disposition of these funds after stipulated obligations were
safeguarded but by decision of the Inspector General only the
second sum was paid to the Chinese Government. On July 20 the
cabinet requested release of [$]50,000 per month for
administrative purposes, to which no reply has been made. It is
reliably reported that the Government is endeavoring to arrange
for the issue of $25,000,000 of bonds secured on customs revenue
now considerably in arrears. This I intend to protest against with
interested colleagues as unjust discrimination against prior
foreign obligations having general security.
2. Marshal Wang Huai-ch’ing, commander in chief of the
Metropolitan forces, has tendered his resignation. He has been
hounding Inspector General for funds which have been refused.
This appears to be mainly for the purpose of securing money for
the maintenance of his troops; may also be in protest against rival
activities of a Fengtien appointee who is commander of
gendarmerie and obeys only Chang Tsung-ch’ang.60

3. Military affairs seem to be at deadlock on the Hunan-Shansi
and Nankow battle fronts.
4. Yang Wen-kai,61 who is Sun Ch’uan-fang’s62 representative in
the cabinet, left Peking July 30th, which may indicate that Sun is
withdrawing his support from the Peking regime.
5. Execution by order of Chang Tsung-ch’ang without pretense of
trial of Chinese editor August 6 exemplifies negligibility of
governmental authority.
MACMURRAY
59 Not printed.
60 Tupan of Shantung.
61 Minister of Agriculture and Commerce in the Regency cabinet headed by
Admiral Tu Hsi-kwei.
62 Tupan of Anhwei, Chekiang, Fukien, Kiangsi, and Kiangsu.

893.01/223: Telegram
[Document 538]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, August 14, 1926—7 p.m. [2 p.m.?]
[Received August 17—6:47 a.m.63 ]
325. My telegrams 275 of July 7th and 301 of July 24th.64
1. There has been no regime at Peking since 1918 asserting an
even plausible claim to being a legitimately constituted
government. Each has in turn exercised diminishing power.
Nevertheless we and other powers have found it advantageous
hitherto to grant at least de facto recognition to each group
succeeding to control of the capital and offering to carry out the
obligations of the Government of China, even though in other
respects the requirements usually regarded by accepted
international practice as conditions precedent to recognition were
obviously not met by such administration. This continuing
acceptance of diplomatic relations with administrations not
having essential qualities of a government has not been due (at
least in our case) to mere inertia but has been due in each instance
to the result of a deliberate decision that we had less to lose than
to gain in maintaining a diplomatic fiction by which we could
continue 
necessary 
contacts 
with 
China 
through 
an
instrumentality which admitted its international obligations and
which would have a feeling of responsibility for the protection of
the lives of foreigners and of their rights as declared in treaties or
as generally incumbent upon a state in its international relations.
It was obviously worth-while to deal with a central government
which we clearly understood to be a fiction as if it were really
substantial so long as it continued to be, within the limitations of
its power, a conservative force which employed what influence it

had in safeguarding legitimate foreign interests against violation
through arbitrary action by local authorities.
2. In recognizing on these grounds the successive administrations
set up in Peking hitherto, I still believe we have been well advised
in each instance. However, through various stages of uneasy
doubt I have arrived at the definite conviction that conditions
have been brought about by developments of the past year or so
under which we cannot expect that a conservative or even
friendly influence will characterize any new regime here. The
Central Administration, with the dwindling away of its actual
authority and power recently accelerated, has naturally lost its
sense of responsibility for the carrying out of the obligations of
the country as a whole. It is unable beyond a small locality to
make its will effective. Having no stake in the maintenance of
prosperity and order in other areas, its interest in the trading
sections of the country has ceased, as has its concern for the
maintenance there of normal relations with foreign countries and
their interests, and whether agitations disrupt the normally
mutually profitable economic structure and jeopardize the safety
of foreigners. Increasingly the governmental entity maintained at
Peking has become a mere agency of whatever military factions
control it. Witness the levy of the 20 percent cigarette tax. A year
ago the Foreign Office admitted that tax to be in violation of
treaties and its inability to prevent it in the Yangtze provinces was
deplored. Now, for the profit of the occupying forces, it is levied
within the walls of Peking and is defended by the Foreign Office
with sophistries to which no resort was earlier attempted. The
tendency of the Peking administration has been to become a local
political organization, like, for instance, those at Canton and at
Shanghai; its distinction from other than merely regional
organizations lies fundamentally in the recognition by the foreign
governments which it enjoys. While this fact confers no power
upon Peking to control other sections of China in behalf of
foreign rights, it does afford to Peking the opportunity of making
an appeal through the country to nationalistic sentiment as the
doughty champion of China for the Chinese. Thus, when Peking

pursues a policy of whittling down or repudiating China’s
obligations, it can be sure of sympathy even from its domestic
enemies. A degeneration in the morale of the administrative
organization has resulted. The permanent officials of that
organization have been a steadying influence until recently, but
this is the case no longer. For the most part, those officials whose
salaries are in arrears and who have available no other livelihood
have become mere place holders. Each, by a record of patriotic
zeal in opposing foreigners, is bent upon insuring his tenure.
3. The matter of rendition of the Shanghai Mixed Court67 has
forcefully illustrated this. Last December the Foreign Office
repudiated all previous negotiations and a preposterous
arrangement ignoring foreign rights was insisted upon. A
committee representing interested Ministers sought for months to
work out a compromise with a technical commission in the
Foreign Office which would preserve essential foreign interests
and rights. No disposition was found to accord an even open-
minded hearing to the foreign point of view. The chairman of our
committee, Peck,68 then enlisted the personal interest of Wang
Ch’ung-hui.69 The latter was impressed with the fairness of our
proposals and their conciliatory spirit. He offered to use his great
influence to the utmost with the officials of the Foreign Office
and Ministry of Justice to persuade them, before this question
became acute, to accept the proffered solution. He acknowledged
his complete failure two days later … In regard to any
consequences possibly ensuing in Shanghai should a breakdown
of the negotiations occur, they were altogether reckless. The
interested Ministers resolved at that point upon the experiment of
transferring the negotiation of a preliminary agreement, along the
lines they had tried in vain to get the Foreign Office to consider,
to the consular body at Shanghai. An offer of a more satisfactory
arrangement from the viewpoint of foreign interests than the
compromise proposed by the Ministers to the Foreign Office was
made within a few days to the consuls by Sun Ch’uan-fang.
Presumably this was not because he is better than other Chinese
militarists, but because in fact he does control the Shanghai area,

is involved in its prosperity himself, and, therefore, is interested
parties [party?] in assuming responsibility for seeking a
settlement which might contribute to produce conditions of order
in his bailiwick favorable to trade. The upset of this agreement is
even now being attempted by interested bureaus of the Peking
Government.
4. The lack of a sense of international responsibility in the Peking
regime is illustrated from a somewhat different angle by
representations made by it recently to the British Legation,
bearing upon the negotiations regarding the Hongkong strike and
boycott with the Canton authorities. Occasion was taken by the
Foreign Office to state that although the claims of Canton for
compensation were viewed with approval by the “Chinese
Government”, a caveat must be entered against the suggested loan
to the Canton authorities from the Hongkong government for
industrial development. Its intervention in this matter had for its
sole purpose the imposition of an additional condition of
settlement as though from above. Thus, while professing to
represent the whole of China internationally, the Peking regime
stultified that claim by recognizing complacently that, with its
approval but without its participation, negotiations relating to
questions of its own treaty obligations to Great Britain were being
carried on by a section of the country ignoring the existence here
of a so-called government.
5. I feel convinced from these and similar indications of its
attitude that neither the regime now in existence nor any likely to
succeed it will, except as moved thereto either by some quid pro
quo of support of this factional group against its rivals or by
coercion, 
make 
any 
attempt 
to 
meet 
its 
international
responsibilities. Of these means of influencing, neither is open to
us. The practical reason for a continuation of the diplomatic
fiction of a central government has come to an end. The fact must
be accepted by us. When in the future China is able again to
constitute such a government as can be recognized because of its
merits, conformably to the practice prevailing in other countries,

recognition will have to be considered according to those
circumstances. However, under the circumstances now existing
and which will exist while we continue to offer a basis for the
North China militarists to believe that semiautomatic recognition
will be accorded by us to any group occupying Peking by force,
nothing more in the way of a conservative or stabilizing force can
be expected by us from this Central Administration. From it we
will never get again any recognition of our rights, nor will we get
any willingness to deal in a spirit of good will with us, or of good
faith. It will continue, on the contrary, to be an irresponsible
agency, always currying popular favor, as far as it dares, by
undermining the rights of foreign nationals and the position of
foreign powers. It is as though we had taken to the Central
Government as a life raft in the political shipwreck of the Chinese
Republic; and that raft, its buoyancy lost now, is no longer
keeping us afloat. To keep it afloat we are swimming, but despite
this, it must soon drag us down.
6. In the eyes of the country, the Central Administration
represents less in status than it has ever before. It formerly
commanded throughout the country some slight degree of
prestige and respect at least … since it was the only formulation
politically of the feeling of cultural and racial unity found among
the Chinese people. It has been brought into shame and derision
by the events of the last six months, becoming in the hands of the
Northern militarists a neglected toy. No serious effort was made
for several weeks by Wu Pei-fu and Chang Tso-lin to reconstruct
a cabinet after the flight of Tuan. Then for another series of
weeks, when at Wu’s instance W. W. Yen consented to act as
Premier, Yen was left without the support of a single colleague.
The body functioning now was constituted only after a cynical
announcement was made by Wu that serious consideration must
be given to the matter of a government as the only means for
getting from the powers the additional revenues to be made
available by the Conference. Even the Cabinet members (which I
may say include several of my friends) make little effort to
conceal their attitude that it is a farce. Two of them who are

nonpartisan and who have been associated on and off for years
with Central Government have privately given clear intimations
of their feeling of distaste for the whole adventure. Naturally this
so-called government is taken no more seriously by the people at
large than by itself. I have grave doubts whether any Chinese
consider it to be more than a pawn used in a fantastic game being
played among military rivals having no loyalties and no
principles. My feeling is that the idea of central government has
lost its traditional prestige so far that in the future no
administration can command greater respect than can be enforced
by it upon the country.
7. Regardless of what is effect or cause, this decline of central
government politically accords with an unmistakable trend in the
political ideas of the Chinese. However little we may like the idea
of administrative decentralization from the standpoint of
American interests or from that of what we regard as the interests
of China, it is becoming established. This is going on in the midst
even of the so-called nationalistic movement, which, to a large
degree, has aroused the people to a common impulse of assertion
of themselves as against alien peoples. As I foresee the
development through which China is destined to pass before it
will be able to evolve a reasonably coherent organization of
government, it must experience first a resolution into a loose
confederation, with autonomous component regions, held
together by bonds of sentiment rather than of law, merely
tolerating in degrees both various and fluctuating the continuance
of essential national services such as the railways and telegraph,
customs, salt, posts, and perhaps the judicial system. I conceive it
as possible that were these organizations able to keep beyond the
control of any faction and aloof from politics, they might be
permitted to function as quasi-independent entities fairly
generally and regularly, as is now done in large degree by the
Customs Administration. But if their subordination to the
authority of a nominally central government exercising control
only locally and for the benefit of a faction is to continue, they are
bound to break up sooner or later.

7a. This tendency towards decentralization, which is at least
temporary, we cannot check through an attempt to confer a
factitious existence upon a central administration not considered
by the Chinese people to be representative. Nor would our
appearing to stand in opposition to the course of the political
development of China be something we could afford. In my
opinion, the time has come when an accommodation to the
progress so far shown by this development must be made by us.
We have begun to do this to a certain extent already. For some
time cases involving protection have been handled, not through
the Foreign Office which lacks authority to act even if it should
possess the good will, but more and more frequently through
consular officers who deal with local authorities possessing all
responsibility and power. And certain categories of claims, as
arranged with the Foreign Office, are taken up in a number of
provinces with the local commissioner for foreign affairs. This
official acts under the instructions given by the provincial
authorities, though nominally he holds his post under the Minister
of Foreign Affairs.
8. Our position in regard to endeavoring to protect our nationals
and secure fair treatment for them is anomalous in the present
ultimate phase of the breaking up of central authority. Though the
Peking administration really exists by virtue of the recognition
extended by us and other powers, it gives us no help. Rather it is
disposed more and more to act as a devil’s advocate against our
interests and our rights. And the various regional or provincial
authorities, resentful over what is construed by them to be our
support of the rival faction in control of Peking, are antagonized
and are only too ready to renounce those responsibilities which, if
we dealt directly with them, they might be prepared to undertake.
If our supreme duty in China is, as I conceive it to be, to do
everything we can do legitimately and honorably to maintain the
interests of Americans here and at home, we must to that end
adopt methods conforming to actual conditions. We do not need
to temporize, nor need we alter in its essentials our policy toward
China as a whole, but, even though we look forward still

hopefully and with a desire to be helpful to eventual
reestablishment here of an actual central government, we should
face the fact that no longer in China’s political turmoil is the
Peking regime more than an unrepresentative unit.
9. We do not recognize today the existence in Peking of a
government. We ought to withhold such recognition, in my
opinion, not only until a substantial government has come into
being, but we should declare our intention publicly and
unequivocally to that effect. Should I have wrongly estimated
how hopeless it is to expect in the reasonably near future the
reconstituting of a representative central government, then the
taking of such a position by us would stimulate such latent
potentialities as may exist and result in a serious, possibly
successful, effort toward bringing a real government of China into
being. Yet, whether that fortunate result should or should not
follow, in my mind there is no doubt that if we took such action, it
would enable us, despite all the difficulties as to details which
obviously would be involved, to get results far better than we can
obtain at present in protecting just American rights and interests.
Our nationals everywhere in China are on the defensive and are
deprived of that protection from Chinese authorities which we
might expect to be able to secure for them were we to place
responsibility squarely upon those having the power to act and the
incentive to do so.
10. The proposal I am making, that we discard frankly the fiction
that a central government exists in Peking, has for a considerable
time been maturing slowly in my mind. I did not feel warranted,
however, in committing myself in regard to it even in my own
thought up to the time when the possibilities of carrying out the
Washington Customs Treaty provisions were exhausted by the
American delegation to the Tariff Conference.71 If we could on
July 3rd have obtained consent from the other powers to proceed
immediately to the negotiation of an agreement on the
Washington surtaxes, with the cooperation of those members of
the Chinese delegation still remaining, despite the fact that at the

moment there was no recognized government, I would have
regarded it as a defensible sequel, and probably a wise one, to the
negotiations previously conducted in connection with the
Conference. However, on that date, in the meeting of the foreign
delegations, it was disclosed that a resumption of negotiations
would come about only after indefinite delay and, furthermore,
only with a recognized government. Thus, if the implementation
of the Washington surtaxes were made by us an occasion of
recognition rather than a consequence of recognition, we would
find ourselves bound to the wheel of a policy of extending
recognition to anything in Peking which declared itself to be a
government, regardless of its representative character, its
competence or its willingness to deal with our rights and interests
faithfully. I do not feel, in view of the unreality and the futility of
the administration which has been formed in the meantime, that
we can so commit ourselves either with dignity or with safety to
those national interests in regard to which we are trustees.
11. The prospect that we may find that it is now impossible to
conclude any arrangement with a government of China for giving
effect to the Washington Customs Treaty, gives me a feeling of
deep concern. But, according to the situation, that is not
dependent upon our attitude toward the Peking regime. It is
dependent upon facts beyond our control and independent of our
policy. One of these facts is that the British and Japanese, among
others, are unwilling, until there again is a recognized
government, to proceed with Conference matters, and another is
that the status of the Central Government has changed so far since
the Conference began, that, whereas at that time we could have
implemented the Washington Treaty, feeling that the utmost was
being done by us to realize the purposes contemplated by that
treaty, now we could not do so without being conscious that what
we were professedly doing for the whole of China in fact would
benefit nobody save that faction in China which, at the moment,
might be in a position to convert into immediate cash, for the
purpose of conducting civil war, the proceeds of surtaxes for
years [ahead?]. Except for the somewhat remote possibility of the

establishment of a real government here, the working out of an
arrangement for accomplishing this purpose might prove feasible
by means of a separate arrangement, either severally or
collectively, with the various regional administrations.
12. With regard to anticipated benefits from the Conference, it is
my mature opinion that our position would be no worse than if we
concluded an agreement with a central administration which is
and for years must be a political nonentity. The promises to
relieve trade of the incubus of likin and other inland taxation are
not seriously believed by anybody to be realizable. Nor, under the
circumstances that have come to exist, could an undertaking for
the consolidation and funding of unsecured debts possibly be
carried out. Seizure of control of customs by leaders in each area
would merely be provoked by the attempt, which would thus
precipitate a break-up of Customs Administration: the only
stabilizing influence and the only source of revenue by which the
indebtedness of China can conceivably be met. The suggestion of
the British two months ago that our agreement with the existing
regime be concluded by us, subject to the condition that assent be
given to it by other regions, falls between two stools, it seems to
me: the “outs” would take our committing of ourselves to an
arrangement profitable to the “ins” as a challenge; the “ins”
would be resentful of our offering them an agreement, of which
the precedent condition obviously could not be fulfilled. In my
judgment, we must dismiss as absolutely futile and illusory any
hopes based upon the possibility that a central administration in
China could carry out any obligations it might assume in
connection with the Conference.
13. After consulting Strawn,72 who indorses strongly the above
views, I have considered carefully this question: whether our
position regarding the manner of our contacts with China ought to
be determined and announced immediately or whether
developments in respect to the present indeterminate situation in
North China should be awaited. My firm conviction is that this
position, if it is to carry the moral weight of a decision formed

with a view to the larger aspects of our relations with China, must
be taken without dependence upon any exigency confronting us
incidental to the factional contest in progress at present. Its
significance would tend inevitably to be limited were some
concrete situation made the occasion of our action, and
implications that partisanship influenced our action would be
involved.
14. This question has still greater urgency because of the
possibility or probability that a return of the Kuominchun to
power in Peking may shortly occur. I would have less
apprehension in regard to the policy which that party might
pursue were there not reason for believing that in that event, Feng
Yu-hsiang,73 who has been freshly schooled at Moscow in
revolutionary methods, as contrasted with evolutionary methods,
and in the doctrines of repudiation, would return to China. In such
a case, possibly arising soon, Feng, in the name of the central
government he had set up, would quite probably have all existing
treaties with the United States and other “capitalistic” powers
canceled by a declaration he would cause to be made. It seems to
me that in such a contingency we would be in a much stronger
position tactically if our policy that there is in existence no
government representing China had been taken definitely already.
15. Though the views set forth above are novel in some respects,
they are not peculiar to this Legation or to me by any means. In
speaking recently with members of the Danish, British, and Dutch
Legations, and Saburi of the delegation from Japan,74 I have
learned that among them there is a drift toward similar views.
This arises out of recognition of the fact that the most important
problem faced today by foreign interests is the question
concerning the reality of any government professing to represent
China.
16. I am offering in another telegram concrete suggestions with
regard to the action I would recommend pursuant to the views
herein indicated.

MACMURRAY
63 Telegram in six sections.
64 Post, pp. 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577] and 847 [Pg. 847
includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639].
67 See pp. 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 793 and Doc. 794] ff.
68 Willys R. Peck, Chinese Secretary of the Legation.
69 Chinese member of the International Commission on ExtraterritoriaUty
and former Chinese Minister of Justice.
71 See pp. 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613] ff.
72 Silas H. Strawn, American commissioner to the Special Conference on
the Chinese Customs Tariff.
73 In control of the Kuominchun prior to his retirement in January 1926.
74 Sadao Saburi, of the Japanese Foreign Office, a delegate to the Special
Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff.

893.01/225: Telegram
[Document 539]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, August 14, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received August 17—7:35 a.m.]
326. 1. In my telegram 325, August 14, I presented my opinion that, in the
present circumstance in which the Tariff Conference is in abeyance as the
result of the practically complete disintegration here of a governmental
entity, the necessity confronts us of making a definite decision concerning
this question: whether we should not take the position frankly and openly
that any administration which professes to be China’s Government cannot
be dealt with by us until an administration has been established which
actually is representative of a [united China?], and which possesses
authority sufficient to carry out its international obligations.
2. If you approve the course I recommend, the question comes up whether
we preferably should act to that end singly or cooperate with Japan and
Great Britain. While I think that cooperation with them would be preferable
if arrangements could be made safely and readily, I am doubtful, because of
our experiences with the indecisiveness and vacillation characterizing
British opinion regarding China at present and with Japanese
meticulousness in insisting that their own views should prevail, and even
their own phraseology (shown in the preparation of the Shanghai judicial
inquiry report and in the recent negotiations for implementing the
Washington surtaxes), whether at this phase we could seek cooperation
without serious danger of loss of control of the situation and the risk of its
being subordinated as to time and manner of action to the views of Great
Britain and Japan. In consequence, cooperation might, for instance, be
made a mere occasion for opposition to the Kuominchun, in case that party
regained power here. It would be my suggestion therefore that rather than
seek cooperation from other interested powers, the Embassies at London

and Tokyo might merely be used by you to inform the respective Foreign
Offices of your views, in strictest confidence, and to give the further
information that I had been asked by you to state our position publicly
within a brief period and had been authorized by you to have a full
discussion of the matter in Peking with my British and Japanese colleagues.
3. I venture the suggestion that the statement might take the following
form:75
“In pursuance of its traditional policies towards China, which
found formulation in the decisions of the Washington Conference,
the American Government has consistently joined in according
recognition to the several administrations that during recent years
have successively established themselves in control of the
agencies of the Central Government, because in each case it was
hopeful that such recognition would contribute towards providing
the fullest and most unembarrassed opportunity for China to
develop and maintain for herself an effective and stable
government. Those hopes have been repeatedly disappointed.
Instead of developing any sounder and more satisfactory
governmental entity, each of these administrations in turn has
become less able to command the recognition and the support of
its own people, has possessed a diminishing extent and declining
domestic authority, and has been less able to live up to its
international responsibilities as the repository of the sovereignty
of the Chinese Nation. The Government of the United States feels
that those administrations which during the past few years have
received international recognition as the Government of China,
have not in fact been similarly recognized by the people of China,
or possessed those attributes and qualifications which in accepted
international practice are ordinarily deemed prerequisite to the
recognition of a government by foreign states; and it has come to
feel that, with whatever eagerness of hope and with whatever
spirit of helpfulness it looks forward to the reestablishment in
China of a system of government possessing the approval and the
loyal support of the country itself, no purpose beneficial to the
interests either of the United States or of China would be served

by recognizing as a central government any administration which
is not in fact generally representative of the Chinese people and
competent to exercise the ordinary functions of government.”
MACMURRAY
75 Quotation not paraphrased.

893.01/223: Telegram
[Document 540]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, August 24, 1926—2 p.m.
171. Your telegram 325, August 14, 2 p.m., and your 326, August 14, 3 p.m.
Your recommendations have received my very careful consideration. As
you are aware, the Department assumed the lead in being insistent that in
pursuance to the Washington Treaty a Customs Conference should be held;
that the scope of the Conference should be broadened so that the whole
subject of tariff relations would be considered; that a Commission on
Extraterritoriality should be appointed with full power to consider the
subject in its entirety and report; and that this was insisted upon by the
Department with the other powers, of whom some were disposed not to go
to the extent we were willing to go, though at last they substantially
acquiesced in our views. The responsibility for the Washington treaties was
largely this Government’s, and we have insisted on various occasions that
we intended to carry out those treaties in absolute good faith and to consider
the whole matter of extraterritoriality and our tariff relations with the
objective of satisfying Chinese aspirations. I realize how weak the
Government is, and I concur fully in your views regarding its impotency.
However, since we have insisted on going ahead, and in view of our
responsibility for the Washington treaties and for their fulfillment, I cannot
believe that it is wise for the United States to take the lead in abandoning
the Conference and in giving public notification to China that she has no
government. Even if we believe that there is no prospect of a central
government sufficiently strong to carry out its treaties, it seems to me that
we should not take the lead. It would bring the hostility of the Chinese
people upon us and give to other nations an opportunity to lay the blame
upon us for the failure of the Conference and furnish them at the same time
with a sought-for excuse for abandoning the Conference. I realize that you

are on the ground, and I place in your opinion and Mr. Strawn’s the greatest
confidence. But the action you suggest, I feel certain, would fail to be
understood in the United States and would meet quite likely with disfavor.
It is my preference that, unless you are able to put forward some controlling
reason, action should not be taken. Cable to me fully, please, whatever
further suggestions you may desire to offer.
KELLOGG

151.096/128: Telegram
[Document 541]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 8, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received September 8—8:20 a.m.]
377. Your 135, July 3, 1 p.m. Jenkins reports special bureau created for
issuance of passports to Chinese proceeding to America from Liang-Kwang
whose seal reads “Bureau of issuance of passports for America from Liang-
Kwang.” Seal of signing officer reads “Seal of special officer issuing
passports for America from Liang-Kwang.” It is trusted that this
arrangement which now appears satisfactory to the Cantonese and Jenkins
will meet with the approval of the Department.
MACMURRAY

151.096/128: Telegram
[Document 542]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, October 1, 1926—5 p.m.
211. Your 377, September 8, 9 a.m. Inform Jenkins that arrangement is
acceptable to Labor Department and is approved.
KELLOGG

893.01/235: Telegram
[Document 543]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 31, 1926—noon.
[Received 10:10 p.m.]
522. Following from American consul general at Canton:
“October 30, 11 a.m. Chen states that one of the important
resolutions adopted at recent Kuomintang conference regarding
his government’s diplomatic policy was the centralization of
diplomatic functions in the regularly established Minister of
Foreign Affairs at Canton and that the government would not be
bound by the diplomatic agreements and alliances of Chiang
Chung-cheng76 or other military officer if made without the
consent of Chen’s office.”
MAYER
76 Also known as Chiang Kai-shek, commander in chief of the Cantonese
forces.

755.93/36
[Document 544]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
[WASHINGTON,] November 11, 1926.
The Italian Ambassador called and read to the Secretary portions of
telegrams received from his Government concerning China. …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
The Ambassador stated that his Government had received confidential
information to the effect that the British Foreign Office was at this time
making a careful study of the situation at Canton with a view to extending
recognition to the Canton regime. He said that his Government desired
information as to whether we had contemplated any action.
The Secretary informed the Ambassador that the policy of this Government
was to enter into friendly relations with any government representing China
capable of negotiating for China and committing China; that the question of
extending recognition to the regime at Canton had not been considered by
this Government; that we were not prepared to enter into relations of a
formal nature with any part of China; that doubtless the question of
extending recognition would have to be considered if and when that regime
obtained control over the greater part of China.
N[ELSON] T. J[OHNSON]

893.01/239: Telegram
[Document 545]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 17, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received November 17—6:53 a.m.]
556. My 547, November 13, noon.78 Following from American consul
general, Canton:
“November 14, 4 p.m. Referring to my telegram[s] of November
11, 1 p.m.,78 and November 11, 5 p.m.78 I interviewed Eugene
Chen yesterday. He denied that his note79 was intended to be a
demand for recognition but admitted that it might be construed as
an intimation that the Canton regime desired to open negotiations
with the powers looking toward recognition of some sort.
Primarily, he said the note was intended to inform the powers that
the Cantonese regime was not disposed to follow the practice,
peculiar to China and unknown to international law, of dealing
with the several powers through the diplomatic corps. He had
established the practice of addressing separate, though often
identic, notes to the several consuls and would henceforth insist
upon separate notes from them.
2. This would also apply to the diplomatic corps, Chen
said, which had been allowed to develop into a sort of
administrative organ, to the serious detriment of
Chinese sovereignty. Nothing was more harmful to
China than this system of aligning the powers on the
offensive and China on the defensive. The interests of
the powers were not identical, and from now on China
must deal with them separately and not en masse.
3. In response to the suggestion that in spite of his
explanation the note looked like a bid for recognition,

Chen said it scarcely seemed fair that the powers should
turn to the Canton regime respecting such important
questions as to the preservation of treaty rights and yet
not accord any form of recognition to the Government.
He intimated that while there might be some excuse for
withholding full recognition, the powers should be
prepared to accord international status of some sort. He
declared Canton Government was expanding rapidly
and that sooner or later the question would have to be
solved.
4. Chen did not seem quite so cordially disposed to us
as formerly. He expressed ‘entirely unofficially’ his
surprise that our Government should continue to protest
against consumption and production taxes and similar
measures which we must know had come to stay and
referred to our ‘legalistic’ attitude in foreign relations.
5. Neither the British nor the Japanese consul has
protested individually against the new taxes.
6. As Tredwell80 has doubtless informed you,
Hongkong press recently had much to say anent
recognition of the Canton regime. November 15, noon.”
MACMURRAY
78 Not printed.
78 Not printed.
78 Not printed.
79 Of November 8; p. 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 693].
80 Roger Culver Tredwell, consul general at Hongkong.

893.01/244: Telegram
[Document 546]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 18, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received December 18—7:04 a.m.]
625. 1. Wu Tsing, the representative of Chang Tso-lin whose call on me on
the 16th was referred to in 5th paragraph of my number 621, December
17,81 called again the following day and rather insistently sought to
ascertain what view the American Government would take if Chang were to
come to Peking and establish, under his authority as leader of Ankuochun,82
a government with somewhat pretentious program of reforms. I assured him
we were anxious to witness the establishment of a real government
representative of the people of China and possessing the will and the power
actually to govern and to live up to its obligations, but that we must have a
satisfactory state of facts to act on and cannot assume in advance that a
particular action by some exalted personage will convert the present sham
government into a reality.
2. He said that before undertaking this task Chang wanted to be reassured of
the attitude of ourselves and other powers on two questions, the first
relating to finance and the second to our attitude toward treaty revision.
3. As to the first it appeared that he had in mind prospects of being
permitted to levy surtaxes which the Special Conference had had under
consideration. I recalled that we and the other powers had persevered in
those negotiations up to the time that there ceased to be any authority in
China capable of carrying out its part of any of the reciprocal obligations
necessarily involved. I said we would welcome possibility of continuing
such negotiations whenever any substantial and responsible government of
China might be established.
4. With regard to question of treaty revision he said that while of course all
patriotic Chinese aspired to status of international equality for their country,

Chang did not approve of Nationalist attempt to attain that aspiration by
tearing up treaties; he realized that actual conditions do not justify complete
relinquishment of all special rights of foreigners in China; he expected only
that powers would be prepared to negotiate in reasonable spirit for such
modifications as the present state of progress might warrant in the interest
of both Chinese and foreigners. In reply to my inquiries he said that Chang
had in mind no particular points as requiring immediate revision in the
“unequal treaties” and particularly stated that it was well understood that
the foreigners could not be expected to give up extraterritoriality until the
state of Chinese judicial institutions may enable the country to assume that
responsibility. He said that primarily to satisfy that very considerable
section of Chinese opinion which demands revision of the treaties, Chang
wants to be in a position to give the assurance that powers would meet him
in a spirit of reasonableness and good faith. I assured him that we are for
our part always ready to discuss with any actually competent Chinese
authorities such modifications of our treaty rights as may be consistent with
the real state of affairs.
5. It is not unlikely that Chang will shortly set up here an administration of
his own and seek the recognition of the powers. It would in any case have
authority over only a portion of the country, and I doubt whether it would
have any but military support and whether it would have any degree of
permanency. Should the question be presented I trust I have your approval
for an attitude of expectancy not antagonistic but insistent upon the actual
demonstration of its substantial representative character and of its
willingness and ability to govern.
MACMURRAY
81 Post, p. 914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709].
82 An army of Manchurian and allied forces.

893.01/245: Telegram
[Document 547]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 18, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received December 18—10:22 a.m.]
626. My 622, December 17, 5 p.m.83 Following from American consul
general, Hankow:
“December 17, noon. In the course of an informal call on Eugene
Chen this morning he stated that the office of Commissioner of
Foreign Affairs is now in process of being merged into the office
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and that actual merging will
shortly take place. He stated further that his government is now
known to be definitely national in scope and will soon be much
more so. As a national government he will shortly request that in
order to conduct the affairs of the government on a basis of some
semblance of diplomatic regularity, all correspondence will
necessarily have to be addressed to him by the local American
official representative as ‘Minister for Foreign Affairs’ and that
the person so addressing him must be clothed with the authority
either of a commissioner or possibly ‘diplomatic agent and consul
general’. He cited the method of correspondence now employed
by the Legation when a subordinate officer, in the absence of the
Minister, signs correspondence ‘For the Minister’. I seriously
doubt whether this plan is feasible. It seems rather vague and
indefinite, illogical, quite irregular and to denote in fact a form of
recognition which, as I understand it, the American Government
is not yet prepared to extend. Should such an arrangement be
deemed advisable, however, Chen stated that he could be
addressed direct from Peking, if the need should arise, or by me
or some other authorized representative here signing ‘For the
Minister’. It would seem far preferable that the representative
here both were vested with the authority of commissioner or

‘diplomatic agent and consul general’. The latter probably lacks
the sanction of substantive law. Chen is not yet clear in his own
mind as to which form would be preferable but stated that the
matter would have to be definitely settled soon and he wishes you
to give it your prompt and most thoughtful consideration. He said
that he wished to have a further talk with me on this and other
subjects in a few days, I asked him quite frankly what would be
the alternative should it be impossible to work out mutually
satisfactory plan of carrying on our relations here, and he said that
intercourse would necessarily cease until such a plan could be
evolved, intimating that short of recognition itself relations could
not be continued under the new order of things unless one of the
three suggestions are adopted.
In the course of the conversation Chen remarked that the
American Government is often too technical in matters of this
kind and that it overlooks the practicalities of a case.”
MACMURRAY
83 Ante, p. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 525, Doc. 526, and Doc. 527].

893.01/253: Telegram
[Document 548]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 14, 1927—10 a.m.
[Received January 14—4:38 a.m.]
28. 1. “Regent Cabinet” recognized day before yesterday as follows:
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Acting Premier, Koo; Interior, Hu Wei-teh;
War, Chang Ching-hui; Finance, Tang Erh-ho; Communications, P’an Fu;
others as in previous Cabinet.
2. Although dominated by the influence of Chang Tso-lin, this Cabinet
includes none of his immediate adherents. It is a mere transitory makeshift
until such time as he feels it expedient to substitute a cabinet of his own
Fengtien party men.
3. In the absence of such instructions as I requested in fifth paragraph of my
telegram 625, December 18, 11 a.m., I have assumed, with Chang himself
and with his various representatives who have called upon me, the attitude
that we have no prepossessions as to who should govern China, and that
while earnestly hoping for some administration that will be representative
of the Chinese people and willing and able to exercise authority throughout
the country and live up to its international obligations, we nevertheless want
to rely upon realities rather than upon hopes or vague assurances without
performance. Now that a new cabinet is seriously announcing itself and
doubtless intending to make some bid for international recognition, I trust I
may receive an indication of your views.
MACMURRAY

893.01/253: Telegram
[Document 549]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, January 15, 1927—6 p.m.
12. Your telegram number 28, sent January 14, 10 a.m. Your position as
presented in third paragraph is approved.
In view of the developments taking place in the Chinese situation and the
opposition that is very evident and widespread against the factions now in
control at Peking, the opinion of the Department is that the direction of
events should be awaited before considering the granting of recognition to
any group or faction making a claim that it acts with authority for the whole
Chinese people.
KELLOGG

Protection of American missionary
interests endangered by antiforeign
movement in South China
[550] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, January 5, 1926—9 p.m.
393.1163/25: Telegram
[551] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 2, 1926—3 p.m. [Received February 2—8:44 a.m.]
893.00/7056: Telegram
[552] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Canton, February 6, 1926.
893.00/7190
[553] The American Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Chinese
Minister of Foreign Affairs (Wang)
Peking, February 10, 1926.
893.00/7256

[554] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, February 10, 1926—7 p.m.
893.00/7078a: Telegram
[555] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 11, 1926—4 p.m. [Received February 11—9:45 a.m.]
893.00/7079: Telegram
[556] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 26, 1926—noon. [Received February 26—6:47 a.m.]
893.00/7126: Telegram
[557] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 1, 1926—3 p.m. [Received March 1—6:20 a.m.]
893.00/7128: Telegram
[558] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 1, 1926—5 p.m. [Received March 1—10:43 a.m.]
893.00/7132: Telegram
[559] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 1, 1926—7 p.m. [Received March 1—1:52 p.m.]
893.00/7133: Telegram

[560] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, March 1, 1926—8 p.m.
893.00/7133: Telegram
[561] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 1, 1926—8 p.m. [Received March 1—3:05 p.m.]
893.00/7134: Telegram
[562] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 13, 1926—5 p.m. [Received March 13—12:22 p.m.]
393.1162/1: Telegram
[563] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 14, 1926—10 a.m. [Received March 14—4: 54 a.m.]
393.1162/2: Telegram
[564] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, March 15, 1926—2 p.m.
393.1162/1: Telegram
[565] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 24, 1926—4 p.m. [Received March 24—11 a.m.]
393.1162/7: Telegram

[566] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 28, 1926—11 a.m. [Received 12:33 p.m.]
893.00/7234: Telegram
[567] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, March 30, 1926.
393.1162/6
[568] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Canton (Jenkins)
Washington, April 3, 1926—2 p.m.
393.1162/7: Telegram
[569] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
Canton, April 7, 1926—3 p.m. [Received April 7—9:58 a.m.]
393.1163/39: Telegram
[570] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Canton, April 14, 1926.
893.00/7403
[571] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 20, 1926—3 p.m. [Received May 20—11:37 a.m.]
893.00/7407: Telegram

[572] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, May 21, 1926—1 p.m.
893.00/7407: Telegram
[573] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 23, 1926—2 p.m. [Received May 23—10: 30 a.m.]
893.00/7411: Telegram
[574] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, May 26, 1926—5 p.m.
893.00/7411: Telegram
[575] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 8, 1926. [Received July 14.]
393.1164/33
[576] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 7, 1926—8 a.m. [Received 9:45 a.m.]
893.00/7504: Telegram
[577] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 19, 1926—1 p.m. [Received July 19—6:47 a.m.]
393.1162/21: Telegram

[578] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 24, 1926—4 p.m. [Received July 24—9 a.m.]
393.1162/22: Telegram
[579] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, July 26, 1926—7 p.m.
393.1162/22: Telegram
[580] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 1, 1926—1 p.m. [Received October 1—11: 52 a.m.]
393.1162/29: Telegram

393.1163/25: Telegram
[Document 550]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, January 5, 1926—9 p.m.
4. With reference to personal letter from Strawn dated November 18,
1925,84 and particularly to paragraph concerning possibility of your
covering question of the elimination or modification of missionary privilege
clauses in treaty which Conference is now preparing, the Department does
not desire to take up this question at this time but prefers to leave it until it
can be dealt with in negotiations for a new commercial treaty with China to
take the place of previous treaties.
KELLOGG
84 Not printed; Silas H. Strawn was American commissioner to the Special
Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff.

893.00/7056: Telegram
[Document 551]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, February 2, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received February 2—8:44 a.m.]
63. 1. Admiral Williams has referred to me, through naval attaché, a request
of Navy Department for my opinion relative to proposed considerable
reduction in destroyers attached to Asiatic Fleet. I consider the present a
most inopportune time for any reduction. The political and military
situations are so undefined and the temper of Chinese popular feeling so
inflammable that it is impossible to predict what may eventuate even in the
near future, especially as concerns the status of the foreigner. There can be
no assurance that in any place where antiforeign agitations arise there will
prove to be, on the part of Chinese, either the authority or the good will
necessary to assure the proper protection of American interests. The
necessity may, and in all probability will, arise again at any time for naval
vessels to proceed instantly to any of a number of ports for the protection of
American lives and property. By reason of their speed, destroyers have
proved of particular value in cases arising in coastal cities.
2. I cannot too strongly urge that the Asiatic Fleet be maintained, at least as
at present.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7190
[Document 552]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)85
CANTON, February 6, 1926.
No. 380
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Legation’s
instruction of December 8, 1925, in reference to my despatch No. 326 [323]
of November 6, 1925,86 concerning the lack of respect shown in Canton for
the rights due to American citizens under the treaties, and suggesting that I
prepare a frank and full statement of my views as to the measures the
United States Government might advantageously take to protect American
citizens and their property from encroachments by officials of the Canton
regime, strike pickets and others.
I trust the Legation understands that I had no intention of undertaking to
criticize the attitude of our Government in relation to Canton, or China as a
whole. I realize fully how extremely delicate the situation is and with what
care American policy must be developed and carried out if we are to avoid
even greater difficulties than are now being encountered. While I can have
little or no expectation of adding anything new to the information already in
the Legation’s possession, I shall endeavor to report the situation as I see it.
It is barely possible that I may have something to suggest of value with
respect to Canton which, it seems to me, is somewhat apart from the general
situation in the rest of China.
Needless to say I am entirely opposed to the use of force. I cannot, however,
escape the impression that our present policy with relation to the Cantonese
is lacking in decision and firmness. I believe that we ought to be just and
exceedingly friendly in our dealings with these people, but that we should
carefully guard against creating the impression, as I now think we are

doing, that we are afraid to meet the issue and are prepared to put up with
almost anything rather than stiffen our attitude.
It is only natural, in view of what has gone on during the past seven months,
that the mass of the Cantonese should have gotten the impression that the
Powers are really afraid to do more than mildly protest, as one treaty right
after another is disregarded and brushed aside. There has been a mass of
propaganda in Canton tending to convince the students and the general
public that the powers are divided and weak, that they have no justice on
their side, and that all the right lies with China. The local regime, assisted
by its Russian Soviet advisers, has been steadily feeding propaganda to the
people of Canton and at the same time doing everything in its power to
prevent the dissemination of information contrary to its interests and aims.
The local newspapers are not permitted to print anything unfavorable to the
present administration. Adverse criticism is suppressed, but everything
published in the United States and other countries favorable to China (and
there has been a great deal of it) is seized with avidity and given the widest
possible publicity.
The Canton government is using the strike to further its aims. There could
be no valid objection, of course, to the strike as such were it not encouraged
and directed by the authorities, but there is, it seems to me, a very serious
cause for complaint in the fact that the local government has permitted the
strikers to uniform and arm themselves and to arrest foreigners alleged to
have broken strike regulations as well as to seize foodstuffs and other
merchandise in the possession of foreigners. Some six weeks ago a
Japanese steamer, alleged to have touched at Hongkong, was boarded by
armed pickets upon arriving at Canton and is still being forcibly detained
pending the payment of a heavy ransom. The local authorities say that they
are not responsible for the strike and yet they not only fail to prevent
outrages of this sort but have actually promulgated laws conferring
extensive police and other powers on the strikers.
The United States government and the other powers were right, in my
opinion, in not attempting to interfere with the ordinary course of the strike.
Any interference on their part would have been unwarranted and would
have been a cause for just condemnation on the part of the outside world.

When the strikers went further, however, and began to interfere forcibly
with the freedom of movement of American citizens and to seize food
products intended for their personal use, it seems to me the situation passed
beyond a point where the Powers could longer remain passive and continue
merely to file ordinary notes of protest.
In the beginning the strike leaders probably had no intention of interfering
directly with foreigners, but when they found that they could take one step
without difficulty they naturally tried another and another, so that I should
not be surprised at any time now to find the pickets forbidding foreigners
entering or leaving Shameen at all, nor should I be surprised to hear that the
strikers had decided to prevent the American communities at Tung Shan and
Paak Hok Tung from obtaining supplies from neighboring native shops, or
even transporting foodstuffs for their own use. Such things have actually
been threatened but have not as yet been put into effect.
The ultimate aim of the Kuomintang, or the Canton branch of it at least, is
clearly to force the United States and the other Powers to surrender
extraterritorial rights and it seems to me quite clear that as long as the
Powers submit to the present methods of attack the campaign will gradually
become more and more reckless of treaty rights to the very grave
discomfort of Americans and other foreigners residing here.
If the Powers are not going to insist upon retaining extraterritoriality in
some form we should, it seems to me, let the fact be known without delay.
If we continue to cling to these treaty rights in theory and allow them to be
taken away piece by piece in practice we shall not only find ourselves
without the rights in the end but also without the good will that would come
with the voluntary surrender of extraterritoriality.
I do not believe that the Powers should surrender extraterritorial rights but I
feel we might get along much better if we could amend the existing treaties
without delay and at the same time retain such safeguards as may be
necessary. I understand from what I have seen in the newspapers that the
Secretary of State has announced that we are not prepared to surrender our
extraterritorial rights until we can be reasonably assured of the maintenance
of law and order and the proper administration of justice in China. This
being true, should we not make it quite clear to the Chinese, and especially

to the Cantonese, that we are prepared to go so far and no farther, and that a
continuation of the present policy of disregarding the treaties (the more vital
features of them) will not be tolerated?
I do not believe such a step would worsen our relations with the Chinese or
in any way increase the danger of a possible resort to force. On the contrary
I am convinced that the Cantonese would realize, as they do not now, that
while the United States Government is disposed to be most patient and
kindly it will not permit unjust and unreasonable encroachments upon the
rights of its citizens even in China.
In order to assume such an attitude, however, the United States Government
must have the support of the American people and to secure this support it
would be necessary to let the American public know just what is going on
in China. So far the people at home have heard a great deal about the rights
of the Chinese and the injustice of the powers but they have not been fully
informed respecting violations of essential treaty rights, the absence of any
real government in China, the corruption of the judiciary, and the brutality
and lawlessness of the Chinese military, not to mention the interference of
Russian Bolshevik agents and the open declaration on the part of the
Canton regime that it will pursue a policy of friendliness only to those
Powers which treat China as equals. The indignities to which American
citizens are now being subjected at the hands of the strikers should also be
stressed. It is believed that a change in the attitude of the American press
would immediately react on the Canton politicians, who are working on the
assumption that the American Government does not enjoy popular support
in its China policy.
So far as I can ascertain the present Canton regime does not desire
recognition, or at least will not until it has secured control of Peking or a
large part of China. Dr. C. C. Wu87 said only a few days ago that they were
not “secessionists” and were not especially interested in the question of
recognition at this time. It is clear, however, that the Canton government
holds the present Peking regime in the utmost contempt and that
communications addressed to Peking with respect to matters in Canton are
not only almost useless but irritating to the Cantonese. Might it not be
possible, with certain precautions and within certain limits, for the United

States Government to communicate with the Canton regime through this
Consulate General? This would have the advantage of directness and would
lend greater emphasis to our government’s views in relation to Canton.
To summarize I would suggest:
(a) The use of force is most inadvisable and should not be
considered except in connection with the gravest possible
emergencies involving the preservation of American lives.
(b) The abolition of extraterritoriality is inadvisable so long as
China is without a responsible government, including a reliable
judiciary.
(c) The speedy and extensive amendment of the existing
extraterritorial treaties seems highly desirable so that unessential
and objectionable features may be dropped while essential rights
should be maintained although possibly under a radically different
form.
(e) [sic] Some plan should be adopted under which the Canton
régime might be dealt with more or less directly rather than
through Peking. Moreover the Canton regime should be informed
that further encroachments upon the essential rights of Americans
cannot longer be tolerated.
(f) To make this position in relation to the Cantonese effective and
at the same time remove the danger of having to resort to force,
steps should be taken to awaken the American public to the true
state of affairs in China.
Trusting that the above suggestions may be of some small value to the
Legation, I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS
85 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general as an enclosure
to his despatch No. 455, Feb. 6; received Mar. 17.

86 Neither printed.
87 Wu Ch’ao-ch’u, prominent leader in the Kuomintang.

893.00/7256
[Document 553]
The American Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Chinese
Minister of Foreign Affairs (Wang)88
PEKING, February 10, 1926.
No. 164
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that reports received
from the various American Consular officers in China indicate that a most
deplorable state of lawlessness has existed in several of the provinces
during the past months and that conditions have been growing steadily
worse. This is particularly true in the provinces of Honan, Shensi Anhui,
Shantung and Fukien, although lawlessness is by no means confined to
those provinces, but exists in varying degree in practically all parts of
China. Many reports are received from time to time regarding looting and
burning by large bands of brigands in which American missionaries are
often the direct or indirect victims. In addition there has lately been carried
on a considerable amount of anti-Christian propaganda, including threats to
destroy mission stations and kill missionaries and native converts. While
this state of affairs is not of recent origin, and this Legation has in the past
been obliged to make representations to Your Excellency’s Ministry in
regard to specific instances involving the loss of American life and the
destruction of American property at the hands of Chinese bandits, I am
constrained to take this occasion again to invite Your Excellency’s attention
to the general situation as it exists at present, and to insist that the Chinese
Government take all available measures, through the instrumentality of the
provincial authorities and otherwise, for the protection of American citizens
and their legitimate interests, wherever they may be.
I avail myself [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY

88 Copy transmitted to the Department by the American Minister as an
enclosure to his despatch No. 478, Feb. 26; received Mar. 30.

893.00/7078a: Telegram
[Document 554]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, February 10, 1926—7 p.m.
39. Central News despatch from Hongkong via London published today
reports attack by students and Bolshevist sympathizers on American
Presbyterian mission in Kachek, Hainan Island, Kwangtung. Please cable
brief report.
KELLOGG

893.00/7079: Telegram
[Document 555]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, February 11, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received February 11—9:45 a.m.]
71. Your number 39, February 10, 7 p.m.
1. Only information available is message just received from
Inspector General of Customs to the effect that he has been
informed from Kiungchow, Hainan Island, that students are
reported to have invaded American mission compound, Kachek,
January 31st, entered hospital, beat Chinese hospital assistants,
hauled down, tore up and trampled upon, American flag. No
foreigners molested but their servants taken away. Protest lodged
by American mission with Commissioner for Foreign Affairs.
French consul also protested concerning treatment French
Catholic mission. Hoihow quiet.
2. American consul general, Canton, and commander in chief,
Atlantic [Asiatic?] Fleet, informed and former requested to report
immediately by telegraph any available information and possible
recommendations for despatch of naval vessel to Hainan.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7126: Telegram
[Document 556]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, February 26, 1926—noon.
[Received February 26—6:47 a.m.]
92. Following telegram has been received from American consul general,
Canton:
“February 23, 6 p.m. Radio message was received just now from
American destroyer, Hainan Island, reporting antiforeign and anti-
Christian propaganda but thinking American lives and property in
no immediate danger. American flag at the Kachek mission torn
down by students but soldiers only watched. Chinese officer made
a feeble attempt to prevent outrage and Commissioner of Foreign
Affairs, Hainan, issued proclamation warning people against
violence to foreigners. Commissioner and local magistrate have
promised missionaries to protect American lives and property, so
missionaries have returned to Kachek.
At Nodoa troops overran mission compound on February 5th,
threatened American citizens and billeted in American mission
school, presumably for Chinese boys.
According to a report unofficially from a Hainan missionary,
several American-owned chapels occupied by soldiers and, in
some, Christian inscriptions torn down and destroyed. Threatened
strike against the mission has not developed.
Destroyer reports mission does not desire presence of man-of-war
but does wish ship to call fortnightly. As the mission has not
rendered official report to the consulate general in spite of urgent
requests, it is evident mission does not desire governmental
assistance or interference except in grave necessity. There are 32

Americans on the island including women and children. I have
repeatedly warned them not to reside at Kachek and other interior
stations.
I am informed that there will be from four to six steamers
monthly between Hainan and Hongkong. If this is confirmed,
presence of destroyer will not be necessary, but I suggest that
man-of-war call occasionally when practicable.
As troops did not take part in insulting flag and in view of the
delicate political situation I suggest consulate general be
instructed to insist upon written expression of regret from the
Canton authorities respecting flag incident and promise to prevent
further outrages and threats against Americans and their property,
also that proclamation shall be issued at Kachek expressing regret
and [warning?] people against insulting the flag of friendly
nations.”
To which I have replied as follows:
“I approve suggestions in last paragraph. From your penultimate
paragraph I am uncertain whether you definitely conclude that the
presence of destroyer is not necessary. Reply at once by radio.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7128: Telegram
[Document 557]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 1, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received March 1—6:20 a.m.]
101. My 92, February 26, noon. American consul general, Canton, reports
February 28, 10 a.m., that presence of destroyer no longer necessary and he
has so advised Navy.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7132: Telegram
[Document 558]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 1, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received March 1—10:43 a.m.]
103. My 92, February 26, noon. Following from American consul general,
Canton:
“February 26, 4 p.m. Referring to my telegram of February 23, 6
p.m., concerning Island of Hainan affair, I have just received copy
of a private letter written by an American missionary woman at
Nodoa and forwarded by the British consul which shows much
worse conditions than the previous reports had indicated.
According to this letter Cantonese troops entered mission
compound by force, occupying chapel and boys’ school, also
threatened to occupy American residence and threatened lives of
American missionaries. Soldiers continually yelling ‘kill
foreigners’ and invading private dwellings. Officers commanding
the army extremely rude and showed no disposition to hold men
in check.
Missionaries do not believe their lives in danger because the
troops evidently instructed to carry outrages as far as possible
without endangering lives and property.
I am still awaiting further particulars in report from destroyer
commander, which I understand has been mailed. Meantime, I
would urge immediate authorization to take strong position with
the Cantonese Government, insisting upon expressions of regret
from the Government, as well as general commanding troops, and
assurances order will be maintained in the future and American
rights respected, including evacuation of American property.

Consular officer should be sent to Hainan but this is impossible so
far as my office is concerned.”
MACMURRAY

893.00/7133: Telegram
[Document 559]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 1, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received March 1—1:52 p.m.]
105. My 103, March 1, 5 p.m. I have telegraphed consul general, Canton,
approving proposal in the concluding paragraph of his telegram on the
assumption that regret and assurances are to be expressed to him.
MACMURRAY

893.00/7133: Telegram
[Document 560]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, March 1, 1926—8 p.m.
50. Your 105, March 1, 7 p.m. Your action approved.
KELLOGG

893.00/7134: Telegram
[Document 561]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 1, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received March 1—3:05 p.m.]
106. Supplementing my telegram 103, March 1, 5 p.m.
1. I greatly regret there is no consular officer in China that can be
spared for the purpose of proceeding to Hainan.
2. I venture to invite the Department’s attention to the necessity
for bringing up to normal standard the personnel of the consulates
in China in the disturbed conditions that have for some time
existed. Consular officers have been working at high pressure
with insufficient assistance and in the majority of cases unable to
be spared for the normal leave of absence necessary to prevent
their becoming stale.
3. Hainan incidents are typical of what we may expect to occur
with increasing frequency and seriousness. Throughout China
there is no adequate governmental authority to prevent such
outrages and at points beyond the reach of gunboats we are
unable to bring force to bear. Our sole recourse is to [make]
investigations and representations to the authorities concerned,
which resolve themselves largely into a question of the activity
and personal influence of our consular representatives. Even if we
should wish to do otherwise we must bear our own part as under
present circumstances other nationalities are not in a position to
give us effective help. We must moreover make up our minds to
place no further reliance upon the prevalence in China of a
disposition particularly favorable to Americans. The new spirit of
Chinese nationalism recognizes no obligations of friendship
except with Russia, but classes us with the British and Japanese

with the sole distinction that we are considered less aggressive
and therefore the less to be feared. I earnestly recommend that we
plan our consular establishment for the present and the future in
China on the basis required by the new situation.
MACMURRAY

393.1162/1: Telegram
[Document 562]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 13, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received March 13—12:22 p.m.]
126. 1. Following two telegrams received from American consul, Canton:
“March 10, 11 a.m. At 11 o’clock yesterday morning strikers’
pickets surrounded Canton hospital and forced all domestic
helpers to leave under threats of death. Entrances to hospital are
guarded by the pickets in uniform armed with clubs who refuse to
permit any Chinese to enter. Hospital management declines to
accept demands for the complete unionization of staff and may
close institution temporarily if the local authorities fail to afford
adequate protection. Police are standing by but evidently
authorities do not dare openly to oppose strikers. Other American
mission institutions expect similar attacks but the American staffs
thought not to be in any immediate danger.
Information just received strikers preventing food supplies from
entering hospital. Water supply has been cut off. This consulate
general protesting vigorously.” And:
“March 12, 5 p.m. Referring to my telegram of March 10, 11 a.m.
and March 11, 4 p.m., paragraph number 2.88a Local government
has failed utterly to protect hospital against the strike pickets and
openly states that it favors so-called pro-labor union policy. All
patients (Chinese) have been removed and only American
members of the staff remain observer [sic]. Pickets still surround
hospital and prevent food supplies being brought in even by
Americans. Water supply still cut off also.

If these conditions continue much longer Captain Constien89 and
I agree Navy should undertake to revictual American staff. Should
this become necessary, force would not be used except as last
resort and only to repel attack by the pickets. It is not anticipated
that either local government or the pickets would permit matters
to go so far but we should be prepared for any eventuality.
Alternative plan would be to abandon hospital property, but this
would very probably lead to occupation of the premises by the
Chinese and similar attacks on other American missionary
institutions.
I am firmly of the opinion that the time has come for us to warn
local government that it cannot continue this cowardly policy of
hiding behind the strike pickets while deliberately depriving
American citizens of their elemental rights not to menace those
under the treaties. Am awaiting Legation’s instructions.
Canton Christian college expects strike of employees shortly.”
2. I have replied as follows:
“(1) I approve procedure proposed by you to revictual
American staff of hospital. I assume that it is not to be
used until other means of carrying out this program are
exhausted and fire action only employed to repel attack.
I await reply to my March 1, 4 p.m.,90 before
instructing regarding the suggestion you made in
penultimate paragraph of your March 12, 5 p.m.
(2) I leave to your judgment the expediency of
requesting commander in chief to despatch further
naval forces to Canton.
(3) I have informed commander in chief of my approval
of your proposal and requested him to afford you
whatever assistance you may request.”

MACMURRAY
88a For telegram of March 11, see infra.
89 Edward T. Constien, U. S. N., commander of the South China Patrol.
90 Not found in Department files.

393.1162/2: Telegram
[Document 563]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 14, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received March 14—4: 54 a.m.]
128. Supplementing my telegram number 126, March 13, 5 p.m.
1. Following received from Canto:
“March 11, 4 p.m. Letter received from Hainan reports American
missionary, Thomas, accompanied by wife and several small
children, was attacked by bandits on March 3rd while en route
Hoihow from Kachek. All escaped without injury by hiding in
rice fields. Chinese authorities showed justifiable annoyance that
missionaries persist in residing in interior Hainan under present
conditions.
Canton hospital strike situation still acute but there are some
prospects of a satisfactory settlement. Strikers’ pickets continue to
prevent food supplies entering hospital. American business
manager, Auger, was arrested by pickets but was released within
two hours.
Canton Christian College also in receipt of unreasonable labor
demands.”
2. Regarding first paragraph, I strongly recommend that the Department
take up with the interested missionary organizations the advisability of
withdrawing their missionaries from the interior of Hainan in view of the
impossibility of affording them protection during the present period of
lawlessness.
MACMURRAY

393.1162/1: Telegram
[Document 564]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 15, 1926—2 p.m.
64. Your telegram number 126, March 13, 5 p.m. Department approves the
instructions to Canton as given in your paragraphs 2, 3, and 4.91 In the
judgment of the Department, military force should be employed only as a
last resort and only if considered to be absolutely necessary.
KELLOGG
91 Apparently refers to last three paragraphs.

393.1162/7: Telegram
[Document 565]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 24, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received March 24—11 a.m.]
148. My 142, March 22, 11 a.m.92 Following from American consul general
at Canton.
“March 23, 1 p.m. Referring to my telegram of March 20, 1
p.m.92 Wuchow situation continues very threatening. Movement
evidently developing amongst Chinese to demand possession of
hospital. Serious anti-Christian, antiforeign rioting at Kweilin,
Kwangsi Province, on March 12th and 13th. American [Baptist?]
mission invaded and Chinese Christian beaten. At first troops
gave protection but later commander lost courage and apologized
to the radical leaders for protecting mission. I anticipate serious
attempts to seize various mission properties in the near future
unless we are prepared to call local authorities to account or
Canton regime changes policy.
Situation in Canton growing tense. Respecting action of the
Whampoa Cadets Saturday morning when the strike headquarters
and Soviet Russian residences were surrounded by soldiers, I
have just been informed reliably that General Chiang93 of Cadets
has become suspicious of crew of the cruiser Wingfung [and] also
of the attitude of certain strike leaders and Soviet Russians. With
customary promptness his troops took control of cruiser and at the
same time surrounded labor headquarters and all Soviet
residences while searches were made for arms. A number of
arrests were made including several Russians and some of
General Chiang’s own followers at Whampoa. Great secrecy is
being maintained by the officials but I am reliably informed

Chiang will have no more Russian advisers, also that Cantonese
General Li Chai-sum [Li chi-shen?] is lukewarm to Chiang and
Wang Ching-wei, chairman of the Canton regime, disapproves of
Chiang’s action. Moderates in the Government appear to support
Chiang and seem to expect more conservative policy unless the
Russians succeed in uniting Cantonese radicals and ousting
Chiang and his Cadets. No immediate fighting is expected.”
Following inquiry has been received from the consul general at Canton,
dated March 16, 11 a.m.:
[Paraphrase.] “Department’s 202, August 15, to Legation.94 There
is an inclination on the part of Captain Constien to interpret this
telegram as meaning the Navy is only to be used to protect
American life and not property. Is this justified?”
I have replied to Jenkins on March 22, 5 p.m. as follows:
“Referring to your March 16, 11 a.m. Considering the last
paragraph and the next to the last sentence of Department’s
telegram 202 of August 5 [15], 1925, 1 p.m., to the Legation, it is
our policy, stated in general terms, to distinguish between
protecting American life and property, only employing
destructiveness, especially fire action, for the former purpose.
However, in view of the fact that, although these two situations
are theoretically different, it is difficult in practice to make a clear
differentiation between them, I consider that the interpretation of
this policy must be made in the light of the particular
circumstances and the policy applied according to the necessities
in each instance. For example, the Department gave its approval
to the procedure which you deemed expedient in the recent case
concerning the proposal to revictual the American staff of the
Canton hospital.” [End paraphrase.]
MACMURRAY
92 Not printed.

22 Not printed.
23 Chiang Kai-shek.
24 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. ;,_.p. 760.

893.00/7234: Telegram
[Document 566]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 28, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received 12:33 p.m.]
156. My 154, March 27, 2 p.m.96 Following from American consul general
at Canton:
“March 27, 1 p.m. Referring to my telegram of March 26, 3
p.m.96 American missionaries have decided to evacuate Wuchow
because of the strike against the hospital and antimissionary
demonstrations. I have asked U. S. S. Pampanga, which reached
Wuchow last night, to assist missionaries to leave, then seal
mission buildings and inform local authorities they will be held
responsible.
“Soldiers are again threatening to occupy American mission
property Hoihow, Island of Hainan, in spite of protests. No further
news from Kweilin mission in Kwangsi Province. If general
conditions do not improve and Canton Government continues
present negative attitude, I may find it necessary to urge all
missionaries to evacuate island stations.
“Actual negotiations with Hongkong for the settlement of the
strike and boycott expected to begin in the near future.”
MACMURRAY
96 Not printed.
96 Not printed.

393.1162/6
[Document 567]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, March 30, 1926.
No. 192
SIR: The Department has received your telegram No. 128 of March 14, 1926,
10 a.m., in regard to the safety of American missionaries in Hainan. The
contents of this telegram were communicated on March 18, 1926, to the
Executive Secretary of the Board of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian
Church in the United States of America, 156 Fifth Avenue, New York City,
and the Board was urged to dissuade the members of the mission from
reoccupying the interior stations on that island. There is enclosed for your
information a copy of a reply dated March 20, 1926, which has been
received from the Board on this subject.96
I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW
96 Not printed.

393.1162/7: Telegram
[Document 568]
The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Canton (Jenkins)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 3, 1926—2 p.m.
Your telegram to the Legation, March 23, 1 p.m. The Associated Press has
reported from Hongkong that the Kweilin rioting was a Communist
movement against American missionaries, and it informally asks if this and
other incidents, such as the picketing of the hospital at Canton, are a part
merely of a general antiforeign feeling or are evidences that there is a
special hostility against Americans. Has there been at Kweilin no
molestation of missionaries of other nationality than American?
KELLOGG

393.1163/39: Telegram
[Document 569]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
CANTON, April 7, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received April 7—9:58 a.m.]
Department’s telegram April 3, 2 p.m. The anti-Christian movement is
apparently a general one. Americans are affected primarily, probably for the
reason that American missions are the most numerous. Since the original
outbreak, in June, no British missions have been attacked. The Italian
Catholic mission was occupied by troops recently.
JENKINS

893.00/7403
[Document 570]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)97
CANTON, April 14, 1926.
No. 422
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my despatch No. 414 of April 7, 1926,98 and
to report that the radical elements in the Government now seem to be
gaining strength so rapidly that it is becoming a question whether they may
not expel the moderates before the latter finally muster sufficient energy
and courage to put the radicals out.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
THREATS TO SEIZE AMERICAN MISSION PROPERTIES
In this Consulate General’s Despatch No. 419 of April 13, 1926,99 reference
was made to the fact that Chinese agitators had begun to advocate the
seizure of the American Southern Baptist Hospital at Wuchow. This
movement now appears to be spreading for similar propaganda has been
started in Canton with respect to the Canton Hospital. According to the
native press the Hongkong strike committee is urging that the Canton
hospital property be “borrowed” by the strike committee as a hospital for its
members. It will be recalled that the Canton hospital, like the institution in
Wuchow, was forced to close its doors some weeks ago because of the
failure of the local authorities to protect it from the unreasonable demands
of so-called labor organizations.
In addition to the two hospitals trouble has been stirred up in the Canton
Christian College between the labor organization at that institution and the

student body. Every effort is being made to smooth out these differences but
the indications are that the local authorities are siding with the labor
element as against the students and that if a settlement is not reached in the
near future the college may be forced to close its doors.
As soon as this is accomplished a movement will undoubtedly be started
urging the Chinese authorities to take over this splendid institution which
owes its existence entirely to American missionary efforts.
Similar labor difficulties are being fomented at the John Kerr Hospital for
the Insane, another American institution which has done a great work in
Canton. A labor union has been formed amongst the employees in this
hospital and it is not unlikely that exorbitant demands will soon be
forthcoming which may necessitate the closing of the hospital, in spite of
the fact that it is now housing 700 Chinese patients.
As was pointed out in this Consulate General’s Despatch No. 419 it is
becoming increasingly evident that the Communists and radical members of
the Kuomintang party in Canton are following a definite plan to force the
American Missionary institutions in South China to close their doors in
order that an excuse may exist for the Chinese authorities to seize them.
Millions of dollars have been invested by American missionary
organizations in this part of China and some splendid hospitals and
educational institutions have been built up through the course of 75 years. If
the present campaign is allowed to continue and no pressure is brought to
bear upon the local authorities to protect these institutions I feel convinced
they will be ruined and ultimately seized by the authorities who are now
entirely under the control of the radical elements bent upon destroying the
work of the Christians in this part of the world.
 
As has been pointed out repeatedly in the past it will not be sufficient to
protest to the local authorities against the seizure of these institutions for
protests will have no effect whatever. If the United States Government is to
intervene effectively sharp warnings will have to be addressed to the
Canton regime and we should be prepared to follow these warnings with
force if need be. If we are not prepared to take these drastic steps then I fear

we must expect to see the results of nearly a century of missionary effort
swept away in the course of another 6 or 12 months.
In order that the Legation may realize that the writer of this despatch is not
alone in viewing the present situation in Canton with alarm, a copy of a
letter dated April 12 from Dr. J. Oscar Thomson, President of the American
Association of South China is enclosed,1 in which he points to the danger of
American missionary institutions being seized, and suggests that the
American Association appeal to the United States Government for
protection. While I deemed it advisable to caution Dr. Thomson against
undertaking to send any communication directly to the local authorities and
also advised against resorting to publicity locally, I told him frankly that the
Consulate General would welcome any expressions of opinion which the
American Association may see fit to address directly or through this office
to the Department of State.
With respect to the dangers to which American missionary institutions may
be exposed it should be explained that the entire situation would be greatly
improved from the American point of view if and when the moderate
elements in the Kuomintang party should gain complete control.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS
97 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general as an enclosure
to his despatch No. 498, Apr. 14; received May 19.
98 Not printed.
99 Not printed.
1 Not printed.

893.00/7407: Telegram
[Document 571]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, May 20, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received May 20—11:37 a.m.]
219. 1. I call the Department’s attention to the following despatches from
Consul General Jenkins at Canton: No. 380, February 6; No. 413, April 1;2
and No. 422, April 14. From these and other relevant reports it is clear that
Jenkins seriously fears that the continuance of a passive policy or one of
“drift” concerning the increasing infringements upon American rights and
interests in territory which is controlled by the Canton regime will be very
dangerous. Jenkins has repeatedly recommended that we should call the
Canton authorities to account and demand that they stop the illegal acts
practiced against foreign persons and properties. He believes this demand
might be made jointly with the other interested powers. I telegraphed
Jenkins for a final statement of his views, in the light of developments to
date. In his reply, which has just been received, he states that there is no
improvement in the situation and that he has not changed his view
expressed in his despatch No. 380 of February 6. …
2. The American Association of South China has adopted a memorial,
which is being forwarded by mail, setting forth temperately the
consciousness of danger confronting American interests. From this
memorial I quote the following.3
“We are living in a section of China which is largely controlled by
a group that refuses to believe in the good intentions of the
American Government, which seems to decline to cooperate in
policies looking toward future good will, and which has allowed
American interests to be illegally destroyed without affording
protection.

Americans in South China are now facing a crisis. We have to
make decisions which involve not only our personal interests and
those of the firm or mission we represent but involve important
interests of the American people as well. Therefore the executive
committee of the American Association on behalf of the
Americans living in South China asks the Department of State of
the United States Government to give us some practical
indications as to how to proceed in the face of these destructive
forces.”
3. A dilemma of the greatest difficulty is presented by the problems
indicated above. One must agree, on the one hand, with Jenkins that if we
allow the Cantonese to disregard with impunity foreign rights to life and
property, it will encourage them in a line of action which is sure to become
more and more outrageous and irresponsible, [possibly or certainly?]
leading to tragic incidents. …
4. On the other hand, the people of South China are in a temper to seek
occasions for offense, being still strongly under the influence of the
hysterical mood of self-assertion, which I described in my telegram No. 293
of July 28, 1925.4 It is therefore difficult to judge whether the Cantonese
would be brought to their senses by a more active insistence upon our rights
backed by the presence of a naval force and an evident readiness to use that
force in any clean-cut case in which our people and their rights were
flagrantly menaced or whether popular feeling would be so inflamed by
such action that the safety of Americans beyond the reach of our protection
would be jeopardized.
 
5. If a passive policy is followed it is certain that conditions will go from
bad to worse, perhaps to the very worst. If we adopt a policy of positive
action to protect our rights, using force if necessary in cases where the
implication is clear and it is feasible to take naval action, we may improve
the situation or we may hasten catastrophe. I frankly feel unable to make
any estimate of these possibilities better than a guess as to the gambling
chances in following one or the other policies. For this reason I do not feel

able to offer any recommendation as to a choice between the two policies
mentioned above without a more satisfactory report on the situation than I
feel can be obtained in the absence of more personal contact than is
afforded by official correspondence. In dealing with the local situation
Jenkins has shown exceptional ability and judgment, but considering the
grave and imminent danger involved and the very different backgrounds
and points of view in North and South China, I feel the necessity in making
up my own mind as to the course to follow, to supplement the written
reports from Jenkins by consultation with him through some one who has
the Legation’s point of view. I therefore urge that the Department authorize
me to send Mayer5 to Canton and Hongkong to spend about two weeks
between those two cities, consulting with Jenkins and Tredwell.6 I think that
the mere fact of his visit would give heart to American interests, which are
becoming very despondent, and also would have a tendency to lead the
Canton authorities to take an attitude of somewhat less unfriendly
indifference. The reason, however, why I especially want authority to send
Mayer is that consultations, particularly with Jenkins, would give me a
basis for making more confident and intelligent recommendations to the
Department as to the policy to be pursued regarding the alarming
developments which are now in progress in South China. If the Department
authorizes this trip Mayer would probably leave here about June 1 and be
absent a month.
MACMURRAY
2 Despatch No. 413 not printed.
3 Quotation not paraphrased.
4 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 799.
5 Ferdinand L. Mayer, counselor of Legation.
6 Roger Culver Tredwell, consul general at Hongkong.

893.00/7407: Telegram
[Document 572]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, May 21, 1926—1 p.m.
104. Your 219, May 20, 3 p.m. Approve your sending Mayer to Hongkong
and Canton at once. I appreciate difficulty of your recommending action
this Government should take to meet situation facing American interests in
South China. This Government desires of course to extend protection for
American lives. If problem is one concerning operation of hospitals or
schools under foreign control question should be considered from broader
aspect of the possible results of the use of force in connection therewith.
See in this connection Department’s telegram No. 67 of March 19, 6 p.m.7
KELLOGG
7 Ante, p. 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438].

893.00/7411: Telegram
[Document 573]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 23, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received May 23—10: 30 a.m.]
226. 1. Department’s 104, May 21, 1 p.m., greatly appreciated, I shall
inform the press that Mayer is proceeding to Canton under instructions from
the Secretary of State of the United States to consult with the American
consulates in South China in regard to the situation in that region where a
number of recent outrages against Americans and their interests have
caused increasing concern to the American Government.
2. [Paraphrase.] I also think Mayer should be instructed, but not for
publication, that, although his mission is chiefly for the purpose of personal
contact between the Legation and the consuls general at Canton and
Hongkong, he should use any opportunity that seems favorable to tell the
Canton officials that we cannot understand their attitude regarding
foreigners in general and Americans in particular, which we believe to be
inexcusable from the point of view of justice and international friendship.
Should there be an appropriate opportunity I think that Mayer could, with
advantage, try to impress upon the Canton officials the unfortunate effect
upon public opinion in the United States which their treatment of American
citizens is having, pointing out that American sentiment has hitherto been
very favorable to the Chinese and particularly to the Cantonese who
comprise the greater part of the Chinese residents in America.
3. To avoid possible misinterpretations, Mayer will go to Canton without
stopping at Hongkong on the way, but will stop there for several days on his
way back, giving an opportunity for him to have informal conversations
with Hongkong officials. I suggest that Tredwell be given instructions to
cooperate in every way with Mayer and to go to Canton to confer with
Mayer and Jenkins, if and when Mayer so requests him. It would be well to
have Chamberlain8 also present at any such conference and I request that he

be authorized to go to Canton for a brief visit, unless the exigencies of the
situation at Swatow prevent it. [End paraphrase.]
4. In order that Mayer’s mission may be expedited and conducted in the
most economical manner, it may prove desirable for him to use naval
transportation between Tientsin and Shanghai, or vice versa. I respectfully
suggest that the Navy Department be requested to authorize the commander
in chief of the United States Asiatic Fleet to cooperate with the Legation in
every way practicable. I am informing the commander in chief of Mayer’s
[apparent omission] as well as Canton, Shanghai and Hongkong.
MACMURRAY
8 Culver Bryant Chamberlain, vice consul at Swatow.

893.00/7411: Telegram
[Document 574]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 26, 1926—5 p.m.
107. Your telegram No. 226, May 23, 2 p.m. Instructions suggested in
second paragraph of your telegram are approved.
The Department considers it preferable to have Mayer confer with Tredwell
only at Hongkong. However, in instructions sent to Tredwell10 he is
authorized to go to Canton if Mayer so requests. If you consider it
necessary you may authorize Chamberlain to go to Canton for conference
with Mayer.
The Department prefers to have Mayer use commercial transportation. If
commercial transportation is available, no request will be made of the
Navy.11
KELLOGG
10 Not printed.
11 Mayer left Peking May 31, and his arrival at Canton was reported June
12.

393.1164/33
[Document 575]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 8, 1926.
[Received July 14.]
No. 614
SIR: Referring to my despatch No. 498, of March 10, 1926,10 and previous
correspondence regarding the widespread character of the anti-Christian
movement in China, I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of a note
which I addressed to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on April 7, 1926,
protesting against the treatment which had been accorded to missionaries
and Christian converts in the district of Waichow in Kwangtung. There is
likewise transmitted herewith a copy of a further note dated May 22, 1926,
protesting against the continuance of the anti-Christian activity in that
region and also protesting against the anti-Christian agitation on the Island
of Hainan. As regards conditions in Hainan, I have the honor to refer to the
Department’s instruction No. 192, of March 30, 1926 (File No. 393.1162/6),
transmitting a copy of a letter from the Executive Secretary of the Board of
Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian Church in America, stating that from
the latest news received by the Board all was well in Hainan. However, on
May 10th the American Consul-General at Canton reported that he had
received a telegram from the American Presbyterian Mission at Hainan that
the Americans had all left Kachek because of the unfriendly attitude of the
Chinese people and also that the mission at Nodoa was occupied by
soldiers. This information was transmitted to the Department in my
telegram No. 205 of May 11th, 11 a.m.11a On May 18th the Consul-General
at Canton again telegraphed that the mission at Kachek had been entered
and looted by an anti-Christian mob and considerable damage had been
done to the property. This information was transmitted to the Department in
my telegram No. 220, of May 20th, 4 p.m.11a The latest news received from
Canton in regard to Hainan is contained in a telegram from the American

Consul-General, dated May 31st, 5 p.m.,12 in which he states that troops
have finally evacuated the mission at Nodoa and that Americans are
prepared to leave Nodoa on short notice, if necessary. However, he believes
that they can safely continue to remain for the present at Hoihow, which is
the treaty port on the coast of the island.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[Enclosure 1]
The American Minister (MacMurray) to the Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs (Hoo)
PEKING, April 7, 1926.
No. 203
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to refer to my despatch of February 10, 1926,
regarding the increase both of lawlessness and anti-Christian propaganda in
China, and to inform Your Excellency that I have received a report from the
American Consul-General at Canton describing the outrageous and
insulting treatment which is being accorded to missionaries and Christian
converts in the District of Waichow, Kwangtung, by Chinese troops known
as the “Whampoa Cadets”. It appears that on Christmas day, 1925, a large
anti-Christian parade and demonstration was held at Waichow by students
and soldiers. From that date up to the present, the missionaries of the
Seventh Day Adventist Mission at Waichow, together with their students
and native converts, have been subjected to all manner of persecution by the
soldiers. The walls, gates and buildings of the mission have been written
over with obscene pictures and characters; students of the mission schools
have been threatened and fired at with blank cartridges; soldiers have been
stationed at the mission gates to prevent any one going into the mission, and
workmen employed by the mission have been threatened and beaten. The
American missionaries and their families have been constantly subjected to
insult and four of their chapels and schools have been robbed and the
furniture broken up by soldiers living in them.

I have the honor to request that Your Excellency will issue instructions to
the authorities concerned to cease at once this persecution which is, as Your
Excellency is aware, a violation of international law and contrary to the
treaties between China and the United States.
I avail myself [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[Enclosure 2]
The American Legation to the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs
No. 230
The American Legation presents its compliments to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, and has the honor to refer to the note of April 7, 1926, from the
Legation, regarding the outrageous and insulting treatment which is being
accorded to American missionaries and Chinese Christian converts in the
district of Waichow, Kwangtung, including the occupation of various of
their chapels and schools by soldiers. The American Legation now desires
to inform the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that it has received a telegram
from the American Consul-General at Canton stating that soldiers continue
to occupy these mission chapels. The same telegram reports that the
American members of the American Presbyterian Mission at Kachek, Island
of Hainan, have left that place because of the unfriendly attitude of the
Chinese people; and also that the compound of the American Mission at
Nodoa, Island of Hainan, is still occupied by soldiers, in spite of repeated
protests from the American Consul-General at Canton. A later telegram
reports that the mission at Kachek was entered and looted by an anti-
Christian mob and that considerable damage was done to the property.
The American Legation must again protest in the strongest possible manner
against this continued ill-treatment of American missionaries and their
property.
PEKING, May 22, 1926.

10 Not printed.

11a Not printed.
1a Not printed.
12 Not found in Department files.

893.00/7504: Telegram
[Document 576]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, July 7, 1926—8 a.m.
[Received 9:45 a.m.]
275. My telegram No. 219, sent May 20, 3 p.m. The report which Mayer
has made upon his experiences and observations indicates apparently that
the problem of protecting American interests in South China must be
considered together with a broader problem of American relations with the
people of China as a whole, in view of the fact that there is no
administrative entity for representing them internationally. Hitherto we have
found it to be a convenient diplomatic fiction, so long as the somewhat
shadowy Central Government at Peking possessed any degree of authority
and had a corresponding sense of responsibility, to deal with that
administration. Mayer’s comments greatly tend to strengthen my doubt as
to whether the regime at Peking has not dwindled throughout the country so
far into insignificance and contempt as to make our insistence upon having
dealings with it a positive detriment to American interests and a means of
enlarging the Chinese people’s antagonism in regard to us. I believe that in
the light of recent events we must consider some alteration in the character
of our relations both with the so-called Chinese Government and the
component regional units. The latter in fact are autonomous and alone have
any political vitality. As the issues which are involved are so significant and
far reaching, I beg permission to put off my further report or comment,
pending an opportunity for reflection.
MACMURRAY

393.1162/21: Telegram
[Document 577]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 19, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received July 19—6:47 a.m.]
290. My 186, April 20, 11 a.m.13 Following from American consul general
at Canton:
“July 18, noon. Reliable information just received that Chinese
have taken over American Baptist hospital at Wuchow which is
now full of sick and wounded soldiers. Further details later.”
For the Minister:
MAYER
13 Not printed.

393.1162/22: Telegram
[Document 578]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 24, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received July 24—9 a.m.]
299. My 290, July 19, 1 p.m. Following from American consul general at
Canton:
“July 22, noon. Deed to Wuchow hospital contains clause giving
Chinese authorities the right in the event of necessity to use
property temporarily for military purposes; and, under these
circumstances, I have not felt free to demand immediate
evacuation of the hospital but suggested to Eugene Chen that he
advise the Wuchow authorities to ask American staff to return and
to reopen hospital immediately on the old basis. Chen consented
to do this and will give me a reply as soon as an answer can be
obtained from Wuchow. Baptist mission also approves of the plan
and will arrange to reopen hospital if Chinese vacate and promise
full protection and cooperation in the future.
“If Wuchow authorities fail to accept the proposal outlined above
and/or do not agree to evacuate in a reasonable time, I
recommend that the consulate general and the United States naval
authorities take such action as may be necessary to clear hospital
of Chinese. Clause in the deed, though rather obscure, cannot
possibly be construed to give Chinese the right of permanent
occupation, and, as American Baptist mission has expended
$300,000 on this property, I believe failure on our part to prevent
its seizure would be tantamount to inviting Chinese to take over
other valuable missionary enterprises in this area.”
MACMURRAY

393.1162/22: Telegram
[Document 579]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, July 26, 1926—7 p.m.
149. Your 299, July 24, 4 p.m. Instruct Consul General at Canton to limit
efforts to recover hospital property at Wuchow to negotiation with
authorities and notification that this Government reserves right to claim for
reimbursement to mission of value of property—damaged, destroyed or
seized.
Department desires Jenkins make full report enclosing copy of deed.14
KELLOGG
14 The report of the consul general at Canton was transmitted to the
Department by the Minister in despatch No. 618, Aug. 2 (file No.
393.1162/26).

393.1162/29: Telegram
[Document 580]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 1, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received October 1—11: 52 a.m.]
441. Legation’s 363, September 1, 4 p.m.15 Following from American
consul general at Canton:
“September 28, 1 p.m. On September 19th Chinese soldiers
vacated Baptist mission hospital at Wuchow, and Americans are
now in complete possession of the institution, which, it is hoped,
will soon reopen. Threatened labor troubles with former
employees have apparently been settled with the assistance of the
local authorities.”
MAYER
15 Not printed.

Policy of the United States with respect
to protection of American interests
during Chinese boycotts and strikes at
Canton and Tientsin
[581] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 10, 1926—6 p.m. [Received February 10—1:09 p.m.]
893.5045/300: Telegram
[582] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, February 11, 1926—3 p.m.
893.5045/300: Telegram
[583] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 20, 1926. [Received March 30.]
893.5045/322
[584] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 1, 1926—5 p.m. [Received April 1—8:55 a.m.]
893.5045/324: Telegram

[585] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 15, 1926—noon. [Received April 15—7 a.m.]
893.5045/328: Telegram
[586] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peeling, April 21, 1926—3 p.m. [Received April 22—7:27 a.m.]
893.5045/329: Telegram
[587] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 7, 1926—3 p.m. [Received June 7—7:25 a.m.]
893.00/7441: Telegram
[588] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 24, 1926—5 p.m. [Received July 24—9:15 a.m.]
893.5045/365: Telegram
[589] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 26, 1926—10 a.m. [Received July 26—7:52 a.m.]
893.5045/366: Telegram
[590] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, September 2, 1926.
893.5045/372

[591] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Washington, September 2, 1926—5 p.m.
893.5045/372: Telegram
[592] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 4, 1926—4 p.m. [Received September 5—11:40 a.m.]
893.5045/373: Telegram
[593] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, September 7, 1926—7 p.m.
893.5045/378: Telegram
[594] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
Washington, September 9, 1926.
893.5045/372
[595] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 14, 1926—4 p.m. [Received September 14—9:27 a.m.]
893.5045/376: Telegram
[596] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 14, 1926—6 p.m. [Received September 14—4:04 p.m.]
893.5045/377: Telegram

[597] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 15, 1926—2 p.m. [Received September 15—8:13 a.m.]
893.5045/379: Telegram
[598] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 15, 1926—6 p.m. [Received September 15—10:20 a.m.]
893.5045/380: Telegram
[599] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, September 17, 1926—1 p.m.
893.5045/377: Telegram
[600] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 20, 1926—5 p.m. [Received September 20—8:55 a.m.]
893.5045/384: Telegram
[601] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 24, 1926—3 p.m. [Received September 24—10:05 a.m.]
893.5045/385: Telegram
[602] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 12, 1926—4 p.m. [Received October 12—9:35 a.m.]
893.5045/391: Telegram

[603] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 17, 1926—3 p.m. [Received October 17—5:57 a.m.]
893.5045/392: Telegram

893.5045/300: Telegram
[Document 581]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, February 10, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received February 10—1:09 p.m.]
69. 1. Inspector General of Customs today discussed with me the following
very confidential telegram from Commissioner General of Customs at
Canton:
“Boycott pickets have commenced seizing import cargo between
ship and shore to an extent that has to be met as a principle. Such
cargo is detained and fined and confiscated at will by them.
Official representations to Government extending over some
weeks have met evasive or procrastinating replies. Yesterday five
loaded cargo boats escorted by Chinese tidewaiter proceeding
from Chinese steamer from Shanghai were carried off by pickets.
I proceeded with party to spot to which taken, first sending word
to Superintendent that I should not leave cargo until it was
brought back to Customs and if not so brought back should stop
loading and discharge of all steamers in harbor until Government
moved one way or the other. This was supported by
Superintendent and, finally, but not until after 10 hours on the
spot, I was able to return to the Customs with the five cargo boats.
Pickets intend take back cargo when examination by Customs
completed. I shall refuse release to them until all cargo now held
by them and not yet presented for examination by Customs is
surrendered for examination. This includes American, Japanese,
and German seized ex16 different ships. This may succeed but
may also bring deadlock between Government and pickets.
Action will also undoubtedly involve possibility of Government
assuming Customs Fund. I am of opinion action absolutely
necessary and timely. There is no flaw in our case and I expect
full support of foreigners and claim merchants.”

Inspector General pointed out that if Canton local agent supports the
strikers in this lawless interference with the landing of cargoes it will raise a
direct issue as to the right to trade with China under the treaties and in that
event will probably involve the seizure by the local authorities of the
customs from the Maritime Customs Administration at Canton and
doubtless before long at other ports.
2. I fully concurred in this view and assured him of my readiness, in case it
should become necessary, to instruct American consul general at Canton to
join with interested colleagues in protest to the local authorities. I stated my
opinion that American naval forces would be warranted in furnishing
protection in the landing of cargo from American vessels to the
customhouse. I reserved, however, subject to your instructions, any opinion
as to action to be taken to prevent seizure of the customs by the local
authorities.
3. Repeated to Canton and to commander in chief for information only.
MACMURRAY
16 i. e., free of charges on cargo until taken from the ships.

893.5045/300: Telegram
[Document 582]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 11, 1926—3 p.m.
40. Your number 69 of February 10, 6 p.m., paragraph 2. Attitude you
adopted in your conversation with Inspector General of Customs is
approved. In this connection see telegram 321 from Department November
23, 1925, 9 p.m.,17 regarding action to prevent the customs being seized by
local authorities.
KELLOGG
17 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 748.

893.5045/322
[Document 583]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, February 20, 1926.
[Received March 30.]
No. 471
SIR: As an unhappy illustration of the difficulties that will doubtless in the
future confront American and other manufacturers at ports open to trade, I
have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed copies of four despatches
from the American Consul-General at Tientsin to the American Minister18
describing a strike of Chinese workmen at certain rug factories at Tientsin
operated by American citizens. Copies of one of the despatches in this
series, that of February 4, 1926,18 have already been sent to the Department
without accompanying comment. There is likewise enclosed herewith a
copy of my despatch of February 4th to Mr. Gauss on this subject.
During the Fengtien régime in Tientsin, under Military Governor Li Ching-
lin, labor unions were suppressed, on the ground that their activities were
subversive of order. At the end of December, last, Li Ching-lin was expelled
by the Kuominchun forces and the labor unions hoped for recognition and
liberty to act under the latter’s more liberal régime. The claim of the Wu
P’ei-fu19 –Chang Tsolin20 alliance is that it is “anti-red”, while the party
headed by Feng Yii-hsiang21 adopts as its slogan liberty and equality among
the citizens of the Republic.
An American concern, H. J. Tavshanjian, Incorporated, operates a carpet
factory in the ex-German Concession at Tientsin with some seven hundred
Chinese workmen. On January 19th these workmen went on strike, their
main object being, apparently, to reestablish their labor union. There had
been no antecedent labor troubles of any importance. Immediately they
went on strike the workmen put on white badges indicating that they were

members of the carpet workers’ union and took possession of the factory
premises. Several Chinese appeared wearing red badges, who seemed to
direct the actions of the workmen.
The Chinese police at once attempted to negotiate with the strikers and thus
to end the trouble without resort to violence. They succeeded in getting the
six or seven hundred strikers to the police compound, where they were
given the alternatives of returning to work, or of being paid off and
dismissed. The Manager of the factory made an offer of three days’ bonus at
the Chinese New Year (February 13th) if the men returned to work and
performed their duties satisfactorily until then. This offer was accepted and
work was resumed on January 22nd.
On January 25th there was again trouble in the factory. This time it was a
dispute between two factions of the workmen themselves, but the result was
that the American Manager was deprived of his control over the factory, and
he became convinced that the only practicable course open to him was to
close the institution. Civil and military police, and also two hundred
soldiers, arrived and some twenty strikers were arrested, which restored
quiet. In spite of the Manager’s desire to close the factory the police were
most averse to his taking this step and about half of the force went back to
work next day.
At this time similar strikes occurred in other American-owned rug factories
in Tientsin. In the handling of these later strikes the Provincial authorities
were much milder in their methods and resorted almost entirely to
negotiations with the workmen. Finally, by giving the men a bonus, the
owners, Messrs. Elbrook, Incorporated, were able to close their factories.
The changed attitude of the authorities was suspected by Mr. Gauss to be
due to pressure brought to bear by Communist sympathizers. Inflammatory
literature and the presence of many agitators indicated the source of the
disturbances in an unmistakable manner, and Mr. Gauss was of the opinion
that after the Chinese New Year the strikes would spread to the cotton mills.
The Communist Party finds in China only very limited scope for its special
type of propaganda, since the class of industrial laborers and transportation
workers is only a minute fraction of the total population. Nevertheless, this

class can be most vociferous and its members are found mostly at the open
ports, where their activities attract disproportionate attention.
Mr. Gauss throughout the recent troubles at Tientsin followed the wise
policy of insisting that the Chinese authorities themselves decide upon and
execute measures for handling the situation. He not only refused to invoke
the use of American military and naval force, but he even declined to
request the authorities to eject the workmen from the factories. I
commended him for adopting this policy and to it I attribute the avoidance
of a possible repetition of incidents similar to those of May, last, in
Shanghai.22 It must be admitted that Mr. Gauss did not succeed in keeping
the American-owned factories in operation, but I cannot see that it would
have been possible to do so. I fear that American industrialists and
merchants in China must face the probability, however discouraging it may
be, that in addition to wars, extortionate taxation, and brigandage, their
various enterprises will for some time to come be hampered by fomented
ill-will and labor agitations. This is the end to which the Third International
and its paid emissaries are directing their sinister activities, and although
the Chinese, with their common sense, will ultimately see that they are
being made the dupes of the Communists and will awake to the advantages
of a co-operative, rather than an obstructive, attitude toward the world-tide
of economic progress, the moment of their awakening may be postponed
for an indefinite period. Unfortunately there are no organized efforts to
show the Chinese where their economic advantage lies in these matters, as
there are energetic efforts to mislead them.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[Enclosure]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Consul General at Tientsin (Gauss)
PEKING, February 4, 1926.
SIR: I have received your despatch of January 26, 1926, and preceding
correspondence relating to strikes of Chinese laborers in American-owned

rug factories at Tientsin, and I note your statement that you would be glad
to receive from the Legation any general or special instructions that may be
deemed appropriate as outlining either the American policy or the course to
be pursued by the Consulate-General.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I share your misgivings in regard to the probable trend of political affairs in
North China during the coming months. The present Government in Peking,
like the Provisional Government of Chihli, is financially destitute, and there
is only a slight prospect that it will be able to secure the funds necessary for
it to meet the financial settlement day at Chinese New Year, February 13th,
with any show of success. Since there is no large industrial class in Peking
with any semblance of organization there is no reason to fear industrial
disorders of a serious nature, however, in the Capital itself. I allude to these
circumstances as indicating that there is little hope that any politically
stabilizing influence will emanate from Peking, unless assistance comes
from some source unforeseen at the present.
The course of events in Tientsin resembles ominously the course taken by
events at Canton under the late Sun Yat Sen Government While conditions
at Canton are now greatly improved, for a long time, as you are doubtless
aware, the strikers’ organization there had, to all intents and purposes, an
official status. The professed government deferred to it and appeared to
accord recognition to its regulations. There remains, as yet, this
dissimilarity, that the Chihli Government has not yet announced its open
support of the labor unions, so far as I am aware.
In these circumstances I consider that you have decided wisely in insisting
that it is the duty of the Chinese authorities to decide as to the measures that
must be taken for the protection of the property of the American factories,
and in pursuing and urging on American interests a policy of patience,
caution and tolerance.
It is obviously impossible for American officials in connection with labor
disturbances, to make good the deficiencies of the Chinese authorities,
except insofar as urgent official representations may awake the latter to a
realization of their duties. You should, of course, at all times apprise the

authorities of danger threatening American interests, with a view to possible
future demand for compensation for losses, should the circumstances seem
to justify such demand. With the present sinister forces actively at work
fomenting discontent and anti-foreign feeling the after effects to be feared
from the use of force seem to outweigh the advantage that it might be
expected to produce.
In view of the accusations that already have been made regarding the length
of working hours and under-payment in the American-owned rug factories
at Tientsin I should be greatly interested in receiving such information as
you could conveniently secure in regard to these points.
I am [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
18 Not printed.
18 Not printed.
19 Former commander of Chihli troops who had been defeated in the civil
war of 1924.
20 General in control of Manchuria.
21 Former commander of the First Kuominchun or National Armies.
22 See Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 647 ff.

893.5045/324: Telegram
[Document 584]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 1, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received April 1—8:55 a.m.]
159. 1. The American consul [general] at Canton informed me by his
despatch number 398 of March 8, 1926, copy of which I am sending by
next pouch,23 that the Standard Oil Company had renewed its request for
naval convoy from Hongkong to Wuchow, Kwangsi, the company desiring
to send large quantity of petroleum products there where the so-called oil
monopoly is not in force, that the cargo could not be safely moved unless
protected against pirates and possible interference by boycott pickets
through that area under Canton régime, and further that the military
authorities in Wuchow had given the company undertaking in writing to
prevent difficulties with strikers or others (presumably in Kwangsi territory)
if oil were shipped up from Hongkong. He further reported that important
area of Kwangsi Province can only be reached effectively by the West River
and that it seemed highly important that, if possible, means should be taken
to keep this open to American trade, providing danger of complications
with the Cantonese authorities were not too great. He also stated that it was
not contemplated that naval vessels should participate in forcing delivery of
oil, since, if local authorities at Wuchow were incapable of preventing
disorder during unloading, company could return entire shipment to
Hongkong.
2. To his request for telegraphic instructions I have replied as follows:
[Paraphrase]
“March 31, 5 p.m. Although I am of the opinion that in convoying
Standard Oil lighters to Wuchow we would be acting well within
our rights under article 9 of the American treaty with China,
1858,24 I consider it inexpedient to do so at present. I have come

to this conclusion after considering the possibility that the
difficulties of the situation at Canton at this time may be resolved
soon as a result of anti-Soviet action taken there recently, and the
probability, in case of need to resort to actual force during the
convoy against strike pickets, of an undesirable reaction against
our position, particularly in the Canton area and generally in
China, which at present is relatively favorable.”
MACMURRAY
23 Not printed.
24 Malloy, Treaties, 1776–1909, vol. I, p. 214.

893.5045/328: Telegram
[Document 585]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 15, 1926—noon.
[Received April 15—7 a.m.]
176. My 159, April 1, 5 p.m. Following telegram sent to the American
consul general, Canton:
“April 15, noon. My telegram March 31, 5 p.m.
1. Representative of Standard Oil has communicated to me a
telegram from their Hongkong office from which the following is
quoted:
‘Chinese merchants now arranging supply Wuchowfu
with 
miscellaneous 
California 
brands 
en 
route
Whampoa and if successful we fear strike organization
Wuchowfu on that account influenced to prohibit
importation by our lighters. To date Wuchowfu officials
and strikers association would welcome arrival our
goods, and British have demonstrated by recent naval
escorts to A. P. Company lighters that no conflicts with
Kwangtung government would result if lighters
convoyed by foreign gunboats.’
Telegram further requests reconsideration decision not to furnish
naval convoy.
2. In view of new factors presented and particularly of its
appearing that in the case of British convoys strike pickets have
not brought on conflicts, please telegraph me whether in your
judgment the facts warrant a reconsideration [of] the question of
expediency of convoy.”

MiacMurray

893.5045/329: Telegram
[Document 586]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEELING, April 21, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received April 22—7:27 a.m.]
192. My telegram 176, April 15, noon. Following from American consul
general, Canton:
“April 19, 3 p.m. Your telegram April 15, noon; my April 17,
noon.25 As my despatch March 826 explained, possibilities of
trouble with Chinese seem to be so remote that I think an escort
should be furnished, and especially in view of the fact that several
times British convoys experienced no trouble and that oil
shipments have been requested by Wuchow authorities.”
I replied April 22 [sic], 3 p.m., as follows:
“Your April 19, 3 p.m. I approve naval convoy to Wuchow be
provided, in the circumstances, for Standard Oil lighters.”
MACMURRAY
25 Latter not found in Department files.
26 Not printed.

893.00/7441: Telegram
[Document 587]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 7, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received June 7—7:25 a.m.]
241. My 239, June 3, noon.26 Following from American consul general at
Canton:
“June 5, noon. Canton regime has appointed Eugene Chen, T. V.
Soong and Chan Kung-pok27 to negotiate with Hongkong for the
settlement of the strike. Government has ordered also the
abolition of the oil monopoly on June 15th, but it is understood
high stamp tax will be retained.
Office of provincial commissioner of foreign affairs has been
abolished and Ministry of Foreign Affairs will communicate
direct with consuls.”
MACMURRAY
26 Not printed.
27 Replaced at the actual strike conference by Professor Ku Meng-yu.

893.5045/365: Telegram
[Document 588]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 24, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received July 24—9:15 a.m.]
300. My 295, July 22, 5 p.m.29 Following from American consul general at
Canton:
“July 22, 2 p.m. Referring to my telegram of July 20, 11 [1]
p.m.29 At the boycott conference yesterday Chinese demanded
cash indemnity but reserved the right to fix the amount. British
delegates definitely refused this, whereupon Chinese demanded
submission of the entire matter to international commission of
inquiry including Shameen shooting affair.30 British delegates
said this must be referred to London but proposed industrial loan
to Chinese. Chinese took the question of industrial loan under
advisement. Meanwhile further meetings postponed until the
British have received a reply from London. In view of the
military successes in Hunan, Cantonese are evidently playing for
delay.”
MACMURRAY
29 Not printed.
29 Not printed.
30 See Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 749 ff.

893.5045/366: Telegram
[Document 589]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 26, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received July 26—7:52 a.m.]
302. My 300, July 24, 5 p.m. Following from American consul general at
Canton:
“July 24, noon. Referring to my telegram July 22, 2 p.m. Boycott
conference adjourned sine die, and it is generally conceded that
efforts at settlement have failed for the present.
At the meeting yesterday Canton renewed demand for
international inquiry. British again declared that this question
must be decided in London and pointed out that inquiry must
include French who were equally concerned in Shameen
shooting. Cantonese demurred, and it became evident, according
to the British, that the Cantonese no longer desired to continue
negotiations after the British had definitely refused to pay
indemnity and in spite of British offer [of] industrial loan not to
exceed $10,000,000 Hongkong currency for public works,
including development of the port of Whampoa. Full report by
mail follows.”29
MACMURRAY
29 Not printed.

893.5045/372
[Document 590]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, September 2, 1926.
SIR: In compliance with instructions which I today received from His
Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, I have the honour
to inform you that in consequence of the serious piratical outrages which
have been committed in Canton harbour by strike pickets, and which
culminated in the recent unprovoked firing on British and other nationals,
His Majesty’s Government have instructed the British naval forces at
Canton to seize and disable all boats employed by strike pickets.
In view of the recent outrage on and imprisonment of a United States
citizen, I am to enquire whether the United States Government wish to
associate themselves with the action which His Majesty’s Government are
taking.
I have [etc.]
(For the Ambassador)
ADRIAN BAILLIE

893.5045/372: Telegram
[Document 591]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, September 2, 1926—5 p.m.
182. British Embassy today left with Department a note from which the
following is quoted: [Here follows essential part of note, printed supra.]
Department has no information regarding firing on British and other
nationals mentioned in British note nor of the imprisonment of a United
States citizen. In order to make suitable reply to British note Department
desires report on these incidents.
Department is disposed to decline invitation to associate itself with the
action which the British Government is taking and to reply that it prefers to
pursue present policy in accordance with which American naval officers are
under standing instructions to take all action necessary for the protection of
American lives and property. Before replying, however, Department desires
your advice and comment in regard to British inquiry. See in this
connection Department’s 202 August 15, 1 p.m., 1925.31
GREW
31 Ibid , p. 760.

893.5045/373: Telegram
[Document 592]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 4, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received September 5—11:40 a.m.]
374. Your 182, September 2, 5 p.m.
1. I received, August 29th, the following telegram from the American
consul general, Canto:
“August 28, 1 p.m. J. W. Banbury, American citizen, was captured
by strike pickets early this morning but was released 2 hours later
as the result of consular intervention. A Russian, employed by
Banbury, was released at the same time. British subject and the
Russian was [were] driving motorboat with Chinese passengers to
the Hongkong steamer when the pickets opened heavy rifle fire,
forcing boat to stop. British subject escaped under fire but
Banbury, the Russian and Chinese were captured. British gunboat
is now searching for motorboat which strikers took away with the
prisoners and in which British subject owned half interest. See my
personal letter to the Minister of August 20th mentioning
Banbury.31a
Pickets have fired several hundred shots in the harbor during the
last few days. One shot struck United States ship Sacramento
against which the consulate general protested.”
2. While considering the above telegram with a view to possible
recommendations to the Department for action, I received, September 2nd,
a despatch from Jenkins informing me of an attack on two American
citizens, Bratt of the Texas Oil Company and Waples, local architect, by
strike pickets, August 18th, at French bridge from Shameen. In reporting
this incident he stated that the usual reply to his protest had been received

from Canton Foreign Office to the effect that an investigation had been
ordered, but he felt quite certain nothing further would be done in the
matter in the present circumstances. The despatch concluded with the
statement that the incident was indicative of insults to which American
citizens must now submit in Canton, with practically no assurance of
redress.
3. I received telegrams, September 2nd and 3rd, from the consuls general at
Hongkong and Canton, respectively, giving me substantially the same
information contained in Department’s 182, September 2, 5 p.m. Jenkins, in
discussing with the British consul general at Canton latter’s instructions to
endeavor to secure American naval cooperation in checking activities of
pickets, told Brennan that he disapproved of Banbury and other Americans
engaging in the business of carrying Chinese passengers to the Hongkong
steamers, that as Banbury had been released no forcible measures were
necessary on our part, that he therefore opposed cooperation, in this
instance at least, but would refer the matter to the Legation.
[Paraphrase]
4. I disagree with Jenkin’s disapproval of the business in which Banbury
and other Americans engage as affecting the policy which we ought to
adopt as a result of such incidents. I feel that the business is entirely
legitimate. It is a general transportation and ferry service between the shore
and the Hongkong–Canton river boats; it is not limited to Chinese. The only
objection to it is that it meets with the violent antagonism of a lawless,
independent organization of Canton strike pickets, whose blackmailing
operations have been outrageously in opposition to our treaty rights for
more than a year and whose renewed activity at the present time should be
made, in my opinion, to cease without any delay whatever. I have
concluded after most careful consideration that, whenever feasible in
respect of attacks such as described above on American citizens, we should
adopt a firm attitude and inform the regime at Canton that if it cannot
protect American citizens in accord with treaty requirements and general
international obligations, the United States Government will be compelled
with regret to take on its own account measures necessary to that end. I urge
that instructions be given to the commander of the South China Patrol that

any strike picket boat which shall have attacked or shall attack an American
citizen be seized and disabled, and that Jenkins convey these instructions
orally to the Canton authorities.
5. I am strongly in favor of informing the British Government that we have
taken this position, which would involve action on our part, so far as
protecting American citizens might require, similar to but not as drastic as
that of the British, though it would not associate us with British instructions
to British naval forces at Canton and would not be publicly cooperative.
6. I may add with reference to last sentence of second paragraph of my
telegram 326 of August 14,32 that while I do believe that in many instances
it is wise for us to act in accord with the British, and the Japanese as well, in
China, this should in my opinion be mainly cooperation as to understanding
and complete information with regard to the plans and policies of each
other, with a view rather to simultaneous action than to our direct and
public association with them in joint action.
MACMURRAY
31a Not found in Department files.
32 Ante, p. 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539].

893.5045/378: Telegram
[Document 593]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, September 7, 1926—7 p.m.
185. Department agrees with you that the business of carrying on general
transportation and ferry service between the shore and the Hongkong–
Canton river boats is as a general proposition open to Americans as it is to
others; but the Department believes that such business as it might be carried
on when conditions are normal is to be distinguished from the actual
conduct of such business at present when it has apparently developed solely
as an outcome of the conflicts existing between British steamers and local
Chinese. Department believes that the policy which this Government would
pursue regarding such business under normal conditions should not be
permitted to encourage Americans under present abnormal conditions to
involve their Government in questions which it seems would be the care
entirely of the British shipping interests that are involved. Of course a
distinction 
should 
be 
drawn 
between 
general 
maintenance 
of
communications from ship to shore between steamers and Canton, and the
attempts of Americans in their own interest to communicate with ships in
Canton harbor, which are proper and in which all the protection that can be
given to the American citizen should be received by him. The Department
thinks that the commander of the South China Patrol should be guided by
the above distinction in his efforts to extend protection to such Americans.
It is desired by the Department that you inform the commander in chief of
these considerations. The Department is prepared, if in his opinion new
instructions are necessary, to discuss the matter with the Navy Department
with a view to the issuance of new instructions.
KELLOGG

893.5045/372
[Document 594]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, September 9, 1926.
EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of
September 2, 1926, in which you stated that you had received instructions
from His Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to
inform this Government that in consequence of the serious piratical
outrages which had been committed in Canton harbor by strike pickets, and
which had culminated in the recent unprovoked firing on British and other
nationals, His Majesty’s Government had instructed the British naval forces
at Canton to seize and disable all boats employed by strike pickets. You
stated that you had been directed to inquire whether, in view of the recent
outrage on and imprisonment of an American citizen, the United States
Government wished to associate itself with the action which His Majesty’s
Government was taking. The situation at Canton has for some time been
receiving the careful attention of this Government and earnest consideration
has been given to the inquiry contained in your note under
acknowledgment. I regret, however, to inform you that this Government is
not in a position to associate itself with the action which His Majesty’s
Government is taking in this matter as set forth in your note. It is believed
that standing instructions which have been issued to the Commander of the
American Naval forces are sufficient to enable him to protect the lives and
property of American citizens in any foreseeable emergency.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG

893.5045/376: Telegram
[Document 595]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 14, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received September 14—9:27 a.m.]
399. Following radiogram received by American naval attaché from U. S. S.
Sacramento at Swatow, September 14th.
“After September 11th the British discontinued campaigns against
the striking pickets of the Canton River. Negotiations concerning
removal of boycott are to be resumed between the British and
Canton Governments.”
MAYER

893.5045/377: Telegram
[Document 596]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 14, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received September 14—4:04 p.m.]
401. 1. The substance of Department’s 185, September 7, 7 p.m., and first
paragraph Legation’s 384, September 9, 3 p.m.,33 were transmitted to the
commander in chief, United States Asiatic Fleet, in accordance with last
paragraph Department’s 185 above mentioned. Commander in chief has
now replied to following effect:
“Commander in chief does not consider it necessary that the Navy
Department be asked to issue new instruction. He notes the policy
of the State Department as contained in your construction of the
Department’s instructions and is prepared to direct the
commander of the South China Patrol to be guided by them. The
commander in chief understands that Banbury has been afforded
no protection by our Navy. That part of the Department of State’s
policy which requires that ‘all available protection is to be
afforded to American citizens who on their lawful occasions make
use of this or similar commercial enterprises’ will present
practical difficulties to our naval officers as regards Banbury’s
boats. To endeavor to protect his boats on every occasion on
which they may carry an American among their passengers and
not protect them at other times would almost inevitably lead to
misunderstandings and disagreeable incidents. It is suggested that
Americans be notified that it will be impracticable for the Navy to
give them physical protection if they use Banbury’s boats.”
2. I must concur in the Admiral’s opinion regarding practical difficulties
which naval officers will encounter in putting into effect a distinction to be
made in respect of operation of legitimate commercial enterprises such as
Banbury’s by American citizens and their use of the same on their lawful

occasions. Furthermore I respectfully submit my apprehension that it may
be difficult for the Canton consulate general to explain the distinction to
American citizens in South China, who in all likelihood will construe it to
mean that we will not protect American citizens whose interests would
otherwise be safeguarded should they in the pursuit of legitimate
commercial enterprises transgress the regulations of a lawless independent
organization such as the Canton strike pickets. While in no way desirous of
encouraging Americans to engage in commercial enterprises which
however lawful are likely to bring the American Government into
opposition with Chinese organizations, unofficial or otherwise, I am
strongly of the opinion that American citizens so engaged should be
protected without discrimination at this critical time in China.
3. In these circumstances I respectfully recommend for the Department’s
renewed consideration the policy suggested in paragraph 4 of the Legation’s
374, September 4, 4 p.m.
MAYER
33 Not printed.

893.5045/379: Telegram
[Document 597]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 15, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received September 15—8:13 a.m.]
406. Legation’s 67, February 6, 7 p.m.34 Following telegram has been
received from American vice consul, Swatow:
“September 13, 10 a.m. Strike of Standard Oil Company
employees of more than 7 months’ duration having been brought
to a close with government aid, operations were resumed today.”
MAYER
34 Not printed.

893.5045/380: Telegram
[Document 598]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 15, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received September 15—10:20 a.m.]
409. My 399, September 14, 4 p.m.
1. On September 4th British gunboats began operations against
strike pickets, stationing men-of-war in front of picket
examination sheds and facing strike craft in harbor. This action
has been entirely successful in achieving its purpose since I am
now informed by British Legation that after discussion between
British acting consul general and Eugene Chen the latter has
addressed a communication to the British consulate general
stating that the Municipal police had been reinstated in charge of
wharves and the river strike pickets having [had] been cleared
from these regions. Replying to this note the British acting consul
general affirmed that in the premises British naval action would
be discontinued. It appears that British naval forces cleared river
and wharves of strike pickets without any resistance on their part
or the firing of a single shot.
2. Chen is likewise seeking to reopen formal boycott settlement
negotiations on a new basis which the British Legation state they
now have under consideration.
3. The success which has attended British efforts in the above
regard would seem to confirm the wisdom of adopting a firm
policy at Canton which, while being eminently just, would
compel the Cantonese by display of force, if necessary, to respect
our treaty rights and the lives and property of our citizens. In this
connection I respectfully refer to my number 401, September 14,
6 p.m.

Mhaver

893.5045/377: Telegram
[Document 599]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, September 17, 1926—1 p.m.
195. Your 401, September 14, 6 p.m. The only information which the
Department has regarding the activities of Banbury is contained in your 374
of September 4, 4 p.m. From that information Department understands that
Banbury, an American citizen, is part owner in a motor vessel which is
engaged in the business of transporting Chinese and other passengers from
the shore to Hongkong steamers of British nationality anchored in stream
off Canton. It is the understanding of the Department that this is not a
normal business at Canton in which Americans or other nationals ordinarily
engage, but that it is incident to a conflict between local Chinese and British
steamship companies. Banbury and others engaged in similar business
therefore appear in this instance to the Department to be serving a British
interest, no essential American interest being involved. American citizens
desiring to avail themselves of British passenger facilities to Hongkong
should be protected in the normal means of accomplishing their purpose but
should be discouraged from taking the risk of abnormal means of boarding
British ships when such means involve conflict with local Chinese of
whatever character. As a practical means of overcoming difficulty
mentioned by Commander-in-Chief Department suggests that Commander
of the South China Patrol arrange to furnish Navy transportation to any
American citizen desiring to board Hongkong steamer at Canton. Such
facilities if offered should be limited entirely to American citizens and their
personal baggage.
KELLOGG

893.5045/384: Telegram
[Document 600]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 20, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received September 20—8:55 a.m.]
419. My 417, September 19, 1 p.m.35 Following from American consul
general, Canton:
“September 19, 4 p.m. Referring to my telegram of September 18,
noon. Cantonese authorities have informed British consulate
general officially that arrangements have been made to end
boycott before October 10th and that proper Chinese authorities
will levy two and a half percent consumption tax on imports with
five percent on luxuries and two and a half percent production tax
on exports to raise funds to compensate strikers.”
MAYER
35 Not printed.

893.5045/385: Telegram
[Document 601]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 24, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received September 24—10:05 a.m.]
429. My 419, September 20, 8 [5] p.m. Following from American consul
general, Canton:
“September 23, 4 p.m. Referring to my telegram of September 19,
4 p.m. There were no pickets at Shameen gates today and
indications are that boycott as constituted during the last year is
coming to end. It seems certain however that British
manufactured goods will still be under the ban. Antiforeign
feeling continues very widespread.”
MAYER

893.5045/391: Telegram
[Document 602]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 12, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received October 12—9:35 a.m.]
471. My 466, October 9, 4 p.m.36 Following from American consul general
at Canton:
“October 11, 2 p.m. Kuomintang and strike committee issued
lengthy statements yesterday declaring boycott ended but
reaffirming intention to carry into effect ‘economic struggle’ with
renewed vigor against the British and imperialists generally
throughout China. A few Chinese came on the Island37 today but
the general public seems very slow to resume pre-strike relations,
and it is still too early to judge the situation. There were no
disorders.”
MAYER
36 Not printed.
37 Shameen.

893.5045/392: Telegram
[Document 603]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 17, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received October 17—5:57 a.m.]
487. Following from American consul general, Canton:
“October 16, 1 p.m. Referring to my telegram October 11, 2 p.m.
Strike pickets have been removed and Chinese are now entering
Shameen freely. Passenger traffic with Hongkong is also quite
free but no British goods are moving, and stevedore coolies are
declining to handle cargo for British ships or goods routed via
Hongkong. Unless this situation clears up in a short time, British
will have gained nothing as a result of the so-called ending of the
strike boycott.”
MAYER

Forced levies upon American business
in China
[604] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 14, 1926. [Received July 14.]
393.1152 St 2/–
[605] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, July 23, 1926.
393.1152 St 2/–

393.1152 St 2/–
[Document 604]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 14, 1926.
[Received July 14.]
No. 624
SIR: I have the honor to inform the Department that one outgrowth of the
disturbances which have taken place in China during the past few years is
that it has become customary for Chinese military leaders to levy
contributions or forced loans from the various Chinese merchants doing
business in the territory which they occupy. These contributions may be
levied when a military leader first enters into occupation of a new territory,
when he is about to leave the territory, or during the course of his stay there.
The time of levy and the amount levied depend entirely on the financial
needs or rapacity of the military. A procedure quite frequently resorted to in
making a levy is to ask the local Chamber of Commerce for a lump sum and
the latter then proceed to apportion it themselves among the merchants who
are forced to make up the sums demanded by fear of looting by soldiers or
other evil consequences. The particular phase of this matter to which I
desire to invite the Department’s attention is the inclusion in this levy of
Chinese firms acting as selling agents of American companies, notably the
Standard Oil Company of New York. This Company has selling agents in
practically every town in China of any importance, and they are with
increasing frequency forced to pay these contributions. There is transmitted
herewith a copy of a despatch No. 96, of May 15, 1926, from the American
Consul at Chungking,38 in which he refers to a levy of $100 on the agent of
the Standard Oil Company at K’aihsien. This levy was made in the name of
the “Mei Foo Hong”, which is the Chinese name of the Standard Oil
Company. Mr. Adams requests the instructions of the Legation as to
whether he should In my opinion a forced loan or contribution made in the
name of a like nature pending.

In my opinion a forced loan or contribution made in the name of the
Standard Oil Company from its Chinese agent is in fact a levy on the
business of the Standard Oil Company, regardless of whether or not the
latter reimburses its agent for the amount which he has been forced to pay.
On the other hand if a levy were made against the Chinese agent in his
personal capacity or a levy were made on the general business done by him
including that of selling agent for the Standard Oil Company, then I should
consider that it was not within the province of the American Consular
authorities to enter a protest against it. In the former case, however, I
believe that a right of protest exists.
I have the honor to request the instructions of the Department for my
guidance in dealing with this and similar cases which may arise in the
future, particularly as to whether the Department considers that a protest
should be made against levies of this sort on Chinese agents of American
firms doing business in the interior.
 
There is transmitted herewith a copy of my instruction to the American
Consul at Chungking,39 stating that the question raised by him has been
referred to the Department.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
38 Not printed.
39 Not printed.

393.1152 St 2/–
[Document 605]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, July 23, 1926.
No. 287
SIR: The Department has received your despatch No. 624 of June 14, 1926,
in regard to the levy of a forced contribution, in the name of the Standard
Oil Company, on the native agent of the Company at K’aihsien, Szechwan,
by one of the local Chinese military leaders. The views expressed by you on
the second and third pages40 of the despatch under acknowledgment are
approved. With respect to the question whether grounds for protest exist in
this case you are informed that, in the circumstances, the Department
considers that a protest could properly be made.
I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
LELAND HARRISON
40 Refers to second paragraph of the despatch.

Continuation of the embargo on
shipments of arms to China41
41 For previous correspondence, see Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 641
ff.
[606] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 3, 1926—2 p.m. [Received April 3—7:22 a.m.]
893.113/952: Telegram
[607] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, April 13, 1926—3 p.m.
893.113/952: Telegram
[608] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 30, 1926—5 p.m. [Received July 30—10 a.m.]
893.113 Airplanes/1: Telegram
[609] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, August 5, 1926—3 p.m.
893.113Airplanes/2: Telegram
[610] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

Peking, September 3, 1926—noon. [Received September 3—6:22 a.m. ]

893.113Airplanes/3: Telegram

893.113/952: Telegram
[Document 606]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 3, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received April 3—7:22 a.m.]
162. 1. Reuter telegram from London March 31st reports that in replying to
Labor members of Parliament who referred to the supply of arms to
Chinese factions from abroad, British Minister for Foreign Affairs said that
“he was not inclined to take any very active steps in regard to this matter
‘unless the ban was applied on all frontiers, land as well as sea’“.
2. As a result of almost a year’s observation here I would strongly urge
upon the Department a consideration of the arms embargo of 1919,42 which
I have convinced myself is wholly ineffective to accomplish prohibitions
intended and whose partial enforcement results in favoring some factions to
the disadvantage of others.
 
3. I have reached this conclusion against my own prepossessions, because
when stationed here before I had a certain part in bringing about
establishment of the embargo and because while in the Department I still
felt that it should be maintained in the absence of concrete and conclusive
evidence of its general violation. I am now convinced beyond any doubt
that even though such positive evidence is not available it is the fact that the
embargo is not vigilantly and scrupulously enforced by any nationality
except the British and ourselves. The British control over imports into
China as well as exports from home territories enables them to deal with the
matter more effectively than we but even so there are quantities of British
as well as of American arms that find their way into China.
Nonparticipation of various countries furnishes channels through which
arms can be brought in practically without restriction. Arsenals in various
parts of the country are also in operation which enable the Chinese to a

large extent to supply themselves. The existence of embargo merely makes
it a trifle more difficult and expensive to obtain arms. It does not
appreciably diminish the means for either warfare or brigandage.
4. Apart from this general ineffectiveness of the embargo is the particular
question of supply of arms by Russia to such forces as are willing to
cooperate in Soviet policies in this country. This supply is on a large scale
and, in the face of it, refusal to permit the sale of arms to the Government or
to other factions becomes tantamount to intervention to their detriment. It is
known that Chang Tso-lin and Wu Pei-fu,43 for instance, strongly resent the
restriction thus imposed upon them.
5. To withdraw embargo immediately might have the appearance of giving
support to the forces combined against the Kuominchun in the present
situation. If however the announcement were to be made that embargo
would be withdrawn at some future date (say 3 or 4 months hence) this
action would not have the appearance of being prompted by a particular
situation.
6. Apart from the statement of the British Minister for Foreign Affairs
quoted by Reuter, I have reason to feel that the British Legation shares the
belief that the embargo wholly fails to serve its purpose and prejudices
impartiality of the attitude of the powers towards the various factions in
China. I believe that the same opinion is held by the French Legation.
Knowing the Department’s desire to maintain an attitude of unquestioned
loyalty towards the embargo I have refrained from expressing to any of my
colleagues my own convictions as set forth above. I venture however to ask
your authorization to discuss the matter with them frankly on my own
responsibility in order to ascertain more definitely the general attitude in
this matter with a view to your consideration of the question.
MACMURRAY
42 See ibid., 1919, vol. I, pp. 667 ff.
43 Chinese military leaders in Manchuria and the Yangtze Valley,
respectively.

893.113/952: Telegram
[Document 607]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, April 13, 1926—3 p.m.
80. Your 162, April 3, 2 p.m. While inclined to agree with you that present
arms embargo has failed materially to restrict the supply of arms to warring
factions in China, the Department does not believe that the United States
should take the lead in recommending its revision or discontinuance,
especially at the present time when to do so would offer seeming
justification for a charge that we desired to favor one faction against
another. The Department would therefor prefer that you refrain for the
present from initiating any discussion of question.
KELLOGG

893.113 Airplanes/1: Telegram
[Document 608]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 30, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received July 30—10 a.m.]
309. My telegram 162, April 3, 2 p.m. I am reliably informed that the
British Government has recently removed commercial aeroplanes from the
list of articles procured under the arms embargo and that Avro machines are
now being offered for sale in China by representatives of British interests.
MACMURRAY

893.113Airplanes/2: Telegram
[Document 609]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, August 5, 1926—3 p.m.
157. Your 162, April 3, 2 p.m., 309, July 30, 5 p.m. Department’s 80, April
13, 3 p.m.
You are authorized in your discretion to discuss question of possible
cancellation China arms embargo with your colleagues as suggested in your
162, reporting result of discussion to Department. If information contained
in your 309 can be officially confirmed Department would be disposed in
the meantime to amend present regulations to permit sale to China of
commercial airplanes.
KELLOGG

893.113Airplanes/3: Telegram
[Document 610]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 3, 1926—noon.
[Received September 3—6:22 a.m.]
370. Your telegram 157, August 5, 3 p.m.
1. British Legation has advised me that the following instruction
was issued to British consular officers July 12th las:
“It has been decided by His Majesty’s Principal
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs that the
importation of aeroplanes for commercial purposes
should not be regarded as coming within the scope of
the 1919 arms embargo or of the King’s regents
[regulations?].”
2. Since it seemed advisable to take up the matter first with the
British as the only nationality scrupulously observing embargo,
discussion with colleagues has been delayed in consequence of
absence of the British Minister and of such members of his staff
as are familiar with this question.
MACMURRAY

Recommendation of the Minister in
China that American troops stationed
at Tientsin be withdrawn
[611] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 29, 1926. [Received May 28.]
893.00/7428
[612] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Davis)
Washington, June 7, 1926.
893.00/7428

893.00/7428
[Document 611]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 29, 1926.
[Received May 28.]
No. 562
SIR: I have the honor to advert to my despatch No. 366 of December 30,
1925,44 and to subsequent despatches from the Legation,44 reporting and
commenting upon an incident occurring December 16th last, when several
motor trucks loaded with Chinese troops, heavily armed, entered within the
American Sector of the defense lines at Tientsin. As Mr. Gauss45 remarked
in his despatch of December 18th, enclosed in my communication first-
mentioned, this was the first case when Chinese armed troops have entered
this sector. Theretofore, as Mr. Gauss stated, the Chinese police authorities
had always cooperated with the United States Army forces at Tientsin in
deflecting any bodies of armed Chinese troops approaching this area,
sending them by outside routes around the defense lines to their destination
in the Chinese City or elsewhere.
 
This incident, and the critical state of affairs in Tientsin during the
Kuominchun46 occupation of that city on December 24–26, 1925, in
conjunction with the question of international trains between Peking and
Tientsin, brought up for renewed consideration the entire matter of open
communications between Peking and the sea, as provided for in Article IX
of the Protocol of 1901,47 and particularly the situation in which the
American Army forces at Tientsin found themselves with respect to their
part in the combined defense plan there.
In order to lead up logically to the particular difficulties in the above regard,
and for purposes of record, I venture to review the situation at some length

and chronologically, at the risk of repeating much of which the Department
is doubtless informed.
The Commandants of the military forces of the United States, Great Britain,
Italy and Japan, stationed at Tientsin for the purpose of maintaining open
communication between Peking and the sea by virtue of the terms of Article
IX of the Protocol of 1901, necessarily had to establish about the district for
foreign residence and trade in Tientsin a defense area to serve as a military
base. This the Commandants rightly considered as an area which they must
be prepared to defend and into which, therefore, no armed Chinese troops
should be permitted to enter. This defense area included inter alia the
British, French, Italian, and Japanese Concessions. The sector allotted each
Command corresponded, generally speaking, with the concession of the
respective nationality; but for military reasons the sectors included, in
addition, certain adjacent areas, at the outer boundaries of which lines were
to be established even during civil strife in order to divert any approaching
troops from entrance into the defense area. By reason of there being no
American Concession, the sector allotted to the American Command is in
the former German Concession and other adjoining territory wholly under
Chinese administration. It is adjacent to the British Sector.
With the practical failure on the part of the Powers concerned to compel the
observance of the Agreement of July 15, 1902 (See MacMurray’s China
Treaties, p. 317 et seq.) respecting the marching and stationing of Chinese
troops within twenty li of Tientsin, the question of the maintenance of such
lines became increasingly important, and especially so for the American
Command which, not being based upon a foreign concession, was left
particularly liable to contact with Chinese troops by reason of the different
trunk roads passing through its sector. Unless the other foreign commands,
especially the British, were to maintain the lines assigned them under the
combined defense plan, including the area outside of their concessions, our
forces would be left in an untenable position.
Disregarding the agreement entered into by the Commandants as to the
exclusion of armed Chinese troops from territory within the defense lines,
the British forces at Tientsin on December 25th, and the French on
December 26th, permitted columns of such troops to pass through this

territory, subsequently explaining and defending this action on the grounds
of expediency and the absence of any anti-foreign sentiment among the
Chinese troops concerned. On the other hand, faithfully carrying out the
agreement above alluded to, at one moment a small American picket was
confronted with an entire Division of Chinese troops seeking a short-cut in
pursuit of Li Ching-lin’s defeated Fengtien forces. Fortunately, the Chinese
officer commanding the advance guard of the Division assented to the
request of our picket and turned aside. This incident, one of many during
two days, was of extreme delicacy and danger. A clash was narrowly
averted, which, had it occurred, might have had far-reaching results. This
serves to illustrate the difficulty that has developed from the fact that
Commandants at Tientsin, other than the American, felt justified in
departing from the combined defense plan, and considered themselves safe
in the inviolability of their concessions as a point for ultimate retirement,
while the Americans, without a concession and compelled by elementary
military reasons, were forced thereby to an issue of great danger in order to
preserve the integrity of their base. (See page seven of mail despatch from
the American Consul-General, Tientsin, dated December 28th last, on the
subject of conditions in the Tientsin area.48 ) Upon learning of the above
incident, I called a conference here with General Connor49 and the
American Consul-General at Tientsin, as soon as the disturbed conditions
permitted. It was agreed at this conference that in view of the present
irrational state of mind of the Chinese, it would be utterly impracticable to
take up the matter with the Chinese Government with a view to obtaining
its cooperation in adjusting the position of the American Command at
Tientsin to the new situation created by the breakdown of the combined
defense plan. After careful consideration it was decided that, as a first step
toward this adjustment, General Connor should confer with his colleagues
and present the facts frankly to them and seek an equally candid statement
of exactly what he could expect his position to be in the future vis-à-vis
these Commandants as regards the carrying out of the defense plan. This
conference between General Connor and his fellow-Commandants at
Tientsin, although amicable, brought forth no proposal such as he requested
for the purpose of relieving his position.
General Connor stated to me, as his considered judgment, that the position
of his command at Tientsin, by reason of the failure of the foreign

Commandants in general and of the British and French Commandants in
particular, to adhere to the provisions of the defense plan for Tientsin, had
become militarily untenable and liable to force provocative contacts with
Chinese troops. In view of the seriousness of the situation and of the fact
that civil strife might at any time again break out in and around Tientsin, I
discussed the matter at once with my colleagues concerned—the British,
Italian, French, and Japanese Ministers—with the result that a conference of
the five interested Ministers, and their Commandants at Tientsin, met at the
Italian Legation on February 4, 1926, to discuss the general situation of the
foreign commands at Tientsin, with particular reference to the position of
the American forces there.
At this conference an agreement was drafted, supplementing the combined
defense plan, which more nearly placed the other foreign commands on a
parity with the American Command, in that Article 3 of the Supplementary
Agreement would provide that when, in the opinion of the Commandant of
a Sector, there is any danger arising from an attempted passage of armed
Chinese troops through the inner lines of defense, or from civil disturbances
in territory under Chinese administration within the area of the inner
defense lines, the foreign force in the sector concerned shall, on the demand
of the Commandant controlling such sector, be assisted by contingents from
the other foreign forces comprising the international corps of occupation.
The proposed Supplementary Agreement was by no means entirely
satisfactory, having principally a negative value in placing the other foreign
commands in the same awkward position in which the American forces
might find themselves, through the ability of the American Command to
summon other foreign forces to its aid in the event of a clash in territory
under Chinese jurisdiction; but this arrangement was at any rate designed to
guarantee the United States from the solitary odium of any untoward
incident at Tientsin between foreign and Chinese armed forces, by dividing
what may be termed the political responsibilities involved in excluding
Chinese troops from our Sector.
After discussion and long delay, due principally to misunderstanding on the
part of the Japanese and perhaps in some degree to a desire on their part to
interpret too broadly the extent of the new agreement, the foreign
Commandants at Tientsin have now adopted the Supplementary Agreement

with certain minor amendments, together with an explanation (at the
instance of the Japanese) to which I have referred above. I have the honor to
enclose copies of both these documents.49a
I regret to be compelled to observe that in the opinion of General Connor
and myself it is somewhat problematical whether or not all the foreign
commands at Tientsin will faithfully observe this new agreement in any
given crisis. The British, French, Italian, and Japanese forces have each
their respective concessions into which they may retire, within which they
are actually less likely to be attacked, and which they have particular reason
to defend as a matter of protection to the lives and properties of their
nationals. They will, quite naturally, be strongly tempted to contain
themselves within their respective concessions, without attempting to
control the activities of Chinese troops or disturbers of the peace outside.
The American Command, on the other hand, has no concession into which
it can withdraw, its base being on territory entirely within Chinese
jurisdiction. And the topographical situation, furthermore, is such that the
retirement of the other foreign commands into their concessions
automatically shifts a much heavier burden onto the American forces in
preventing the entry of Chinese troops into their defense lines, as the
rudimentary necessities of defense require of a military force.
Having in mind the generally unsatisfactory character of the position of the
American forces, which I have described above, and in accord with the
strategic retreat which the Powers are seeking to effect in China in respect
of their rights under the so-called “unequal treaties”, we appear to be
logically confronted with the consideration of the question of the ultimate
withdrawal of the foreign garrisons at Tientsin as a necessity in that
relation. I consider that the eventual withdrawal of our Army forces at
Tientsin—which are clearly to be differentiated from the Legation Guard at
Peking—will be expedient at a later date, although I believe their
immediate Avithdrawal would be gravely unwise, if not highly dangerous to
the welfare and even the safety of Americans and other foreigners in China.
In this connection, I have the honor to submit that, as a condition precedent
to withdrawal when the psychological time occurs, the Department should
preliminarily approach the British, French, Italian, and Japanese
Governments with a proposal for simultaneous action; and that every

opportunity should be offered the respective Governments to join in a
common gesture which would be beneficial to all foreigners in China alike.
It seems to me that it would be desirable, if possible, to avoid isolated
action, on the part of any one Power, which, while perhaps accruing to the
immediate popularity of that nationality, would almost inevitably react to its
disadvantage scarcely less than that of other nations, in consequence of the
nationalistic agitation which would thereby be stirred up against those
which retained forces at Tientsin—such agitations always tending to
become indiscriminately anti-foreign, and leading indirectly to new assaults
upon the rights and interests even of the countries not immediately
concerned. Only in the event that the other Governments concerned should
refuse to join in the withdrawal of the foreign commands at Tientsin, upon
the opportunity being thus offered them, I believe, as does General Connor,
that the United States should act alone in this matter.
My principal reason for recommending withdrawal of the foreign garrisons,
at some time in the future which I hope will not be far distant, is that the
reason for their presence in China has virtually ceased to exist. The
maintenance of open communication between Peking and the sea, by
compelling the running of international trains between Peking and Tientsin,
can no longer be counted upon as feasible, in view of the recent
developments in the technique of military operations by Chinese forces. In
my opinion, that portion of the Protocol of 1901 is no longer practically
enforceable under circumstances such as arose in December last and in
March and April of this year, and which are likely to recur in the course of
the prevalent civil disorders in China,—the only part of the Protocol, in this
general regard, remaining to us as practicable of execution, being the
maintenance of an open port at Tientsin (as in the case of the recent Taku
incident50 ). A foreign garrison at Tientsin is, therefore, virtually relegated
to a secondary function not originally contemplated by the Protocol,
namely, the protection of foreigners and of foreign interests at the port of
Tientsin. This function, I believe, does not justify the maintenance there of
forces whose presence affords recurrent occasions for clashes with the
Chinese, which the new temper of the Chinese people makes almost
inevitable, sooner or later, as a result of some misunderstanding or accident
impossible to foresee and guard against. Should the situation at Peking or
around Tientsin become such that a foreign expeditionary force would have

to be landed for the purpose of opposing a Chinese army, with modern
equipment, acting offensively against foreign lives and interests, I believe
(and in this General Connor concurs) that this force could establish itself at
Tientsin, by means of naval contingents alone, practically as easily and with
as little loss of life as if foreign troops maintained a base there. It is
furthermore problematical whether such a small foreign force as is now
stationed at Tientsin, say a total of 3,900, would not be defeated during the
period of time which would be required for adequate reinforcements to
reach Tientsin.
I enclose herewith a copy of a secret letter addressed to me by General
Connor on January 13th last in this general regard.51 This sets forth certain
conclusions at which General Connor has arrived and which were discussed
at the conference I have referred to above as having been held with him and
the Consul-General at Tientsin in January last. General Connor is
forwarding a copy of this letter to the War Department, by the Legation
pouch, simultaneously with the present despatch.
I have the honor to invite the Department’s attention especially to the
summary of the situation at Tientsin in General Connor’s opinions set forth
on page 8 of his letter of January 13th, and to his conclusions A and B under
paragraph 29 on the following page. In the main, I concur heartily in
General Connor’s statements. It is necessary, however, to add, as indeed he
wishes me to do, that certain of the remarks in the summary of the situation
are no longer pertinent, owing to the supplementary defense agreement
enclosed with this despatch.
I should likewise observe, in conclusion, that General Connor agrees in my
conclusions that (1) in view of the risks now being incurred with
insufficient military justification, the situation at Tientsin must ultimately be
resolved by the withdrawal of the American Army Forces stationed there—
if possible, in conjunction with the other foreign Powers maintaining
similar forces; but that (2) this action must be timed with the greatest care
in order to avoid what is at the present time the very serious danger of
creating a situation in which nationalistic sentiment would be further incited
against foreign rights and interests, rather than appeased by such a
withdrawal. In view of this latter consideration, I venture to express the

most earnest hope that the Department, even though on consultation with
the War Department (for which purpose I enclose an extra copy) it may feel
fully convinced of the wisdom of such eventual withdrawal as I
recommend, will withhold, until it shall have received a further report from
me, any definite decision as to the time when it may be advisable to initiate
discussions with the other interested Powers concerning the withdrawal of
all the foreign occupational forces at Tientsin.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
44 Not printed.
44 Not printed.
45 Clarence E. Gauss, consul general at Tientsin.
46 National armies then under control of Marshal Feng Yü-hsiang.
47 Foreign Relations , 1901, appendix (Affairs in China), p. 312.
48 Not printed.
49 Maj. Gen. William Durward Connor, in command of the American forces
in China.
49a Neither printed.
50 See pp. 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 423] ff.
51 Not printed.

893.00/7428
[Document 612]
The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Davis)
WASHINGTON, June 7, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to enclose for your strictly confidential information a
copy of despatch No. 562 of April 29, 1926, from the American Minister at
Peking52 in which he discussed the question of the possible withdrawal at
some time in the future of the American Army forces stationed at Tientsin.
This Department is not now in a position to make definite recommendations
in regard to this matter pending the receipt of a further report from Minister
MacMurray. I have the honor therefore to request that in view of the
peculiar situation at that port no action be taken for the present.
I have [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
52 Supra.

The Special Conference on the Chinese
Customs Tariff53
53 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 833–885 .
[613] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 30, 1926—6 p.m. [Received January 30—10:40 a.m.]
500.A4e/552: Telegram
[614] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, February 1, 1926—4 p.m.
500.A4e/552: Telegram
[615] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 22, 1926—8 p.m. [Received February 22—2:43 p.m.]
500.A4e/559: Telegram
[616] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 3, 1926—3 p.m. [Received March 3—9:43 a.m.]
500.A4e/561: Telegram
[617] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation

Washington, March 3, 1926—5 p.m.
500.A4e/561: Telegram
[618] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 26, 1926—6 p.m. [Received April 27—9:55 a.m.]
500.A4e/579: Telegram
[619] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, April 28, 1926—6 p.m.
500.A4e/579: Telegram
[620] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
Washington, May 5, 1926—8 p.m.
500.A4e/581: Telegram
[621] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
London, May 6, 1926—5 p.m. [Received May 6—3:50 p.m.]
500.A4e/583: Telegram
[622] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 12, 1926—1 p.m. [Received May 12—2:37 p.m.]
500.A4e/585: Telegram

[623] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 12, 1926—5 p.m. [Received May 13—6:11 a.m.]
500.A4e/586: Telegram
[624] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 17, 1926—5 p.m. [Received May 17—1:22 p.m.]
500.A4e/589: Telegram
[625] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, May 20, 1926—5 p.m.
500.A4e/589: Telegram
[626] The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
Tokyo, May 26, 1926—11 a.m. [Received May 26—9:32 a.m.]
500.A4e/597: Telegram
[627] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
London, May 28, 1926. [Received June 5, 1926.]
500.A4e/600
[628] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 10, 1926—3 p.m. [Received June 10—8:28 a.m.]
500.A4e/602: Telegram

[629] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 13, 1926—10 a.m. [Received June 12 (13?)—6:43 a.m.]
500.A4e/605: Telegram
[630] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, June 19, 1926—noon.
500.A4e/600: Telegram
[631] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 28, 1926. [Received July 26.]
500.A4e/628
[632] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 30, 1926—9 a.m. [Received June 30—6:46 a.m.]
500.A4e/614: Telegram
[633] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, July 2, 1926—6 p.m.
500.A4e/614: Telegram
[634] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 8, 1926—7 p.m. [Received July 3—5:43 p.m.]
500.A4e/617: Telegram

[635] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 8, 1926. [Received September 11.]
600.A4e/649
[636] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Canton, July 16, 1926.
893.00/7561
[637] The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
Peking [,July 23, 1926—11 p.m.] [Received July 23—6:10 p.m.]
500.A4e/624: Telegram
[638] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 24, 1926—3 a.m. [Received July 23—11:59 p.m.]
500.A4e/625: Telegram
[639] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 24, 1926—6 p.m. [Received July 24, 1926—2:55 p.m.]
500.A4e/627: Telegram
[640] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, July 26, 1926—5 p.m.
500.A4e/625: Telegram

[641] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Canton, July 29, 1926.
500.A4e/647
[642] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 30, 1926. [Received September 1.]
500.A4e/645
[643] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Canton, July 31, 1926.
500.A4e/646
[644] The British Embassy to the Department of State
Manchester, Mass. , September 17, 1926. [Received September 20.]
500.A4e/652
[645] The Department of State to the British Embassy
Washington , Oct. 5, 1926.
500.A4e/654
[646] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 20, 1926—noon. [Received 12:53 p.m.]

500.A4e/686: Telegram
[647] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, November 23, 1926—6 p.m.
500.A4e/686: Telegram
[648] The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
Washington, November 24, 1926—2 p.m.
500.A4e/657: Telegram
[649] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 27, 1926—1 p.m. [Received 3 p.m.]
500.A4e/689: Telegram
[650] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 3, 1926—11 a.m. [Received December 3—10:30 a.m.]
500.A4e/690: Telegram
[651] The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
London, December 8, 1926—2 p.m. [Received December 8—2:05 p.m.]
500.A4e/691: Telegram

500.A4e/552: Telegram
[Document 613]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 30, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received January 30—10:40 a.m.]
Conference 24. Legation’s 36, January 20, 8 p.m.54 Financial requirements
of Chinese Government daily growing more desperate. Aglen55 declines to
furnish them any security from existing customs for a loan. We have it on
good authority that within the next 10 days the powers will be asked to
permit two and one-half percent surtax provided by Washington Treaty56 to
become effective immediately. Revenue derived therefrom to be
immediately and unconditionally available to Central Government. At
beginning of Conference all powers except Japan agreed to immediate
putting into effect of the two and one-half percent provided by Washington
Treaty, the revenue derived therefrom to be impounded and to be hereafter
disposed of as agreed by the Conference in accordance with article 3,
Washington Treaty. We do not believe powers will recede from that position
and grant request of Central Government for unrestricted use of revenue. As
above indicated, powers believe, first, that present administration has no
influence in any province and that its life will be of very short duration;
second, that granting its request would be regarded by provinces and other
war lords as an effort, on the part of the powers, to perpetuate the existence
of present Central Government and would preclude the possibility of
obtaining cooperation of provinces and war lords in the support of any new
treaty which we may evolve.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
54 Not printed.
55 Sir Francis Aglen, Inspector General of Chinese Maritime Customs.
56 Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 282.

500.A4e/552: Telegram
[Document 614]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
WASHINGTON, February 1, 1926—4 p.m.
11. Position outlined in your Conference Number 24, January 30, 5 p.m.,
has the approval of the Department.
KELLOGG

500.A4e/559: Telegram
[Document 615]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING, February 22, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received February 22—2:43 p.m.]
Conference number 25. With reference to Conference summary number
10,57 the Chinese delegation offered two resolutions, the first proposing that
the powers agree that the interim surtaxes on imports be levied so as to
yield between 90 and 100 million Chinese dollars, the second proposing
that, since the above-named surtaxes require sanction of a new treaty, surtax
authorized by Washington Treaty meanwhile be made effective April 1st.
The foreign delegations unanimously rejected the first resolution, taking the
position that no agreement could be made with regard to the amount of
revenue to be raised from interim surtaxes independently of a definite
understanding as to the purposes for which said revenues would be used, a
subject which had not been agreed upon. The powers also rejected second
resolution because it did not contain provision for impounding revenue until
the Conference should determine its disposition. At a meeting Saturday of
subcommittee named in Conference summary number 10, the Chinese
again presented substantially the same resolutions in combined form and
the powers rejected them for the reasons above indicated, whereupon
subcommittee adjourned to Tuesday, 23rd. Now postponed by request [of]
Chinese to Wednesday, 24th.
We feel the effort of the Chinese to name the amount of surtaxes agreed
upon by the powers is for political purposes only and that such action would
be very embarrassing not only to the powers but to the Chinese also because
the amount would be given wide publicity which would not be coupled with
the fact that the amount was dependent upon purposes to be hereafter
agreed upon and that such action would make it exceedingly difficult by the
powers to agree with China on the purposes. We are also convinced that if
the amounts derived from surtaxes provided in the Washington Treaty are

not impounded with the Customs Administration to await the decision of
the Conference they would be dissipated, hypothecated or pledged
immediately. We believe all foreign powers agree on the above
propositions.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
57 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 879.

500.A4e/561: Telegram
[Document 616]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 3, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received March 3—9:43 a.m.]
Conference 26. British delegates inactive, say they are waiting instructions
from their Government respecting the attitude of Chinese provinces toward
Conference and proposed treaty. We told them we proposed to proceed with
negotiations irrespective disturbed conditions; that we were bound to
effectuate Washington Treaty and thought it advantageous that powers
should endeavor to get in accord on general tariff policy toward China, then
if China went to pieces before treaty ratified, responsibility of disintegration
would not be on powers. Under all the circumstances we believe we should
diligently proceed with negotiations and encourage others to do so.
AM[ERICAN] TAR [IFF] DEL[EGATION]

500.A4e/561: Telegram
[Document 617]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
WASHINGTON, March 3, 1926—5 p.m.
12. Your Conference 26, March 3, 3 p.m. Your attitude regarding
negotiations approved.
KELLOGG

500.A4e/579: Telegram
[Document 618]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 26, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received April 27—9:55 a.m.58 ]
33. The British delegates have suggested that the powers make a public
declaration in substance: That the delegates have been working 6 months in
the face of difficulties created by civil war and internal political dissension
to frame a treaty providing for tariff increases and the removal of tariff
restrictions within fixed period in accordance with program of the Chinese
delegation; that the consummation of these negotiations has been frustrated
by political disorder, culminating in the recent dissolution of the Central
Government; that the various problems under consideration have been
carefully examined and concrete proposals for their solution in accordance
with China’s wishes put forward; that the active leadership of the Chinese
Government and cooperation of Chinese provincial authorities are now
required to conclude negotiations and effect a settlement satisfactory to all
concerned, that such leadership and cooperation cannot be forthcoming
under existing political conditions and that further progress is therefore
impossible without a Chinese delegation able to speak for the country as a
whole; that the delegates of the powers who are animated by the sincerest
feelings of friendship and sympathy towards China, while awaiting
reestablishment of a Chinese Government with which negotiations can be
resumed, appeal to the Chinese people and the leaders of all parties in the
State to sink internal differences and take all possible means to restore
peace and establish settled government, in order that these negotiations may
then be carried to a speedy and satisfactory conclusion.
2. The British attitude indicates a desire to adjourn the Conference and
postpone indefinitely attainment of its objectives, the delegations other than
Chinese not having yet put forward concrete proposals implementing
Washington Treaty and agreement respecting a new treaty covering interim
surtaxes. We believe that British suggestion is premature and if followed

would expose the powers to the charge of having availed themselves of the
present political crisis to delay any substantial increase in the customs tariff.
We think the delegations other than Chinese should continue their efforts to
effectuate Washington Treaty and complete program covering interim
surtaxes, likin abolition and debt consolidation, and that agreement should
go sufficiently into detail so that there would be no misunderstanding
among the powers and the Conference could lay on the table a definite
program for the consideration of the new Chinese Government when it is
organized. The Japanese delegation is apparently in general accord with our
views and we are hopeful the British will abandon the idea of attempting to
adjourn the Conference until the foreign delegations have reached common
agreement.
3. The French have circulated a memorandum protesting against the
proposed schedule of tariff increases which has been informally agreed
upon by the other delegations. They call attention to Mackay treaty59
providing for seven and one-half percent surtax in compensation for the
abolition of likin and saitem:
“The surtaxes, the establishment of which we now contemplate,
must include a tax in compensation for likin and exempt foreign
goods from all other duties in transit. The powers signatory or
adherent to the Washington Treaty find themselves formally
obligated therefore to agree that these surtaxes shall be fixed at
seven and one-half percent. The strict execution of this agreement
would easily furnish the sums necessary for the ends which we
have in view and promise the most favorable solution for our
commerce. Nevertheless my Government in a friendly spirit
toward the other nations represented at the Conference and in
order to satisfy their interests as far as possible, is ready to agree
that a class of goods in which, moreover, will be found listed the
majority of those exported from France shall be subject to a
surtax double that provided for by the Mackay treaty and that, on
the other hand, for certain articles which may be recognized,
unable without serious inconvenience to bear a heavier burden,
the surtax should by way of exceptions be reduced from seven
and one-half to two and one-half percent.”

4. [Paraphrase.] In case we can agree with other powers to plan an
implementing of the Washington Treaty and agree upon a general draft of a
new treaty with respect to imposition and allocation of interim surtaxes,
calculated to result in an additional revenue of $90,000,000, it is our belief
that if the French remain opposed to such a program, they should be
disregarded. We should appreciate having general instructions from you on
this point and also upon our views as outlined above concerning the
continuation of our work here until our efforts to secure a general accord
with the delegations of the principal foreign nations have been exhausted.
[End paraphrase.]
AM[ERICAN] TAR [IFF] DEL[EGATION]
58 Telegram in two sections.
59 Commercial treaty between Great Britain and China, signed at Shanghai,
Sept. 5, 1902; for text, see Foreign Relations , 1903, p. 551.

500.A4e/579: Telegram
[Document 619]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
WASHINGTON, April 28, 1926—6 p.m.
20. I approve attitude outlined in paragraph 2 of your telegram number 33
of April 26, 6 p.m.
KELLOGG

500.A4e/581: Telegram
[Document 620]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain
(Houghton)
WASHINGTON, May 5, 1926—8 p.m.
66. Department has just received a telegram from the American Delegation
to the Tariff Conference60 now sitting in Peking to the effect that the British
Delegation appear reluctant to continue further with negotiations at Peking
and are planning to return home. The American Delegation informs the
Department that it has been unable to determine the extent to which British
attitude reflects the position of their government or their own personal
views. American delegates state that they are of the opinion that the British
Delegation are mistaken in ignoring the danger of a renewed outbreak of
prejudice against foreign riots [rights?] and interests especially in view of
the approaching anniversary of the Shanghai riots of May 30.61 They state
that Japanese Delegation appears to share their view that an adjournment in
the manner which appears to be contemplated by the British would be a
catastrophe for foreign interests and that they are already authorized to go
on even without the British to implement the Washington Treaty and
exhaust their best efforts to agree upon the draft of a treaty providing for
interim surtaxes. The French and Dutch Ministers are reported personally to
favor such action though as yet without instructions from their
Governments.
The American Delegation reports that there is to be a meeting on Thursday
morning of interested Ministers accompanied by the other plenipotentiaries
of their delegations for the purpose of considering the political situation in
relation to the Conference. At that meeting the American Delegation will,
with the approval of the Department, take the position that it is prepared to
go on with the Conference as far as political conditions will permit no
matter what other nationalities may refuse to go along with them. You may
bring the above informally to the attention of the British Foreign Office and

explain orally that this Government is of the opinion that the gravity of the
situation in China respecting foreign rights and interests demands that the
interested Powers who have been participating in the Tariff Conference
should exhaust every effort to fulfill the undertakings entered into at the
Washington Conference and the promises made to the Chinese Government
last fall.62 You will express to the British Foreign Office this Government’s
sincere hope that the British Government may find itself able to continue to
cooperate with us and the other interested Powers in bringing to a
conclusion the task which was begun last October and upon which it would
appear much progress has been made.
KELLOGG
60 Not printed.
61 See Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 647 ff.
62 See note No. 41, Sept. 4, 1925, from the Minister in China to the Chinese
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and footnote 86, ibid. , p. 831.

500.A4e/583: Telegram
[Document 621]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
LONDON, May 6, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received May 6—3:50 p.m.]
92. Your 66, May 5, 8 p.m., was read to Wellesley63 today, who stated Peel
and Stewart of the British delegation were not government officials and for
business reasons could not delay leaving China although their actual
departure was not known to Foreign Office until yesterday. Wellesley
pointed out this still left official British members of the delegation to
continue conversations with the possibility of the two above-mentioned
members returning later. He will discuss your telegram of May 5, 8 p.m.,
with Chamberlain64 on Monday or Tuesday and advise Embassy of British
position, which he stated was still under contemplation but naturally
influenced by reports from British Minister, Peking.
[Paraphrase.] Wellesley said that he himself feared that granting tariff
autonomy with a consolidation of debts under foreign control might
postpone still further any benefit from customs revenue to China as a
whole. He pointed out that the Chinese did not favor debt consolidation.
Since more debt consolidation looked toward giving security to the many
and in some instances very questionable loans made by the Northern
Government, which proceeds had in part been used to fight against the
South, he indicated that he was fearful about what attitude might be taken
by Canton in regard to such debt consolidation, in view particularly of
British interests in South China. He remarked that it was his recollection
that when he had his conversations in Washington with MacMurray,65 the
latter was in agreement with him about the inadmissibility of debt
consolidation and the tendency of such consolidation to thwart the
fulfillment of the Washington Conference’s purposes.

 
In his opinion, this program seemed to be inconsistent with the frequently
announced policy to release China from foreign interference, as far as
possible, with which the British Government was in accord. [End
paraphrase.]
HOUGHTON
63 Victor Wellesley, British Deputy Under Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs.
64 Sir Austen Chamberlain, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
65 In 1923; memoranda of conversations not printed.

500.A4e/585: Telegram
[Document 622]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 12, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received May 12—2:37 p.m.]
[Conference] 37. British, Japanese and our advisers have agreed upon draft
of protocol implementing Washington Treaty which is being distributed
among the advisers of other delegations today with a request for meeting of
advisers of all delegations tomorrow morning to consider the subject.
Following is the draft of protocol:65a
[Agreement.] “In the exercise of authority vested in them by their
respective Governments, and for the purpose of giving effect to
the provisions of article 3 and the second paragraph of article 6 of
the treaty relating to the Chinese customs tariff, signed at
Washington on February 6, 1922, the representatives of the
powers assembled at this Conference, to wit (blank) hereby agree
that, beginning 3 months from the (blank) day of (blank) 1926
(the date of signature of the present agreement) the Chinese
Government shall impose and collect surtaxes on dutiable imports
as follows: On all commodities listed in the schedule hereto
annexed a schedule [surtax] equal to the amount of the regular
duty prescribed in the revised import tariff for the trade of China
at the time being in force (that is, either the specific duty or the 5
percent ad valorem provided in that schedule), and on all other
dutiable commodities a surtax equal to one-half of the regular
duty prescribed in the revised import tariff for the trade of China
at the time being in force; and that these surtaxes shall be levied
uniformly at all land and maritime frontiers;
And do hereby agree that these surtaxes shall be collected by the
Maritime Customs Administration and that, until this agreement
shall have been superseded or modified by provisions of a later

treaty [, treaties,] or agreements, such as have [been] and are
under consideration at this Conference, the additional customs
revenue which will accrue from their levying shall be applied as
follows:
1. As an immediate measure in preparation of the way for the
speedy abolition of likin, the collections taken in payment for
transit passes (which passes shall continue to be issued as
heretofore at the same rates) shall be distributed through the
Maritime Customs Administration to the provincial authorities in
proportion to the amount of the transit duties collected on the
merchandise destined to, or passing through, or originating in the
various provinces, respectively, under the cover of the transit
passes.
For the loss occasioned by this action there shall be taken from
the surtax collections the sum of $5,000,000 per annum, and this
sum shall be credited, by way of compensation, to the ordinary
customs revenue.
2. As a further measure in preparation of the way for the speedy
abolition of likin and as a step looking toward the abolition of
export duties, both on foreign and on domestic trade, China will,
simultaneously with the going into effect of the above-mentioned
surtaxes, abolish the tax known as the ‘coast-trade duty’, that is,
the half duty at present charged on the reimport of goods of
domestic origin which, after having been exported from one
Chinese port, are imported into another Chinese port.
For the loss occasioned by this action there shall be taken from
the surtax collections [collection] the sum of $4,000,000 per
annum, and this sum shall be credited, by way of compensation,
to the ordinary customs revenue.
3. From the surtax collection there shall be remitted monthly
through the Maritime Customs Administration to the Ministry of
Finance the sum of $750,000 to be used solely for the current
administrative expenses of the Government.

4. After the purposes specified above shall have been served, the
remaining portion of the proceeds from the collecting [collection]
of the surtaxes shall be held by the Maritime Customs
Administration, free from all encumbrances, as an accumulated
fund to be applied later to the liquidation of the unsecured and
inadequately secured debts of the Chinese Government.
Disbursements shall be made from this fund in accordance with
the provisions of the treaty, treaties or agreements concluded at
this Conference, or, if such treaties [treaty], treaties, or
agreements shall not have come into effect within 2 years after
the date of the signature of the present agreement, in accordance
with the principles which may at that time be agreed upon.
5. The proceeds from the collection of the surtaxes shall be
deposited in such banks, in such manner, and in such proportions,
as are specified in the resolution hereto annexed.
It is understood that the foregoing agreements for the disposal of
the additional customs revenue which will accrue from the
levying of the surtaxes are adopted in the expectation that there
will be concluded a new treaty, treaties or agreements, as
indicated above, in which provision shall be made for the levying
of such graduated import duties as will yield a further increase in
the customs revenue with a view to serving purposes under
discussion, and that these arrangements will be superseded by the
provisions of such treaty, treaties or agreements.
It is furthermore understood that, in view of the essential
importance of the Chinese railways in the promotion of China’s
prosperity hence [and the] rehabilitation of her credit which are
fundamental purposes of this Conference, China will take the
earliest possible steps to restore the commercial efficiency of her
railways and to ensure that the financial obligations of the
railways be adequately served from railway revenues.”
MACMURRAY

65a Corrected on the basis of despatch No. 5117, Nov. 1, 1940, from the
Ambassador in Japan (file No. 026 Foreign Relations/1511).

500.A4e/586: Telegram
[Document 623]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 12, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received May 13—6:11 a.m.]
38. With regard to reference made in the Department’s telegram May 7, 4
p.m.,66 to the conversations in Washington between Wellesley and
MacMurray concerning debt consolidation, it is the personal recollection of
MacMurray, Hornbeck and Perkins, all three of whom were present during
these conversations, that the understanding was the consolidation of the
unsecured debts might be left out of the scope of the Congress if such
consolidation could be previously effected by a refunding operation based
upon salt surplus and that it was not understood that these debts could in
any event be left out of consideration.
The Department’s position on this subject was furthermore definitely stated
in its telegram to London number 67, March 26, 1923,67 the contents of
which the Embassy was instructed to communicate to Wellesley. His
comment in reply was reported to the Department in London’s number 140,
May 2, 1923.67
With regard to the subsequent attitude of the British Foreign Office, see
Perkins’ confidential report to the Department July 29, 1925.67
It should also be borne in mind that the views expressed in 1922
contemplated merely the disposal of funds to accrue from the Washington
surtaxes, an amount regarded as insufficient adequately to refund the whole
floating debt of the Chinese Government, whereas now after a lapse of
almost four years we are confronted with an entirely new situation. We are
now proposing to raise almost treble the amount of new revenue calculated
to accrue from the Washington surtaxes, the whole situation having become
such that if something is not done about the debts along with other matters

in the near future the Chinese Government may take action which will put it
forever out of our power to deal effectively with it.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
66 Not printed; it transmitted telegram No. 92, May 6, from the Ambassador
in Great Britain, p. 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621].
67 Not printed.
67 Not printed.
67 Not printed.

500.A4e/589: Telegram
[Document 624]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 17, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received May 17—1:22 p.m.]
39. Our number 37, May 12, 1 p.m.
1. At a meeting at Dutch Legation May 15, subsequent to meeting of
advisers May 13, foreign delegates after making a few unimportant verbal
changes unanimously adopted draft agreement for implementing
Washington surtaxes to be referred by foreign delegates of [to] their
respective Governments for approval. The only change of any consequence
relates to coast-trade duties and is found in paragraph 2 in which phrase
“within 3 months after” is substituted for “simultaneously with”.
2. We request the Department’s approval, at the earliest moment, of the
draft as now submitted in order that we may be prepared to cooperate with
the other foreign delegates in presenting this matter to the Chinese with a
view to early and definite agreement for effectuating Washington surtaxes.
3. At the meeting of delegates above referred to, the Japanese submitted
proposal for an additional paragraph as follows:
“It is furthermore understood that, with a view to increasing the
facilities enjoyed by traders, suitable adjustments will be made in
the appointment [and assignment]67a of the foreign staff of the
Chinese Maritime Customs Service, giving due consideration to
the trade relations with Chinese of the foreign powers
concerned.”
American delegates stated that while they were not unfavorably disposed
toward the principle expressed in this proposal, they thought it would be
very unfortunate to embody such a provision in the agreement, as it would

open the way for the Chinese to raise the whole question of customs
administrations. It was agreed that subject matter of the proposal should be
considered, but that for the present at least paragraph should not be adopted
as a part of the draft agreement.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
67a Corrected on the basis of despatch No. 5117, Nov. 1, 1940, from the
Ambassador in Japan (file No. 026 Foreign Relations/1511).

500.A4e/589: Telegram
[Document 625]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
WASHINGTON, May 20, 1926—5 p.m.
24. Your 39 May 17, 5 p.m. Department does not know just what
commodities are listed in schedule annexed to draft protocol but presumes
list is consistent with principle set forth paragraph 3A of Department’s 303,
October 23, 7 p.m.68 Subject to the foregoing, Department approves of draft
agreement for implementing Washington surtaxes communicated in your 37
May 12, 1 p.m. as modified by paragraph 1 of your telegram under
acknowledgment. Department believes it highly inadvisable to include in
such an agreement any reference to increased employment of foreign staff
of Chinese maritime customs such as that given in paragraph 3 of your 39.
KELLOGG
68 Telegram to the Minister in China, Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 859.

500.A4e/597: Telegram
[Document 626]
The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
TOKYO, May 26, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received May 26—9:32 a.m.]
53. Last night the Foreign Minister, in an interview, said that reports to the
effect that he expected the suspension of the Customs Conference at Peking
had no truth in them, and that he had every reason for believing that the
Conference would continue until the conferees reached some plan that was
definite, at least sufficiently definite to submit it to the Government of
China when one was established, reiterating the substance of the statements
contained in my 39 of April 26, 5 p.m.69 He believed it to be the expectation
of other powers also that the Conference would continue. He said that when
Colonel Peel70 went through Tokyo on his way, Peel told him that his
departure from Peking in no way indicated any relaxation of British efforts
to gain an agreement; the British Minister was to stay in Peking, and the
experts for the most part were to continue. The Foreign Minister further
stated that Mr. Saburi, the Japanese delegate, might go on a vacation in the
latter part of June because he had recently been in poor health owing to
overwork, but that at present there was no intention of withdrawing him
from Peking.
MACVEAGH
69 Not printed.
70 Col. Sidney Peel, British delegate to the Customs Conference.

500.A4e/600
[Document 627]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
LONDON, May 28, 1926.
[Received June 5, 1926.]
No. 1045
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my telegram No. 107, of May 25, 1 p.m.,71
relating to the Customs Conference now meeting at Peking, and to transmit
herewith a copy of the Note mentioned therein.71
A memorandum, a copy of which is also enclosed, was handed today to a
member of the Embassy staff by Mr. Mounsey, of the Foreign Office, who
stated that Mr. Wellesley was at the moment out of town.
In referring to the question of debt consolidation, Mr. Mounsey informally
stated that His Majesty’s Government were in his opinion prepared to
consider favorably a proposition which they understood was now being
entertained by the Conference, namely, that up to one third of the customs
revenue be devoted to debt consolidation. It would seem evident from the
conversation however that the British are most anxious that some action of
the Conference should commend itself to the Chinese public in order that
there may be no increase in anti-foreign feeling thereby increasing any
existing resentment against Great Britain. To this end it would seem that the
British may insist that the Washington surtaxes be granted before any
adjournment, even temporary, of the Conference takes place. Secondly, that
a scheme of foreign control of the customs revenue for debt consolidation
will not be favorably considered in view of the probable dissatisfaction this
might create among the Chinese over the alleged increase of foreign
interference and control thereby.
I have [etc.]

For the Ambassador:
F. A. STERLING
Counselor of Embassy
[Enclosure]
The British Foreign Office to the American Embassy
MEMORANDUM
His Majesty’s Government have received through the United States
Embassy in London a message from the United States Government72
enquiring whether His Majesty’s Government endorse the attitude ascribed
to the British Delegation at Peking of desiring to abandon the negotiations
at Peking and break up the Tariff Conference; and expressing the hope that
His Majesty’s Government will continue to cooperate with the other
interested Powers in bringing to a conclusion the task which was begun last
October.
2. His Majesty’s Government desire to assure the United States
Government that the report received by them that the British
Delegation desire to withdraw from the negotiations at Peking
appears to be based on a complete misunderstanding. His
Majesty’s Government have no intention whatever of breaking up
the Tariff Conference. It is true that the question has been
considered whether at the present juncture it might not be
convenient to arrange a brief suspension of the conference over
the summer months. It was realized, however, that in existing
circumstances suspension of the conference might prove to be
more prolonged than was intended, and in order to prevent the
possibility of misunderstanding as to the sincerity of the Powers,
His Majesty’s Government considered it to be of the greatest
importance that before even such a brief suspension as above
contemplated took place, there must first be a complete
liquidation of the promises made at Washington.
3. The British Delegation in Peking fully shared this view, and
appreciated the prime necessity of liquidating the Washington

Treaty. A considerable interchange of views has, however, taken
place between the Foreign Office and the Delegation in regard to
the proceedings of the conference on the subject of the unsecured
debt; and it is probable that the misunderstanding to which
reference is made above has arisen in consequence of the attitude
which the Delegation has been instructed to take on this matter,
and which was formally stated by the chief British Delegate at the
meeting at the Netherlands Legation on the 6th May.
4. The United States Government will no doubt recollect that His
Majesty’s Government were from the first averse to the
imposition on the Chinese Government of any scheme of
consolidation of the unsecured debt as part of the work of the
Tariff Conference, and that they only agreed later and with great
reluctance to the discussion of any such scheme at the conference.
If the schemes of the foreign Delegations for the consolidation of
the unsecured debt should postulate too strict a control over
China’s customs revenues (shortly to be increased by tariff
autonomy) His Majesty’s Government are afraid that a dangerous
deadlock may arise, for the discussions on this subject show that
the Chinese, though willing to bind themselves to devote a
proportion of their revenues to the unsecured debt, have declined
to allow the details of debt consolidation to be dealt with by the
Tariff Conference, and will refuse to submit to any extension of
foreign control—for that or any other purpose—over China’s
customs revenues.
5. His Majesty’s Government, after full consideration and
prolonged consultation with their Delegation in Peking, have
come to the conclusion that, while they are ready to agree to any
reasonable scheme for dealing with the unsecured debt put
forward by the Chinese and agreed to by the other Powers, it
would not be right to associate themselves with any attempt to
force upon the Chinese a greater degree of foreign control over
the revenues required for that purpose than they are prepared
voluntarily to concede. A policy involving increase of foreign
control, and capable of being regarded as an encroachment on that

sovereignty and independence of China which the Powers agreed
at Washington to respect, is so fundamentally opposed to the
traditional policy of the United States towards China that His
Majesty’s Government are disposed to believe that the State
Department will share their anxiety on this subject.
6. It is true that His Majesty’s Government originally desired to
exact proper guarantees from China in regard to the abolition of
likin as a condition precedent to the grant of the Washington
surtaxes, but they have come to the conclusion that, in the altered
circumstances and changed atmosphere of to-day, any attempt to
insist upon guarantees against the will of the Chinese Government
would only result in postponing indefinitely the liquidation of the
Washington promises. They are as anxious as the United States
Government fully to implement these promises at the earliest
possible moment, and believe that it would be contrary to the
intentions of both governments, both at and subsequent to the
Washington Conference, to subordinate the fulfilment of these
promises to the imposition upon China of a scheme for the
consolidation of her unsecured debt and extension of foreign
control over her customs revenues. Any failure to implement the
Washington Treaty might create a very dangerous situation, and
His Majesty’s Government, now, therefore, hold the view that if
any reasonably satisfactory assurances are given by the Chinese
Government as to the use which it proposes to make of the new
revenues the Powers should accept such assurances, abstain from
any attempt to impose control or exact guarantees, and forthwith
authorize the levy of the surtaxes. They feel confident that a
policy, so closely in accord with the friendship and generosity
always displayed by the United States of America towards the
people of China, will receive the full and cordial support of the
United States Government.
71 Not printed.
71 Not printed.

72 See telegram No. 66, May 5, to the Ambassador in Great Britain, p. 748
[Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 620].

500.A4e/602: Telegram
[Document 628]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 10, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received June 10—8:28 a.m.]
Conference 43. 1. Although the technical experts representing all foreign
powers reached definite agreement June 1st upon resolution respecting
custodian banks to be attached to protocol implementing Washington
surtaxes, the Japanese delegation at a meeting of delegates this morning
refused to consider the report of experts until they had further instructions
from their Government and advanced the opinion that the foreign
delegations should make further immediate effort to reach an agreement
upon questions considered heretofore, with a view to concluding a new
treaty concerning larger projects, including consolidation of debts.
2. British delegates suggested that when Washington surtax protocol was
agreed upon they would decide whether there was a Chinese Government to
treat with, in which case the protocol should be submitted to the Chinese as
a basis of negotiation accompanied by a note to the effect that the foreign
powers assumed that the Chinese Government would make the necessary
arrangements for giving effect to the agreement and that in event that
opposition by any of the several provinces should make it impossible for
the Chinese Government to give effect to said agreement, collection of
surtaxes therein provided would be postponed until such opposition should
be removed. There was informal general approval of this suggestion but the
meeting adjourned without any definite action because of refusal of
Japanese delegates to proceed until they heard from their Government,
which they expect to do at any time.
MACMURRAY

500.A4e/605: Telegram
[Document 629]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State73
PEKING, June 13, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received June 12 (13?)—6:43 a.m.]
Conference number 44. Your number 30, June 10, 6 p.m.74 quoting cable
[sic] British Foreign Office. The British cable evidences misconception of
the underlying purpose of debt consolidation which is not so much one for
the satisfaction of China’s foreign creditors as it is for the reestablishment
of China’s credit, which is necessary condition precedent to continuation of
China’s foreign trade and her development.
2. Rebellious and impatient attitude of China’s foreign creditors is caused
not so much by their failure to receive payment of their debts as by the
persistent ignoring and violation by the Chinese Government of its
contracts with foreign creditors and the superimposing of domestic loans
ahead of the foreign debts, the proceeds of which loans have been devoted
to carrying on of useless wars.
3. The British cable evidences solicitude that if the powers are too insistent
upon an orderly consolidation of China’s debts it will prejudice British
trade. On the contrary we believe that the leading Chinese merchants and
bankers will agree with foreign traders and creditors that the
reestablishment of China’s credit is her most vital problem. The thoughtful
Chinese welcome an equitable debt consolidation to that end.
4. We would be doing a great injustice to the Chinese people as well as to
foreign trade if we agreed upon treaty largely increasing China’s revenue
without consolidating her debts and attempting to reestablish her credit.
Unrestrained by such obligation the Chinese Government would continue in
the future as it has in the past to dissipate all the revenue in the perpetuation
of useless wars.

5. There is no protest from the Chinese delegates against the participation of
foreign powers in evolving plan for a debt consolidation. Principal
arguments have arisen among the powers themselves as to the rates of
interest and as to what debts should be included.
The conferences respecting debt consolidation were continued until the
British delegates refused longer to sit, and the two members representing
them in this phase of conference work left for home (see our telegram
number 35, May 4, 6 p.m.).75
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
73 Copy of this telegram was enclosed in Department’s instruction No. 569,
June 23, to the Ambassador in Great Britain, with instructions to bring the
contents informally to the attention of the British Foreign Office.
74 Not printed; it summarized despatch No. 1045, May 28, from the
Ambassador in Great Britain and the British memorandum enclosed, p. 755
[Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 627].
75 Not printed.

500.A4e/600: Telegram
[Document 630]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
WASHINGTON, June 19, 1926—noon.
123. Your Conference No. 44 and Department’s 119 of June 14, 6 p.m.76
1. Colonel Peel called upon the Chief of the Far Eastern Division
on the afternoon of the 17th. He stated, among other things, that a
difference of opinion had grown up between the British and
American Delegations at the Conference over the question of debt
consolidation, the British feeling that the plan worked out by the
Americans and the Japanese placed too heavy a burden upon the
customs revenues. He stated that British Government was
unwilling to consent to a plan which might become so
burdensome upon the customs revenue as to absorb the greater
part of that revenue and make it impossible for the British
Government in the future to support the customs régime. No
comment was made to Colonel Peel’s remarks other than to say
that we hoped to continue negotiations until some equitable and
mutually satisfactory settlement had been reached.
2. Has question of bearing of any scheme for debt consolidation
upon future of customs régime been considered by you? Customs
Administration is already unpopular in China although created by
China itself. Any question of necessity of supporting Customs
Administration by foreign force to insure fulfillment of
arrangement for meeting interest of consolidated debt would not
meet with popular support in the United States.
KELLOGG
76 Latter not printed.

500.A4e/628
[Document 631]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 28, 1926.
[Received July 26.]
SIR: Reference is made to Conference telegram No. 43, dated June 10, 3
p.m., in which it was stated that a meeting of Delegates was held on that
date for the purpose of dealing with a draft Resolution respecting Custodian
Banks, to be attached to the Protocol implementing the Washington Treaty
surtaxes, and that this meeting adjourned without any definite action being
taken because of the refusal of the Japanese Delegates to proceed until they
had heard from their Government, from which they expected to receive
instructions at an early date.
In this connection, it should be made clear that the Japanese Delegates
declined not only to discuss the draft Resolution respecting Custodian
Banks, but also to give any intimation of the attitude of their Government
toward the Protocol for implementing the Washington surtaxes which had
been unanimously adopted ad referendum by the Delegates on May 15. (See
Delegation’s No. 39, May 17, 5 p.m.) In taking this position, which
apparently was done under instructions, the Japanese Delegates took upon
themselves the sole responsibility for further delay with respect to the
implementing of the Washington Treaty surtaxes: for all the other foreign
Delegations were able to announce substantial acceptance of the Protocol as
a basis of negotiation with the Chinese Delegation, or to state that they
anticipated no objections from their Governments upon the subject.
 
On June 17 Mr. Strawn telegraphed the Department that he expected to sail
on July 13, but that he might be delayed another two weeks on account of
the dilatory tactics now being practiced by the Japanese respecting the

Tariff Conference, and that he would remain here until he had exhausted his
efforts to effectuate the purpose of his mission.
The same day a message was received from the Japanese Delegation,
stating that instructions had been received from Tokyo and that the Japanese
Delegates would like to confer with the American Delegates. A meeting was
accordingly held at the American Legation on the afternoon of June 18.
At this meeting Mr. Hioki77 stated that his Government would prefer not to
implement the Washington surtaxes apart from the negotiation of the larger
treaty which the Conference had had under consideration heretofore and
that, in view of the difficulties in the way of concluding this task at the
present juncture, the Japanese Government, while not proposing, would be
willing to see the Conference take a recess for the summer, with the definite
understanding that the Conference should reconvene on September 30. If,
however, it was desired to proceed with the implementing of the
Washington surtaxes at the present time, the Japanese Government would
be prepared to agree to this course if the first two sections were deleted
from the draft Protocol adopted by the Delegates ad referendum on May 15.
Mr. Hioki did not produce the text of his instructions either with regard to
the Washington Treaty surtaxes or with regard to the recess. Mr. Strawn
stated the reason for the insertion of the first two sections in the Protocol,
explaining that they had been put there largely to satisfy the desire of the
British Delegation that a definite beginning should be made with respect to
the abolition of likin and that the omission of any step in this direction was
regarded by the British as contrary, at least, to the spirit of the Washington
Treaty. Mr. MacMurray made a lengthy statement with regard to the
position of the American Delegation to the effect that the foreign
Delegations ought to make no move which would give the Chinese
opportunity, whether fairly or unfairly, to say that the foreign Powers had
not performed their pledges and were not acting in good faith. It would be
better to avoid any adjournment or recess by formal action. Mr. MacMurray
then said that he was not in a position to say off-hand what might be the
view of the American Delegates with regard to the Japanese proposals; but,
since the British Delegation had been more primarily interested in the
sections which it was proposed to delete, it might be advisable if the

Japanese Delegates should ascertain the views of the British Delegation
with respect to their proposals. Mr. Hioki replied that they had arranged for
a conference with the British Delegation on the following morning.
On the afternoon of June 19 it was learned from the British Delegation that
the Japanese Delegates had made the same proposals as they had previously
made to the American Delegates and that they had been informed that the
British Delegates would submit the proposals for the consideration of their
Government. So far as can be ascertained, the British Delegation is not yet
formally in a position to make known the views of the British Government
with respect to the Japanese proposals. However, from conversations which
Messrs. Mac-Murray and Strawn have had with the British Minister, we
believe the British, if necessary to come to an accord with the Japanese,
would consent to the deletion of the first two paragraphs of the proposed
Protocol (paragraph one being with respect to the coast-wise reimport
duties $4,000,000, and paragraph two the transit pass permits $5,000,000)
and let all of the revenue from the surtaxes, except the $9,000,000 annually
for administrative purposes, be impounded to await future disposition by
the Conference.
The Japanese attitude during the past six weeks has been very disappointing
to the American Delegation especially in view of the very cordial spirit of
co-operation which had existed between the two Delegations throughout the
Conference and of the efforts which the American Delegation had
consistently made to accommodate the Japanese in matters which were
regarded by them as of primary importance in the maintenance of their
commercial and financial interests in China. The new attitude of the
Japanese, indicative of a desire to dictate terms, or, in the alternative, of a
readiness to take independent action, has been a surprise. The situation is
probably to be explained by reason of a difference of opinion between the
Japanese Foreign Office and the Japanese Delegation … Whatever the
cause, the effect has not been the less annoying with respect to proceeding
with the work of the Conference.
While it is, of course, impossible to ascertain the exact purpose of the
Japanese proposals, one cannot avoid the impression that the Tokyo Foreign
Office does not desire, at the present juncture, to make any commitments,

preferring to watch the development and outcome of the present political
situation at Peking.
Simultaneously with this unexpected action of the Japanese in insisting
upon matters involving delay in the work of the Conference, there have
been appearing in the press various articles, indicating the Japanese
Delegation as their source of information, referring to Mr. Strawn’s early
departure for the United States and drafted in such a way as to suggest that
any eventual failure on the part of the Conference to reach agreements and
effectuate concrete results will be due to the unwillingness of the American
Delegation longer to cooperate. As illustrative of this sort of propaganda,
there is enclosed herewith a copy of an article issued by the Nippon Dempo
(Japanese Telegraph News), appearing in the People’s Tribune of Peking on
June 25, entitled “Strawn Leaving—Conference will Hold Sessions”;78 also
a copy of an article appearing in the Peking North China Standard
(Japanese) of June 25, entitled “Expect to Settle Surtax Question Here—Mr.
Strawn Sails.”79
To offset this obvious effort on the part of the Japanese to place the blame
upon the American Delegation for a delay of the work of the Conference
attaching solely to the Japanese themselves, Mr. Strawn issued to the local
press a statement of his position with respect to the matter of his return to
the United States. This statement appeared in the Peking press on the
morning of June 26 and a copy of it is enclosed herewith for the
Department’s information.78
In view of the failure to date of the Chinese to form a government with
which negotiations can be carried on, it is, of course, difficult for the
American Delegation to take any action in the face of the Japanese policy of
delay. Should the Chinese form a nucleus of government within the
immediate or near future, it would then, of course, be possible to resume
negotiations and be necessary for any Delegation desirous of delay either to
renounce such desires, or to disclose its reasons for refusing to co-operate.
The American Delegation hopes that the present confused situation in
which the Tariff Conference now finds itself may be clarified at an early
date.

I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
Chairman, American Delegation to the Special Conference on the Chinese
Customs Tariff
77 Eki Hioki, chairman of the Japanese delegation.
78 Not printed.
79 Not printed. The title of the article is incorrect; it should read “Expect to
settle surtax issue ere Mr. Strawn sails.”
78 Not printed.

500.A4e/614: Telegram
[Document 632]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 30, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received June 30—6:46 a.m.]
Conference 45. 1. All other sources of revenue except anticipated
Washington surtaxes being exhausted, indications are that Chang Tso-lin
and Wu Pei-fu80 will shortly agree to Cabinet in expectation that the powers
will then negotiate the protocol implementing Washington Treaty, thus
enabling Chang [and] Wu to borrow money to carry on their war against
Kuominchun. The latter have a large army, well organized, supplied with
food and ammunition and technical assistance primarily by Russia and
fortified in strong positions so that their defeat by the allied forces of Chang
[and] Wu is by no means certain. Indeed there is at least possibility of
Kuominchun prevailing, which might result in their resumption of control
of Peking Government.
2. If by implementing Washington Treaty we enable Chang [and] Wu to
continue the war, the powers will undoubtedly be criticized by Kuominchun
and Canton party and their followers, and Canton area and some other
provinces will probably refuse either to collect surtaxes or decline to remit
them to the Central Government. They will take the position that
Washington Conference did not contemplate increased surtaxes to be used
to carry on factional wars.
3. On the other hand if we refuse to implement Washington treaties, Chang,
Wu and followers will charge powers with bad faith.
4. Indications are that we shall shortly have to decide which of three
courses we shall follow: (a) refuse to negotiate protocol with Chang-Wu
cabinet because we do not recognize it as the central government of China;
(b) recognize their cabinet at least for the purpose of implementing
Washington surtax treaty and give them unconditionally $750,000 per

month for administrative purposes, impounding remainder of Washington
surtax revenue to await disposition by the Conference—this would mean
that Chang-Wu government would immediately borrow money which
would be used to carry on war and not for administrative purposes; or (c)
accompany protocol implementing Washington surtaxes with note to the
effect that foreign powers expect the Chinese Government to remove all
opposition among the provinces to the agreement and, in the event of failure
of Chinese Government to remove such opposition before the date when
rates are to become effective (90 days after the date of protocol), then
effective date of rates shall be postponed until opposition is removed.
Following arguments may be made in favor of this note: (1) Preservation of
Maritime Customs Administration and prevention of its disintegration; (2)
test of strength of Central Government—obviously, if it is unable to carry
into effect Washington surtax treaty, it cannot hope to make effective
proposed interim surtax treaty; (3) prevention of opposition of
Kuominchun, Canton and other factions which, if Washington treaty were
tendered to the present Chinese Government unconditionally, might insist
that the powers were aiding Chang and Wu by enabling them to borrow
money as above indicated; (4) note would allay fear of importers that tariff
would become effective in some parts of China and not in others; (5) note
would serve as notice to the bankers that tariff would not become effective
unless provisions of note were complied with and present Government
officials could probably not borrow money on the strength of anticipated
revenues.
Arguments against sending note: (1) Chinese Government will probably not
accept the proposition contained in the note because of conscious inability
to deliver all provinces; (2) note invites opposition of the provinces; (3)
note would by inference recognize obstructive powers of provinces to any
action taken by Central Government; (4) if conditions were attached to
implementing of the treaty the Powers might be charged with bad faith in
that they did not fulfill unconditionally obligations of Washington Treaty;
(5) so long as the Powers recognize existing Chinese Government by
diplomatic contact is it consistent for them to insist that the Government is
incapable of functioning without the approval of each of the provinces.

5. Japanese delegates have proposed elimination of paragraphs 1 and 2 of
draft protocol set forth in our 37, May 12, 1 p.m., and that $9,000,000
annually disposed of by those paragraphs be thrown into impounded fund to
await disposition of Conference. The British are submitting Japan’s
proposal to Foreign Office. We believe present indications are the British
will accept Japanese proposal. While we believe deleted paragraphs follow
letter and spirit of Washington Treaty in that they evidence disposition pro
tanto to effectuate abolition of likin we would not recommend standing out
against the Japanese proposal if the British agree.
6. Unless we are prepared to withhold recognition until China evolves
stable government, which course might ultimately be best for the Chinese
people but which we believe other powers, especially British and Japanese,
would not at this time adopt, we believe we should follow the plan to
implement Washington surtaxes as suggested in paragraph 4 (5).82
7. It may be the British will recede from their previous insistence about
accompanying note as indicated in second paragraph of our 43, June 10, 3
p.m., and that they will deliver the protocol unconditionally. If, however,
they or the Japanese insist upon accompanying note we should like to have
your authority to vote with them on that proposition.
8. Inasmuch as decision as to which of the three courses above outlined we
should follow involves general policy of our Government toward China, we
should much appreciate your instructions as promptly as possible.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
80 Military leaders in North China.
82 Of this telegram.

500.A4e/614: Telegram
[Document 633]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, July 2, 1926—6 p.m.
33. Referring to paragraph 4 of your telegram, conference number 45, June
30, 9 a.m. The whole protocol, in the opinion of the Department, ought to
be put into effect. If the British and Japanese do not desire to accept the
protocol as a whole, the plan outlined in your fourth paragraph in
subsection (b) is the next best plan. Forming an opinion on what course to
take about the note is difficult here. The view of the Department is that we
should not join in it but go ahead to put article III and paragraph 2 of the
sixth article of the Treaty of Washington into effect on the assumption that
the only Chinese government we can deal with is the Central Government.
Undoubtedly we are running some risk. However, heretofore our policy in
regard to carrying out the Washington Treaties has been to go as far as it
was possible to go. The difficulties you face are realized by the Department,
and in case you feel that it is very important for us to join in the note, will
you please cable. If we do join in the note, the protocol will doubtless not
go into effect at all, and possibly the charge may be made against us that we
are unwilling to fulfill the Treaty of Washington, despite the truth of the fact
that the imposition of the surtax was to be made on such conditions as
might be determined by the Conference.
KELLOGG

500.A4e/617: Telegram
[Document 634]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, July 8, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received July 3—5:43 p.m.]
48. Our 47 of July 3, 6 p.m.83 We consider that the meeting held this
morning marks the close, to our great disappointment, of all possibility of
making progress, at least until autumn, with the work of the Conference.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
83 Not printed; it contained a report of the meeting held July 3. For details
of that meeting, see pp. 837–840 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 635].

600.A4e/649
[Document 635]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 8, 1926.
[Received September 11.]
SIR: For the convenience of the Department, and as a means of summarizing,
as well as supplementing, the official Proceedings of the Special
Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff, a full set of which is enclosed
herewith,84 and copies of which have been furnished to the Department as
they were issued, we have the honor to submit the following report
concerning the work of the Conference to date: The First Plenary Session,
October 26, 1925.
The First Plenary Session of the Special Conference on the Chinese
Customs Tariff was held at Peking on Monday, October 26, 1925, at 10:20
o’clock a.m., in the Chu Jen Tang, Chung Hai, Winter Palace. His
Excellency, Shen Jui-lin, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
China, presided, and after formally opening the Conference, introduced the
Chief Executive of the Chinese Republic, Tuan Chi-jui, who delivered an
address of welcome. (See Minutes of First Plenary Session, October 26,
1925, for text of address). After the Chief Executive’s address the
Conference was organized for work, His Excellency, Mr. Shen Jui-lin,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, being elected Chairman of the Conference on
motion of Mr. Oudendijk, the Netherlands Delegate. The Chairman thanked
the Delegates for the honor they had conferred upon him, and after a brief
address of welcome, introduced Dr. C. T. Wang, who laid before the
Conference the proposals of the Chinese Government on the question of
Tariff Autonomy. Dr. Wang referred to the fact that at the Paris Peace
Conference in 1919 the Chinese Delegation had presented the question of
Tariff Autonomy, but that it was not discussed on the ground that it did not
come within the scope of the Conference. He also stated that it was brought
up at the Washington Conference and discussed but that it was not accepted
in toto whereupon the Chinese Delegation at that Conference had declared,

at the Seventeenth Meeting of the Committee on Pacific and Far Eastern
Questions on January 5, 1922, that it was their intention to bring up the
question of Tariff Autonomy again for consideration on all appropriate
occasions in the future.85 He cited particularly Section I of Article I of the
Nine Power Treaty relating to Principles and Policies, by which the
signatory powers agreed to respect the sovereignty, the independence and
the territorial and administrative integrity of China.86 Dr. Wang stated that
the Government of the Republic of China attached great importance to that
declaration and considered that the Special Conference afforded an
appropriate opportunity to renew the request for Tariff Autonomy. He
thereupon submitted the following proposals for the removal of the
restrictions imposed by the existing treaties with respect to the Chinese
Customs tariff:
(1) The participating Powers formally declare to the Government
of the Republic of China their respect for its tariff autonomy and
agree to the removal of all the tariff restrictions contained in
existing treaties.
(2) The Government of the Republic of China agrees to the
abolition of likin simultaneously with the enforcement of the
National Tariff Law which shall take effect not later than the 1st
day of January in the 18th year of the Republic of China. (1929)
(3) Previous to the enforcement of the Chinese National Tariff
Law, an interim surtax of 5% on ordinary goods, 30% on A grade
luxuries (namely, Wine and Tobacco) and 20% on B grade
luxuries shall be levied in addition to the present customs tariff of
5% ad valorem.
(4) The collection of the above-mentioned interim surtaxes shall
begin three months from the date of signature.
(5) The decisions relative to the above four articles shall be
carried into effect from the date of signature.
Following this announcement brief addresses were made on behalf of each
Delegation by the following Delegates: American, Mr. Mac-Murray;

Belgian, Mr. de Warzée; Danish, Mr. Kauffmann; French, Count de Martel;
British, Sir Ronald Macleay; Italian, Mr. Cerruti; Japanese, Mr. Hioki; The
Netherlands, Mr. Oudendijk; Norwegian, Mr. Michelet; Portuguese, Mr. de
Bianchi; Spanish, Mr. Garrido; Swedish, Mr. Ewerlof. The text of all these
addresses may be found in the Proceedings of the First Plenary Session,
October 26, 1925. After all the Delegations had responded to the address of
welcome, Dr. Hawkling Yen was elected Secretary-General of the
Conference and the Chiefs of each Delegation, together with Dr. C. T.
Wang, were appointed a Committee on Programme and Procedure. With the
fixing of 11 o’clock a.m., October 27, as the time for the meeting of the
Committee on Programme and Procedure, the First Plenary Session was
adjourned subject to the call of the Chairman.
 
Meeting of the Committee on Programme and Procedure, October 27, 1925.
At the meeting of the Committee on Programme and Procedure, held
October 27, 1925, Dr. C. T. Wang was unanimously elected Chairman and,
after expressing his thanks for the honor conferred upon him, he pointed out
that the Agenda (See p. 22, Minutes of October 27, 1925), presented three
different sets of questions to be discussed namely:
A. Tariff Autonomy.
B. Provisional Measures.
C. Related Matters.
Dr. Wang suggested that there should be three different committees, one
dealing with each of these three sets of questions, and that a fourth
committee, a Drafting Committee, be appointed later. After brief debate this
suggestion prevailed and each Delegation was requested to submit the
names of the Delegates or experts to be included as members of the four
committees.
In the course of the meeting suggestions were made by Sir Ronald Macleay,
Mr. Cerruti and others that it would be well to make some rearrangement of

the Agenda, as some of the questions seemed to be inappropriately placed.
Dr. Wang voiced vigorous objection to any change being made in the
Agenda on the ground that it had been sent out by the Chinese Government
and accepted by the different Delegations and should therefore not be
changed. A difference of opinion immediately arose as to whether the
Agenda had actually been accepted by the participating governments and
Mr. Oudendijk explained how the matter had been handled by him in his
capacity as Senior Minister. He stated that the Agenda, with certain slight
modifications which had been made after discussion in a meeting of the
Diplomatic Body, had been telegraphed by his colleagues to their respective
governments for approval. The modifications contemplated omitting the
item of “Abolition of Likin” from “A”, and making it a separate subject on
the Agenda called “B”, thus making the heading, “Provisional Measures”,
come under “C”. “Related Matters” would then be called “D” and under
this heading was the question of the Board of Reference authorized by a
resolution adopted at the Washington Conference. Most of the Governments
concerned approved the Agenda as modified, but when the matter was
submitted to the Chinese Government the Chinese Committee of the
Conference held that the time was too short to make alterations. There the
matter had rested, according to Mr. Oudendijk. Notwithstanding Dr. Wang’s
insistence that the Agenda had been accepted, it was clear that this view
was not shared by other Delegates, notably Count de Martel, Mr. Cerruti
and Sir Ronald Macleay. Considerable debate ensued and various
suggestions were made with a view to a modification of the Agenda and
since Dr. Wang would not agree to a change it was finally suggested by Mr.
MacMurray that he (Dr. Wang) should draft a statement to be formally
recorded in the Minutes to the effect that the Chinese Government
proposed, in connection with Articles 1 and 2 under Section B, to include a
discussion of the disposal of the proceeds of the surtaxes. This suggestion,
by way of compromise, was accepted by Dr. Wang and the following
statement was made a part of the Minutes:
“The question of the disposal of the proceeds from the surtaxes as
provided in items 1 and 2 under “B” (Provisional Measures to be
taken during the Interim Period) will be discussed when the
Committee on Section B meets.”

Sir Ronald Macleay appeared not to be entirely satisfied with this
statement, since he feared that the Delegates might be debarred from
discussing any of the questions raised in the Nine-Power Treaty, such as the
steps to be taken for the abolition of likin, the levying of the 2½% surtax on
ordinary articles, the 5% surtax on luxuries and the purposes, time and
conditions of the surtax. At the suggestion of Sir Ronald Macleay, Mr.
MacMurray’s statement was amended so as to read as follows:
“It is understood that the question of the disposal of the proceeds
from the surtaxes as provided in Items 1 and 2 under B
(Provisional Measures to be Taken During the Interim Period) as
well as the questions of the date of enforcement and of the
conditions subject to which they are imposed, will be dealt with
by the Committee on Section B.”
This amended statement was adopted and made a part of the Minutes.
At this point Mr. MacMurray suggested that the Agenda under which the
Conference would work contained no reference to the so-called Board of
Reference authorized by one of the Washington Conference Resolutions,87
and he proposed that provision should be made for discussing and dealing
with that matter. Dr. Wang, after stating that the matter was not embraced in
any treaty signed at the Washington Conference, but was merely a
resolution, said quite frankly that the Chinese people seriously objected to
the Board of Reference and requested Mr. MacMurray to withdraw the
suggestion, as he did not consider it advisable to bring up matters which
might seriously delay or hinder the successful conclusion of the
Conference. Mr. MacMurray replied that while he would not insist upon an
immediate discussion, he wished to make it clear that the American
Delegation, first of all, was under instructions to fulfill its duties under the
Washington Conference provisions and that the Delegation would reserve
the right at any time that was appropriate during the Conference to discuss
and dispose of all the questions which by the treaty or resolution were
imposed upon them at this Conference. Sir Ronald Macleay made a similar
reservation and the general debate that ensued divulged the fact that the
Delegates wished it to be understood that the Agenda covered all points

arising from the Washington Treaty and resolution for the purpose of which
the Conference had been convened.
It was agreed that the official language of the Conference should be Chinese
and English, but that any Delegate who so preferred could speak in French.
The Rules of Procedure were then taken up and, after discussion, were
adopted with slight amendments. A copy of the Rules of Procedure as
adopted may be found on p. 23 of the Minutes of the Committee on
Programme and Procedure, October 27, 1925.
After deciding to issue a brief press communique the Committee adjourned.
Committee on Tariff Autonomy, First Meeting, October 30, 1925.
The third meeting held under the auspices of the Special Conference was
that of the Committee on Tariff Autonomy which was held on October 30,
1925. At the suggestion of Mr. Oudendijk, Dr. C. T. Wang was elected
Chairman of the Committee and in taking the chair he referred to the
Proposals on Chinese Tariff Autonomy presented at the Plenary Session of
October 26, and to the proposals presented by the Chinese Delegation at the
Paris Peace Conference in 1919 (See p. 3, et seq., of Minutes of October 30,
1925). He praised the spirit of the Washington Treaty, but stated that the
Chinese people found it difficult to accept the conditions of the Treaty. He
stated that the Chinese people were determined to exercise what was due
China as a sovereign nation and that it had often been said that the right of
tariff autonomy had been denied to China because of a lack of unity in the
country, but that this seemed to him in the nature of a vicious circle. He
stated also that the Government, in order to function properly should have
freedom of action in fiscal matters and that China, by reason of various
treaties with the foreign powers, was bound hand and foot and was not able
to increase its revenues without the consent of the Powers concerned. In
commenting on the fear expressed in some quarters that the additional
revenues which might accrue to China would be squandered, he stated that
no portion of the customs revenues had ever been dissipated. He spoke also
of the overdue obligations of the Chinese Government and the need for the
economic development of the country, especially railway construction. He
asked for the views of other Delegates and Mr. Hioki responded with a

detailed statement of the views of the Japanese Government on the
proposals of the Chinese Government (See p. 8, et seq., of Minutes of
October 30, 1925). Mr. Hioki stated that his remarks were a continuation of
the statement made by him at the opening session of the Conference. At this
point Sir Ronald Macleay sought the views of the Chairman on the question
of Likin, but Dr. Wang, before passing to that question, preferred to hear
from all the Delegations on the subject of Tariff Autonomy. Mr. Strawn
responded on behalf of the American Delegation, saying that he assumed
that each of the Powers represented at the Conference recognized the
sovereign right of China to enjoy tariff autonomy, when conditions should
warrant it. He voiced the view that the American Government would be
glad to see the time arrive when China should enjoy full tariff autonomy.
Mr. Strawn, like Sir Ronald Macleay, requested the views of the Chairman
on the question of the abolishment of likin, especially since it appeared that
this question was so closely related to Tariff Autonomy that the latter could
not be discussed without some knowledge of the plans of the Chinese
Government for the abolishment of likin. He stated also that the American
Delegation was prepared to act immediately upon anything which came
within the purview of the Washington Treaty, but that matters outside that
category would have to be referred to his Government for instructions. He
reiterated that the American Delegation had come to the Conference with
open minds in the hope of arriving at an understanding which would be to
the mutual benefit of all. The Chairman, in reply, stated that the Chinese
Government was determined to abolish Likin as soon as possible and that
the plan contemplated its abolishment within three years, or not later than
January 1, 1929, and even possibly by the first part of 1928. At this point
the Chairman announced that after the Powers represented at the
Conference should agree to tariff autonomy the Chinese Government, for its
part, would agree to the abolition of Likin. Thereupon Mr. Strawn remarked
that he did not think it would be very satisfactory to have a statement from
each of the Powers that it was willing to concede tariff autonomy to China
unless it could be known when and how tariff autonomy was to be enjoyed,
whether likin was to be abolished and how that would affect the Treaty
Powers. He pointed out that the mere statement by the Powers that they
respected and conceded the right of China to enjoy tariff autonomy was
easily made, but this did not, in his opinion, advance their position to any
great extent. He reiterated the statement that the American Delegation was

prepared to do all in its power to bring about at the earliest possible moment
the aspirations of the Chinese Government, but it seemed to him that tariff
autonomy should be coincident with the abolition of likin. He thereupon
asked for a frank statement as to the way in which it was proposed to
abolish likin. The Chairman called upon the other Delegations for a
statement of their views and Mr. de Warzée announced that Belgium in
principle was willing to grant China tariff autonomy, provided a transitory
period should precede its coming into force. He stated that, in his opinion,
tariff autonomy should be simultaneous with the abolition of likin. Count de
Martel stated that he was “prepared to consider in the most friendly and
generous spirit and to submit to my (his) Government any reasonable
proposal which may be put forward, with a view to meet the aspirations of
the Chinese Nation in regard to their Customs tariff.” Mr. Oudendijk stated
that he believed that the right of Tariff Autonomy was an inherent right
which belonged to the right of sovereignty, and that the Netherlands
Delegation would do its best to meet the wishes of the Chinese
Government. Mr. Cerruti stated that the Italian Government was in great
sympathy with the wishes of the Chinese Government to attain full tariff
autonomy, but that he considered the abolition of likin and tariff autonomy
connected questions and that the abolition of likin must precede full tariff
autonomy. Mr. Bianchi of the Portuguese Delegation took a similar view
and asked for a statement of China’s plan for the abolition of likin. Dr.
Wang stated that the Chinese plan for the abolition of likin would be
presented later and that he wished to hear from the other Delegates who had
not spoken on the subject of tariff autonomy. Mr. Kauffmann, of the Danish
Delegation, said that his views were similar to those expressed by Mr.
Strawn; and Mr. Michelet of the Norwegian Delegation declared that his
Government was prepared in principle to grant tariff autonomy, but that it
would be necessary to have more definite information concerning the
proposals of the Chinese Government before giving up any of the
stipulations contained in the Treaty between Norway and China. The
Spanish Delegate, Mr. Garrido, in very general terms, expressed
sympathetic interest in the aspirations of China and Mr. Ewerlöf, the
Swedish Delegate, stated that he was “very willing to discuss, in the most
liberal spirit, the proposals of the Chinese Government,” but that he could
not accept them without instructions from his Government. The Chairman
then expressed his appreciation of the declarations made by most of the

Delegates present agreeing to accept in principle the proposal of the
Chinese Government for full tariff autonomy. The Chairman thereupon
placed in the hands of the Delegates two memoranda88 and a Table showing
the Chinese plan for the Abolition of Likin. These memoranda and the
Table, together with explanatory remarks by Dr. Wang may be found on p.
22, et seq., of the Minutes of the Meeting of the Committee on Tariff
Autonomy, October 30, 1925.
Committee on Tariff Autonomy, Second Meeting, November 3, 1925.
The Second Meeting of the Committee on Tariff Autonomy was held on
November 3, 1925, and at this meeting Sir Ronald Macleay, on behalf of
the British Delegation, gave his interpretation of the Chinese position on the
question of Tariff Autonomy, citing particularly the first two proposals of
the Chinese as follows:
“(1) The participating Powers formally declare to the
Government of the Republic of China their respect for
its tariff autonomy, and agree to the removal of all of
the tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties.
“(2) The Government of the Republic of China agrees
to the abolition of likin simultaneously with the
enforcement of the Chinese National Tariff Law, which
shall take effect not later than the 1st day of January in
the eighteenth year of the Republic of China (1929).”
Sir Ronald inquired of the Chairman whether it was his wish that the
Delegates should agree to these two Articles and on being informed
affirmatively he stated that it would not be possible for him to agree to the
phraseology proposed, although he was prepared to declare that tariff
autonomy was an inherent right of sovereignty and that he was fully
prepared to discuss the question. Sir Ronald said that he had not the power
to agree to the removal of all tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties;
that a statement in the phraseology used in the Chinese proposals would in
effect be a renunciation of the present treaty provisions. The Chairman
replied that while the Chinese Delegation wished the Powers to agree to the
removal of the tariff restrictions contained in the present treaties, he did not

mean that they should be brushed aside, leaving a vacuum. What he wished,
he said, was the substitution of a bilateral treaty for a unilateral one and
that, as he understood Sir Ronald’s remarks, Great Britain was agreeable in
principle to granting China tariff autonomy, but new treaties were necessary
and had to be discussed. The wording of the Chinese proposal was further
discussed, with the result that the British attitude could only be made clear
by the submission of a formal statement reading as follows:
“The British Delegation, recognizing the inherent right of all
independent and sovereign states to tariff autonomy, and
considering that the fulfilment of the provision of the Treaty of
Washington of February 6th, 1922, will constitute a step towards
the attainment by China of such autonomy, formally declare that
in addition to the carrying out of the terms of that Treaty, they are
willing to submit to the ratification of their Government such
further measures as may be devised and agreed upon at this
Conference, with a view to ensuring within a reasonable period
the full realization of China’s claim to complete liberty of action
in matters relating to her tariff.”
The Swedish Delegate, Mr. Rwerlof, agreed with Sir Ronald’s statement
and Mr. Hioki of the Japanese Delegation then presented a formal statement
of the Japanese view89 (See pp. 9 and 10 of the Minutes of November 3,
1925). Mr. MacMurray of the American Delegation then presented the
American proposals,90 which had been worked out more in detail than any
of the other proposals (See pp. 10, 11 and 12 of the Minutes of November 3,
1925). Sir Ronald Macleay said that on general outlines the American
proposals seemed to be based very largely on China’s own idea, which was
the abolition of likin, and seemed to be one to which the British Delegation
could commit itself, at least in principle. Sir Ronald also said that the
Japanese and American schemes seemed in effect to be very similar. The
Chairman declined to commit himself to the American plan because he had
not had time to study it, although he remarked that it contained a number of
things which had already been mentioned in the Chinese proposals. Count
de Martel reserved the right to discuss fully the matter of the readjustment
of the special relations which have been in force between China and French
Indo-China since 1886, with regard to the Customs tariff. Mr. Oudendijk

stated that from a superficial examination it seemed to him that the
Japanese and American proposals covered practically the same ground, the
main difference being that the American proposals, in which he was in full
sympathy, were more detailed. He suggested, therefore, that the Committee
consider the possibility of combining the two proposals into one, which
would simplify and expedite the work of the Committee. The Chairman
opposed this suggestion because, in his opinion, the American plan
contained “many objectionable points which the Chinese Delegation would
wish to reserve for answer after the statement had been examined into.” The
Chairman declared also that while it was true that the two propositions had
a number of points in common, yet the American plan contained a number
of other things which were not found either in the proposals of the Chinese
Government or in those of the Japanese Delegation. Dr. Wang proposed that
the Committee proceed to a discussion of the Japanese plan, but objection
was made by Sir Ronald Macleay. Dr. Wang, however, took occasion to say
that the Japanese plan did not contemplate raising enough revenue to
“enable the Chinese Government to abolish likin once for all as they had
determined to do,” and that the revenue “would not be sufficient to meet the
purposes which the Chinese Government had in mind.” A discussion ensued
as to the functions of Committees A and B, Mr. Strawn remarking that the
personnel was substantially the same and that there was no material
difference between the work assigned the two Committees. Mr. Strawn
again declared that the American Delegation desired to give China
everything that was authorized by the Washington Treaty, which the
Delegation could do without reference to its Government, and that the
Delegation was prepared to recommend to its Government the speedy
adoption of a new treaty which would give China something with which to
abolish likin; that the American plan was designed to furnish sufficient
revenues to meet the needs of China, but that the Japanese plan seemed to
fall short in this respect. It was admitted that the surtaxes contemplated
under the Washington Treaty would be insufficient for the purposes of
China. After further debate, confined largely to a discussion of the functions
of the two Committees and the personnel composing them, the Chairman
submitted, just before adjournment, the Declaration of the Chinese
Government regarding the Abolition of the Likin system91 (See pp. 25 and
26 of the Minutes of the Committee on Tariff Autonomy, November 3,
1925).

Committee on Provisional Measures, First Meeting, November 1925.
The first meeting of the Committee on Provisional Measures was held on
November 6 and Dr. C. T. Wang, upon the proposal of Mr. Oudendijk, was
elected Chairman. Dr. Wang read a brief formal statement on the subject of
abolishing likin. It was maintained by Dr. Wang that while the Chinese
Government realizes that the compensation for likin is not one of the
intended purposes for the levying of the 2½% and 5% surtaxes of the
Washington Treaty, it was the purpose of the Chinese Government to
earmark a portion of these revenues for the purpose of abolishing likin, in
addition to the special fund which would be created by the interim surtaxes
(See pp. 2 and 3 of the Minutes of the Committee on Provisional Measures,
November 6, 1925, for Dr. Wang’s statement). Dr. W. W. Yen then
addressed the Committee, explaining the work which had been mapped out
for the Committee, and emphasizing the fact that the Committee would be
called upon to consider only provisional measures and not fundamental
principles, which are permanent. He stated that Tariff Autonomy was the
end and provisional measures the means to that end, and that in the very
nature of things the provisional measures must not be allowed to delay the
arrival of tariff autonomy. At the conclusion of his address, Dr. Yen read a
formal statement showing the proposals of the Chinese Government on the
rates of the interim surtaxes on dutiable commodities into China (See pp. 6
and 7 of the Minutes of the Committee on Provisional Measures, November
6, 1925).
Admiral Tsai Ting-kan then presented to the Committee three statements in
the form of Annexes, as follows:
Annex I: Reasons for the Proposal to Levy on Ordinary Goods a
5% Surtax During the Interim Period.
Annex II: Reasons for the Proposal of the Chinese Government
Regarding “A” Grade Luxuries.
Annex III: Reasons for the Proposal of the Chinese Government
Regarding “B” Grade Luxuries.

These three Annexes, together with the Lists of “A” Grade and “B” Grade
Luxuries, may be found on p. 9 et seq., of the Minutes of the Committee on
Provisional Measures, November 6, 1925. Following the presentation of
these documents, Mr. Yoshizawa read a statement on behalf of the Japanese
Delegation, giving in considerable detail the views of that Delegation on the
subject of the Washington Treaty surtaxes and interim surtaxes, likin and
tariff autonomy (See pp. 16 and 17 of the Minutes mentioned next above).
Mr. Strawn made a detailed explanation of the proposals submitted by the
American Delegation on November 3. He declared that it was the intention
and purpose of the American Delegation to accord, so far as possible, with
the wishes of the Chinese Delegation, and that primarily it was the duty of
the American Delegation to fulfill the provisions of the Washington Treaty
authorizing the 2½% surtax on necessities and the 5% surtax on luxuries.
He suggested the implementing of the Washington Treaty surtaxes with as
little delay as possible. As for a new treaty granting larger surtaxes, Mr.
Strawn stated that this was a constitutional function which must be
exercised by the President with and by the consent and advice of the Senate
of the United States, and that the American Delegation could go no further
than to fulfill the provisions of the Washington Treaty and to recommend a
new treaty to its Government. He then explained the American proposal
regarding Article VI of the Washington Treaty concerning the rates of duty
on land and maritime frontiers,92 and proceeded to a discussion of the
question of abolishing likin, devoting particular attention to the rates of
surtaxes. He referred to the advisability of continuing the present Customs
Administration both for the collection and custody of the customs funds as
contemplated by Paragraph 7 of Article 3 of the American Plan.93 He
referred also to the various small internal taxes related to likin, stating that
he realized that all local activities of the provinces could not be stifled and
that some arrangements would be necessary whereby some local taxes
should be collected. In explaining Paragraph 5 of the Plan Mr. Strawn said
with a view to keeping the funds intact and appealing to the business
sagacity of those financiers who might be in a position to help China work
out a plan of financial readjustment, the American Plan provided that if
likin should be collected anywhere in violation of the Agreement for its
abolition the tax payers should be entitled to a refund from the Customs
Administration of the full amount paid as likin, the rebate being charged

against the province in the distribution of customs revenues, the purpose of
such a provision being to prevent the collection of customs duties and likin
on the same commodity. Dr. Yen brought up the question of administrative
expenses and debt consolidation and stated that he assumed that unsecured
debts would naturally refer first to domestic and then foreign loans. Mr.
Strawn replied that the two categories of loans would have to be treated on
a parity and that no distinction should be made between loans obtained
from individuals in China and those from individuals abroad, no
preferential rights to be enjoyed by either. He stated that it had been
suggested by some that those who had furnished materials for China’s
railways should have preferential rights, but on this point he expressed no
opinion, confining himself to a citation of a ruling of a Federal Court of the
United States that in the event of the insolvency of railroads those who had
furnished materials within a period of six months prior to the insolvency
had a preferential claim.
In connection with Paragraph 9 under Article III, Mr. Strawn emphasized
the fact that it would be necessary to refer any treaty which the American
Delegates might negotiate to the Senate of the United States for ratification.
To obviate any long delay on the part of any signatory power in ratifying
the treaty, he suggested that perhaps something could be worked out
whereby the treaty might become effective when a certain number of the
countries had ratified the treaties, or a certain number of countries
representing a certain amount of foreign trade in China had ratified the
treaty. Mr. Strawn also briefly discussed the provision in the American Plan
calling for another Conference in 192894 for the purpose of declaring that
likin had been abolished and of negotiating any further agreements that the
situation might require.
The question of the levying of surtaxes at land frontiers was again brought
up by Count de Martel, and Mr. Strawn reiterated that Article VI of the
Washington Treaty, in express terms provided that there should be no
distinction in the rate of taxes collected at the land and maritime frontiers,
and after reading Article VI he stated that if there exists anything
inequitable about the situation it was the function of the Conference to
remove the inequalities. Count de Martel reserved the right of making
further statements on this point and after further discussion Mr. MacMurray

was requested to give an explanation of what took place at the Washington
Conference on this subject. He stated that it was the purpose of the
Washington Conference to abolish all distinction between land and
maritime frontiers save as might be required in view of any reciprocal
arrangement which was not capable of being withdrawn. To state it more
clearly, it was his understanding that in cases where in return for the
reduction in Chinese duties at the land frontiers there had been given an
advantage which could not be reconsidered, the adjustment would, in some
way, have to be made equitable, but on the mere ground of reciprocity, there
was no distinction to be made between land and sea frontiers.
A suggestion was then made by Colonel Peel that the American, Chinese
and Japanese Plans be made a composite plan for purposes of discussion,
the American Plan being, in the opinion of Colonel Peel, the most complete
in form and the one which would make a very good basis for such
discussion. There was general agreement that a composite plan should be
put before the Conference for discussion and it appeared that there was a
decided preference on the part of a considerable number of the foreign
Delegates in favor of using the American Plan as the basis of the composite
plan for discussion as it was complete in form, yet simple and concise in
defining proposals. Colonel Peel suggested that the Chinese Delegation
particularly should follow the American Plan as regards form and that in
order to weld all the schemes into one and accomplish something for China
it would be necessary to work in a spirit of mutuality and reciprocity.
Colonel Peel also stated that the British Delegation did not contemplate
proposing a plan, but would be content to proceed on the basis of the three
plans already submitted. Other Delegations, on inquiry by the Chairman,
stated that they had no definite plan to submit, but were prepared to proceed
on the basis of a composite plan made up of the American, Japanese and
Chinese proposals. The Italian Delegate, Mr. Cerruti, however, read a
formal statement (See pp. 42 and 43 of the Minutes of November 6, 1925).
It was finally agreed that the three plans, i. e., American, Chinese and
Japanese, should be arranged in the forqri of a table of three columns, each
proposal side by side, for convenient consideration at the next meeting.

Committee on Provisional Measures, Second Meeting, November 13, 1925.
At the second meeting of the Committee on Provisional Measures, held on
November 13, 1925, the Chinese Delegation, following the suggestion
made at the last meeting of the Committee, submitted a table showing the
proposals of the Chinese Delegation side by side with those of the Japanese
and American Delegations (See p. 2 et seq., of the Minutes of November
13, 1925).
The Chinese Delegation also presented the following documents:
1. A declaration on the Purposes to Which the Proceeds from the
Interim Surtaxes are to be Devoted.
2. A Table of Estimated Revenue from the Proposed Surtaxes on
Foreign Imports according to the Customs Returns of 1924 and
the Revised Import Tariff of 1922.
3. The Regulations Governing the Establishment of the
Commission for the Interim Customs Surtax Sinking Fund, and
4. General Observations of the Chinese Delegation on the
American and Japanese Proposals.
These documents may be found on p. 7 et seq., of the Minutes of November
13, 1925. The Declaration of the Chinese Delegation on Purposes to which
the Proceeds from the Interim surtaxes are to be put contained the views of
the Delegation concerning the Special Fund for the Abolition of Likin, the
consolidation of Inadequately Secured Debts, Domestic and Foreign,
Expenditures for Constructive Projects, and Urgent Administrative
Expenses. The estimate of revenues from the proposed surtaxes indicated
that the Chinese expected to receive from “A” Grade Luxuries (Wine and
Tobacco), 30% surtax, $22,000,000 Mex.; “B” Grade Luxuries, 20% surtax,
$50,000,000 Mex.; and Ordinary goods, 5% surtax, $30,000,000 Mex.,
making a total of $102,000,000 Mex.
Under the heading of General Observations, the Chinese Delegation
explained its position on Tariff Autonomy, Abolition of Likin, Disposal of

the Proceeds from the Surtaxes, Necessity for Higher Taxes, Early
Enforcement of the Washington Treaty, Surtaxes, and Reciprocal Treaties.
Sir Ronald Macleay laid before the Committee what he described as a
“scheme of agenda”, in order that various points raised in the Committee
might be discussed in orderly sequence (See pp. 25, 26 and 27 of Minutes
of November 13, 1925). Some question arose as to the need of
supplementing the Agenda which had already been adopted and Mr.
Oudendijk reviewed the work of the Conference up to November 3. In the
course of this review he remarked that a certain laxness in parliamentary
procedure had prevailed, stating that things had been declared adopted,
which, he was sure, had not been adopted. He cited particularly the question
of surtaxes, stating that the Delegates had agreed only in a general way that
the 2½% surtax could be instituted at once, but that so far as the interim
surtaxes were concerned no Delegation, with the exception of the American
Delegation, had even intimated a view on the subject. The same was true
concerning the question of the allocation of these funds as well as of other
subjects. At this point Count de Martel made formal reservation on several
points in the Chinese proposal. His statement may be found on pages 32, et
seq., Minutes of November 13.
The Swedish Delegate, Mr. Ewerlöf, and the Danish Delegate, Mr.
Kauffmann, made reservations, protesting that they had not committed their
Governments to the extent claimed by the Chinese Government. Mr.
MacMurray took occasion to say, in behalf of the American Delegation and
in order that there might be no misunderstanding, that his Delegation could
not go beyond the immediate provisions of the Washington Treaty and that
there was therefore nothing to which they could agree with finality except
after approval and ratification by his Government. He stated that he wished
to make it clear that in the case of the American Delegation they had agreed
only tentatively and provisionally in those matters which went beyond the
terms of the Washington Treaty. With reference to such provisional and
tentative agreement he said that he should point out that, apart from the
recognition of certain general principles, there was nothing to which they
had agreed, or could agree, other than a general agreement upon some
homogeneous, coherent plan that covered not only simply certain principles
but the details for the working out of those principles. It was therefore

necessary to have a basis of discussion—a program which appeared to
cover all the proposals made in the three plans already submitted—and he
considered the British supplemental agenda a suitable vehicle for that
purpose, since it afforded an opportunity to proceed to a point beyond that
authorized by the agenda previously adopted. He wished a detailed and
concrete agenda under which to work and the British program met that
requirement. Mr. Bianchi also favored the British programme. Dr. Yen then
discussed in a general way the procedure of the Committee and suggested
that the Chinese Delegation, in an effort to present a harmonious whole,
might make a further study of the three schemes that had been submitted.
Mr. Strawn said that, in his opinion, the proposal of the British Delegation
did not conflict in any way with the main agenda, since it arrived at no
conclusion and asserted no personal viewpoints. He felt that the Conference
had dealt in generalities long enough and that it was time to deal with
concrete facts and arrive at definite results. After further discussion,
participated in by several Delegates, Mr. Strawn suggested that it was the
obvious duty of the Delegates, if they wanted to proceed in an orderly way
with the work of the Conference, to discuss whether they wanted to
effectuate the Washington Treaty as soon as possible, and that this question
came within the scope of Proposal No. 1 of the British supplemental
Agenda. Colonel Peel gave his views on this phase of the Committee work
and suggested, on behalf of the British Delegation, that a Drafting
Committee be authorized to draw up a diplomatic protocol with a view to
making possible the collection of the Washington Treaty surtaxes at once.
Mr. MacMurray concurred with this view and submitted for the
consideration of the Drafting Committee a concrete proposal for such an
Agreement. (See p. 50 of the Minutes of November 13, 1925.) Colonel Peel
stated that the American proposal was acceptable, although it might require
some alteration by the Drafting Committee, and Dr. Yen said that it was
well worded but he mentioned the question of the uniform rates on
maritime and land frontiers, stating that this question had not been
discussed at all and was not sure whether the Delegates were in accord on
the subject. Mr. Strawn then suggested that the question be discussed, but
Dr. Wang remarked that this would be bringing up a question which had not
yet been presented by the Chinese Delegation. Although Mr. Strawn urged
that the question be discussed at once, since it was within the scope of the
Washington Treaty and so admitted by Dr. Wang, the latter said that the

Chinese Delegation was not in position to discuss the question at that time
and Count de Martel also requested a postponement Further discussion took
place with reference to the subject, or subjects, which would be first
considered by the Committee and after finally agreeing that Articles I, II, III
and IV (relating to Tariff Autonomy and Likin) of the American [British]
proposal would be discussed, Dr. Wang stated that the Chinese Delegation
wished to reiterate the position which it had taken on the question of the
abolition of likin, to wit, that China voluntarily, but resolutely, declared her
firm purpose to abolish likin and considered it to be an internal measure, for
which reason a solemn declaration on the part of the Chinese Government
to abolish likin would be sufficient. Colonel Peel remarked that he did not
see why the discussion of Tariff Autonomy and Likin as related subjects
should prejudice those questions and that he could not understand why such
discussion should prevent them from also discussing the question of the
2½% surtax. Mr. Strawn referred to Article II of the Washington Treaty95
and read: “Immediate steps shall be taken through a special conference to
prepare the way for the speedy abolition of likin and for the fulfillment of
other conditions laid down in Article VIII” (Treaty of 1902.96 ) Mr. Strawn
remarked that he conceived it to be a part of the duty of the American
Delegation to collaborate with the Chinese Delegation to find a way which
would be satisfactory to all Powers, especially to China, for the abolition of
likin, a duty which he did not assume that the Chinese Delegation, on its
sole responsibility, would undertake to do without assistance from the other
Powers. Dr. Wang said that he thought that the position of the Chinese
Delegation differed from that of the American Delegation, and Mr. Strawn
inquired of Dr. Wang whether he considered that the Chinese proposal
complied with Article II of the Washington Treaty and whether it was the
position of the Chinese Government that none of the other Powers would
have anything to say in the Conference concerning the manner in which
China should abolish likin and that China would not want any assistance
from the other Powers. The only response of Dr. Wang was that the Chinese
Delegation had presented to the Committee the measures whereby likin
could be abolished. Mr. Strawn said that his understanding was that the
purpose of the Conference was to discuss whether the Delegations were in
accord with China’s proposal and whether it was sound and effective. He
said that some doubt might arise in the minds of the Delegates whether
China would be able to abolish likin in the manner proposed by the Chinese

Delegation. He said that it seemed quite necessary to discuss the Chinese
plan, and that while everyone earnestly hoped and expected that likin might
be abolished, the duty of the American Delegation, under the terms of the
Washington Treaty, was to come to an accord with China as to the manner
in which it should be abolished. He reminded the Chinese Delegation that
the Chinese Government owed it to the other Powers with which it had
treaties to come to an agreement as to the manner in which likin could be
abolished. Colonel Peel supported this view and said that it would be
necessary to discuss the abolition of likin because part of the revenues
which were to be given for the abolition of likin would come from the
proposed increase of the customs duties. The Chairman remained obdurate
and addressing Mr. Strawn said that he desired to point out that the Chinese
proposal presented at the plenary session did not say that tariff autonomy
was to be enjoyed by China as a result of the abolition of likin. Mr. Strawn
remarked that he had so interpreted the Chinese proposal and the Chairman
again read the two points in the Chinese plan concerning tariff autonomy
and likin, as follows: First, “The participating Powers formally declare to
the Government of China their respect for its tariff autonomy and agree to
the removal of all the tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties;”
Second, “The Government of the Republic of China agrees to the abolition
of likin simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese National Tariff
Law.” Dr. Wang then said that Tariff Autonomy was a principle which the
Powers had already conceded and that China had agreed to the abolition of
likin simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese National Tariff
Law. Mr. Strawn remarked that he understood that to be a condition
precedent to the enforcement of the National Tariff Law, that is, that likin
should be abolished. On being again informed by Dr. Wang that the Chinese
Delegation had presented the different measures for the abolition of likin to
the various delegations, Mr. Strawn said that it was his understanding that
the time had arrived, or would soon arrive, when the Delegates would take
up in an orderly way and discuss the different measures and that he did not
understand that the Chairman had put the proposals on the table and said,
“Take it or leave it.” It was pointed out that the American Delegation did
not put its proposals forward as an ultimatum, but as the basis of discussion.
On inquiry by Dr. Wang as to whether the Chinese proposals were
satisfactory, Mr. Strawn replied that that was the very question which the
Delegates wanted to discuss. Mr. Strawn quoted the language of the

Chinese proposal: “The Government of the Republic of China agrees to the
abolition of likin simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese
National Tariff Law,” and inquired with whom the Chinese Government
agreed unless with the Delegates who were sitting at the Conference. In
other words, if China was going to abolish likin and did it in her own way,
and at her own pleasure, there certainly was not any agreement about it. His
recommendation was that the subject should be set aside for discussion at a
subsequent meeting of the Committee if it was not agreeable to discuss it
then. Dr. Wang then admitted that it was not the purpose of the Chinese
Delegation to decline to discuss the question of the abolition of likin, but to
have all the Delegations recognize this problem as one of domestic concern.
Mr. Strawn agreed with Dr. Wang on this point, saying that the foreign
powers were going to furnish the wherewith to enable China to solve this
domestic problem. He considered, however, that the amount wherewith,
when and how it would be furnished, how it would be safeguarded in the
interim were subjects for discussion. Dr. Wang said that on that point there
was no disagreement, to which Mr. Strawn replied that he was glad to be so
informed. The colloquy ended by the Chairman suggesting that the question
of surtaxes be discussed, together with the ways and means necessary for
the abolition of likin, and inquired whether that was agreeable. After an
affirmative answer had been given Mr. Yoshizawa inquired whether the
question of tariff autonomy would be excluded, whereupon Dr. Wang
replied that he thought tariff autonomy had been recognized, since all the
Delegations had made their declarations. Mr. Yoshizawa said that he had
made the inquiry because a few minutes before it had been suggested that
Articles 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the British agenda should be discussed together and
now the Chairman had said that they were going to discuss the question of
surtaxes, together with the ways and means for the abolition of likin and not
including the tariff autonomy question. Dr. Wang said that he did not mean
that and that the question of Tariff Autonomy could be further discussed if
the Delegates so desired.
At this point Colonel Peel pointed out that the British Delegation had made
a definite proposal to support the immediate imposition of the 2½% surtax
and 5% surtax on luxuries, which proposal had been supported by the
American Delegation. He said that at least two Powers, therefore, had made
a distinct promise to do what they could for China immediately and he

wanted to know why they could not go on with that proposal immediately.
Dr. Wang replied that Count de Martel and Admiral Tsai were not prepared
to discuss the question at that time, but the Admiral stated that he was
prepared to go ahead. Mr. Strawn, at this point, made it clear that the
position of the American Delegation was that they were agreeable to giving
China the 2½% surtax on necessities and 5% surtax on luxuries at the
earliest possible moment, the money to be impounded by the Customs
Administration to await disposition by the Conference. Again Dr. Wang
placed an obstacle in the way by insisting that the question of Tariff
Autonomy and the question related to the enforcement of the National Tariff
Law to give effect to Tariff Autonomy should be discussed together. Mr.
Strawn remarked that he did not want the Chinese Delegation to get the
impression that they were holding back what China was entitled to receive
under the Washington Treaty while they discussed a new treaty. It was the
desire of the American Delegation to fulfill the terms of the Washington
Treaty at once and they would give more as soon as they could agree on
what it should be. Colonel Peel said that this represented the British view
also, and the Japanese Delegation, while in accord with this plan, made it
plain that the 2½% and 5% surtax agreement would require ratification by
the Emperor, so far as Japan was concerned, before it could become
effective under Japanese law. Adjournment was taken with the
understanding that items 1, 2, 3 and 4 would be discussed together at the
next meeting of the Committee.
 
Committee on Provisional Measures, Third Meeting, November 14, 1925.
The third meeting of the Committee on Provisional Measures was held on
the morning of November 14, at which time the Chinese Delegation
presented the following resolution:
“The Contracting Powers other than China hereby declare their
recognition of China’s right to enjoy tariff autonomy.
“China hereby declares her intention to abolish likin, and further
declares that the Chinese National Tariff Law will come into force
upon the abolition of likin.”

Colonel Peel announced that at least some of the foreign Delegates could
not agree to the resolution as submitted by Dr. Wang without referring it to
their governments and going through the whole process of ratification
because they were not authorized to go that far. What he wished to do, and
what some of the other Delegations wished to do, notably the American
Delegation, was to implement the Washington Treaty, but he understood
that the Chinese Delegation, and possibly some other Delegations, were not
anxious for these surtaxes to be levied at once. He proposed the following
declaration in the preamble of the instrument authorizing the levying of
these surtaxes:
“The Delegations of the Contracting Powers, other than China,
having declared their intention to recommend to their respective
governments the immediate adoption of a treaty which shall
recognize the principle of China’s right to enjoy Tariff Autonomy,
and China having declared her intention to abolish likin, it is
agreed that the treaties shall provide that China’s National Tariff
Law shall come into effect upon the abolition of likin.”
Colonel Peel believed that these surtaxes, which they were authorized to
impose, should not come into force until the signature of the new Treaty.
Admitting that he did not know the exact meaning of the word “likin”,
Colonel Peel stated that he wished to guard his Delegation against accepting
a Chinese word, of the exact meaning of which he was not sure. Dr Wang
did not agree with the form of the declaration offered by Colonel Peel, and
Mr. MacMurray, in discussing the Chinese declaration, said that it went not
only beyond the powers of the American Delegation as negotiators, but
beyond the powers of even the American Chief Executive. Since it involved
a power which could be exercised only by the President, by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate, it would be quite impossible for the
American Delegates to accede to the resolution in the form proposed by the
Chinese. It would be worse than useless and the American Delegation was
therefore disposed to accept the British proposal which embodied the same
purport, but in a form which fell within the scope of the powers of the
American Delegation. If the Chinese were not satisfied it was suggested
that a drafting committee could quite readily iron out the difficulties and the
2½ per cent and 5 per cent surtax agreement would be effectuated. Dr.

Wang objected, however, and desired the matter referred to a smaller
committee in which suggestion Mr. MacMurray acquiesced. Mr. Oudendijk
suggested a substitute resolution, but it was the sense of the committee that
the matter could be resolved only by the appointment of a small special
committee to compose the differences. Such a committee composed of Mr.
Oudendijk, Mr. Strawn, Mr. Hioki, Sir Ronald Macleay and Dr. Wang, was
appointed and the committee adjourned subject to the call of the chair.
Sub-Committee of Committee II, First Meeting, November 17, 1925.
The Sub-Committee appointed by the Committee on Provisional Measures
at its meeting on November 14, met on November 17 and Dr. Wang
submitted the following declaration for consideration:
“The contracting Powers other than China hereby recognize
China’s right to enjoy Tariff Autonomy; agree to remove the tariff
restrictions which are contained in existing treaties between
themselves respectively and China; and consent to the going into
effect of the Chinese National Tariff Law on January 1st, 1929.
“The Government of the Republic of China declares that likin
shall be abolished simultaneously with the enforcement of the
Chinese National Tariff Law; and further declares that the
abolition of likin shall be effectively carried out by the first day of
the first month of the eighteenth year of the Republic of China
(January 1st, 1929).”
Some discussion followed as to whether the declaration would form a
preamble or an article of a treaty. Before this question was settled, however,
Mr. Hioki brought up the question of a conventional tariff between China
and Japan. He said that while the Japanese Delegation had endeavored
repeatedly to make it plain that Japan was prepared to assist China in
realizing her national aspiration in regard to tariff autonomy, Japan’s
important and special trade relation with China made it imperative to
conclude a conventional tariff, as had been previously stated. Mr. Hioki
asked if the Chinese Delegation was in a position to make a definite
declaration of their readiness to enter into an agreement with Japan in the
matter of a conventional tariff. Citing certain statements made at the First

Plenary Session and at the Third meeting of Committee II, Dr. Wang stated
that China was prepared to enter into a reciprocal tariff agreement with
Japan or with any other Power which desired to enter into such a reciprocal
agreement. It was pointed out that no such agreement then existed between
Japan and China, but that in case one should be negotiated it would come
into force either before or after the enforcement of the National Tariff Law,
item 5 of which relates to the subject.
Mr. Oudendijk inquired whether a reciprocity treaty such as described
would contain a “most favored nation clause.” Dr. Wang replied that it
could be so made if there were things for exchange on the basis of
reciprocity.
The question again arose as to whether the declaration submitted by the
Chinese Delegation should be a preamble or an article in the treaty. Dr.
Wang took the position that it would constitute an article, or two articles, of
the treaty that was being negotiated at the Conference. Mr. Oudendijk
favored the language in the American proposal,97 as it was more emphatic.
Mr. Strawn said that the first part of the American proposal, namely, “The
Contracting Powers other than China recognize the right of China as a
sovereign State to Tariff Autonomy”, was put in because China had by
previous treaties given away the sovereign right of tariff autonomy and it
was now proposed to have China recover it and as a condition to regaining
it and enjoying full tariff autonomy it would be necessary to remove the
tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties. Further discussion on this
point, participated in by several Delegates, and consideration of an
amendment offered by Mr. Hioki, resulted in the adoption of the following
preamble to the Chinese resolution, or proposed treaty articles, which had
the unanimous approval of the Delegates:
“The Delegates of the Powers assembled at this Conference
resolve to adopt the following proposed article relating to tariff
autonomy, with a view to incorporating it, together with other
matters to be hereafter agreed upon, in a treaty which is to be
signed at this Conference.”

After the approval of the preamble and articles Colonel Peel again inquired
as to the exact meaning of the word “likin” and the chairman replied that
likin included all taxes of a transit nature, whether they came under that
name or not and on inquiry of Mr. Teichmann, one of the British technical
advisers, by Mr. Strawn, Mr. Teichmann replied that his definition would be
that contained in Article VIII of the Mackay Treaty, which referred to likin
and other dues on goods at the place of production, in transit and at
destination. Mr. Strawn considered this the best definition he had heard and
later he and Colonel Peel emphasized the necessity of having a clear
definition of the word “likin” in order to guard against a misunderstanding
of the meaning of the term. The chairman remarked that the Chinese
Delegation had already defined likin as all duties of a transit nature, but
their definition seemed too vague and Mr. Oudendijk, Mr. Strawn and
Colonel Peel expressed the opinion that there should be a definition of
“likin” in exact terms.
The following draft Resolution, or Declaration, was read and unanimously
adopted for presentation to the full Committee:
“The Delegates of the Powers assembled at this Conference
resolve to adopt the following proposed article relating to tariff
autonomy with a view to incorporating it, together with other
matters, to be hereafter agreed upon, in a treaty which is to be
signed at this Conference:
“The Contracting Powers other than China hereby recognize
China’s right to enjoy tariff autonomy; agree to remove the tariff
restrictions which are contained in existing treaties between
themselves respectively and China; and consent to the going into
effect of the Chinese National Tariff Law on January 1st, 1929.
“The Government of the Republic of China declares that likin
shall be abolished simultaneously with the enforcement of the
Chinese National Tariff Law; and further declares that the
abolition of likin shall be effectively carried out by the First Day
of the First Month of the Eighteenth Year of the Republic of
China (January 1st, 1929).”

(See page 15 of Minutes of November 17 for American draft of preamble of
treaty relating to Tariff Autonomy.)97a
Committee on Provisional Measures, Fourth Meeting, November 19, 1925.
The Fourth Meeting of the Committee on Provisional Measures was held on
November 19 and the first business before the Committee was the
Resolution on Tariff Autonomy adopted on November 17 by the
Subcommittee of the Committee on Provisional Measures, the text of which
may be found in the resume of the proceedings of the Subcommittee
meeting of November 17. Mr. Strawn formally moved the adoption of the
Resolution, but Mr. de Warzée, Count de Martel, Mr. Cerruti and Mr.
Ewerlöf, while all expressing their personal pleasure that the subcommittee
had evolved so satisfactory a formula, announced that if it was intended that
the Resolution should be incorporated into a treaty it would be necessary,
under the Constitution of their respective governments, to refer the
instrument to their home governments for approval. Mr. Bianchi, Mr.
Garrido, Mr. Michelet and Mr. de Kauffmann expressed their satisfaction
with the terms of the Resolution and the chairman expressed his thanks on
behalf of the Chinese Delegation and said that he felt that the Delegates
should congratulate themselves on having set a milestone for fair and just
dealing between China and the participating Powers. Dr. Wang thereupon
declared the Resolution unanimously adopted by the Committee on
Provisional Measures, notwithstanding several Delegates had given notice
that ratification would be required on the part of their Governments before
it could become effective as a part of a treaty. Dr. Wang suggested that
while they were sitting as Committee II they might consider the Resolution
as having been passed by both Committees I and II since the personnel of
the Committees was the same. Dr. Yen expressed his appreciation of the
work of the subcommittee and proceeded to explain in detail the Purposes
to which the proceeds would be put. Dr. Yen said that since some of the
Delegates not present at the Washington Conference might unintentionally
give the word “purposes” a significance not intended by those who
introduced it, he thought it well to give a brief historical review of its origin
and significance. After reviewing the discussion which took place at the
Washington Conference on “purposes” (see pages 4, 5, and 6 of Minutes of
November 19), Dr. Yen explained seriatim the four purposes outlined in the

Chinese declaration. The first purpose was the abolition of likin, which
would require about $90,000,000, or possibly $100,000,000. The second
purpose was debts. Dr. Yen said that at the time of the Washington
Conference the foreign debts of China amounted to only $260,000,000 and
the domestic debts about $100,000,000, an amount not at all exorbitant, and
which could have been financed from 10 per cent of the 2½ per cent surtax,
according to Senator Underwood, leaving a surplus of approximately
$35,000,000 to $40,000,000 for governmental purposes. Dr. Yen stated that
the total amount of the debts now approximated $800,000,000, an amount
which seemed rather startling in view of the comparatively short time which
had elapsed since the Washington Conference. He cited the several causes
for this increase, one being the difference in the rate of exchange, as
instanced by the increase in the value of the Pound Sterling by one third in
the last four years. The second cause he attributed to accumulated interest
and compound interest. The third was the general practice of increasing by
one per cent the rate interest when a loan agreement was renewed after
becoming due. He felt that it was very unfortunate for China that the
Conference had been so long delayed thus causing the great increase in
China’s indebtedness.
Dr. Yen then gave an explanation of the view of the Chinese Delegation on
Constructive Purposes. He said that while it was true that the duty was paid
in the first instance by the merchants, it was really the consumer that
ultimately paid, and for that reason he considered it only just and right that
the Chinese people should share the benefits to accrue from the increased
revenues. He considered it a particularly opportune time to start a
constructive program in China and put an end to the destructive forces and
to avoid the criticism that China had no constructive program. From the
standpoint of intelligent and patriotic Chinese he pointed out, the
Conference could be said to be successful only should something be done
for the social and economic welfare of the Chinese people. He would not go
into details, but mentioned such enterprises as railway construction—the
completion of certain trunk lines—national road building, conservancy
works and industrial developments. He particularly favored setting aside
some money to improve the culture of tea, silk and cotton.

Dr. Yen then referred to the question of administrative expenses. He
reminded the Delegation, in summing up, that a certain amount of
discretion should be left to the Chinese Government and that it would be
well for the Delegates to endeavor, as much as possible, to avoid any
semblance of the Purposes not having been adopted at the initiative of the
Chinese Government. He suggested, in conclusion, a discussion of the
question of Rates because he felt that it would be useless to spend all the
time discussing Purposes without knowing exactly how much fresh revenue
would be derived from the new taxes.
Mr. Hioki suggested the appointment of two subcommittees, one on
Surtaxes and the other on Purposes, saying, at the same time, that it would
be rather difficult to discuss the question of surtaxes until the Purposes had
been fully determined. A discussion of the approximate revenues and needs
ensued and it was finally decided that no real progress could be made until
the serious questions under discussion had been considered by
subcommittees of Delegates or Technical Advisers. Many of the questions
that arose during the discussion were technical in character and involved
classifications of commodities, luxury lists, money values, and related
questions. Admiral Tsai said that, for the convenience of the Delegates and
Technical Advisers, the Chinese Delegates would prepare and circulate an
amplified and enlarged list of luxuries for consideration in the
subcommittee meetings. Sir Ronald Macleay supported Mr. Hioki’s view
that it would be necessary to know how much money was needed before
they could approach the question of the surtaxes and the question of
luxuries and that they should also know the amount needed to fund the
outstanding debts before taking up the question of the amount to be raised.
Pursuant to this view, Sir Ronald suggested that there should be two
subcommittees; one to deal with likin and to make estimates of what would
be required for its abolition, etc., and the other to deal with the
consolidation of debts and the other Purposes, and also to form an estimate
of the amount needed. A rather lengthy discussion ensued as to the number
and functions of the subcommittees and whether they would be composed
of Delegates or technical advisers and the method of appointing members
and, further, whether the subcommittees would themselves be permitted to
have subcommittees. This discussion finally ended in the committee
agreeing that there should be two-subcommittees, one on purposes and one

on rates, each of which would be permitted, if it chose to do so, to divide
into subcommittees of Technical Advisers or others and each Delegation
having the right to signify whether it desired to participate in either one of
the subcommittees or both of them. The Committee on Provisional
Measures resolved itself into a subcommittee on Purposes and proceeded to
its business.
Subcommittee on Purposes, First Meeting, November 19, 1925.
Committee II having resolved itself into a sub-committee on Purposes, that
sub-committee began its work at 11:30 a.m., November 19, 1925.
After a brief discussion among the Delegates concerning the division of
work of the sub-committee, Dr. Yen said that the Chinese Delegation had
hoped that an agreement could be reached in regard to customs duties
without going into the financial condition of the Chinese Government. He
distinctly discouraged any plan which contemplated any exploring of this
subject. His view was that the question of debts was outside the scope of the
word “purposes”. While professing to be willing to give all needful
information, he wished the subcommittee to confine itself to defining
principles to be followed under the heading of “purposes.” Sir Ronald
Macleay said that no Delegation, so far as he was aware, desired to impose
anything on the Chinese Government, but unless they should go into the
question of debts it would obviously not be possible to determine how
much money was needed. Admiral Tsai agreed that the question of debts
and likin were matters in which the foreign Powers could properly interest
themselves, but administrative expenses was one which belonged solely to
the Chinese. Colonel Peel remarked that there was no disposition on the
part of the foreign Delegates to interfere in Chinese domestic affairs, but
they did wish to know how China proposed to abolish likin and how the
revenues would be applied to that purpose and how the question of the
consolidation of debts would be solved. He suggested the appointment of
two subcommittees, one to deal with likin and the other one the question of
consolidating the debt, both of which intimately concerned the Foreign
Powers. As for constructive purposes and administrative expenses, the
foreign Powers wished only to know what aggregate amount would be
needed for these purposes. Dr. Yen said that he fully appreciated the spirit in

which Colonel Peel spoke, but he did not wish the impression to go out that
the Conference had resolved itself into a debt collecting agency. He said
that it would be very unfortunate if such a false impression should prevail.
He considered that it would be sufficient to have two sub-committees, one
on likin and one on other Purposes. Mr. MacMurray supported Dr. Yen’s
suggestion, as did Count de Martel and Mr. Cerruti, with the understanding,
however, that the debt question would be examined into. Mr. Hioki
explained that it was far from the thought of the Japanese Delegation to
impose anything that would be disagreeable to the Chinese Delegation, or
that would appear to interfere with the sovereign rights of China. After
further discussion the chairman summed up the results of the meeting by
saying that the subcommittee on Purposes had agreed to have two sub-
committees of technical advisers, or other members whom each Delegation
would choose, one to sit as a sub-committee on Likin and the other as a
sub-committee on Other Purposes. He pointed out that the subcommittee on
Rates, authorized by the Committee on Provisional Measures, had not had a
meeting, but that the first meeting of the sub-committee on Likin would be
held Saturday morning, November 21, 1925.
Proceedings of the Technical Committee on Likin, November 21, 1925.
The First Meeting of the Technical Committee on Likin was held on
Saturday, November 21, 1925, and on the suggestion of Mr. Mac-Murray,
Mr. T. K. Tseng was elected chairman. Mr. Tyndall Wei of the Chinese
Delegation read a paper on “Remarks on the Technical Side of the Question
of Likin”. This paper, together with a series of tables and annexes, may be
found on page 2, et seq. of the Minutes of November 21, 1925 (morning
session). These papers relate to the technical side of the likin question, likin
collections in various provinces, revenue collected by native customs,
goods tax collection on Tientsin-Pukow Railway, and compensation for
discharged officers and employees of likin offices. Mr. Stewart of the
British Delegation inquired whether it was a general principle in the
Chinese scheme that the Central Government should pay the Provinces
annuities in lieu of likin; whether the estimated sum needed for this purpose
was $80,000,000 with an additional $10,000,000 for discharged officers and
employees; whether these annuities would take precedence over
appropriations to be allotted for other purposes, such as, Debt

Consolidation, Constructive and Administrative Purposes. He received
affirmative answers to all these questions. A further discussion took place
with reference to the amount required for the compensation of the provinces
and a doubt was expressed whether China would be able actually to abolish
likin. The chairman said, however, that the Chinese Government did not
want to minimize the difficult undertaking but that it was the firm
determination of China to abolish likin and that the public would be duly
notified when that had been accomplished. Mr. MacMurray raised the
question as to what would be the alternative if, for any reason, it should, at
the end of three years, be found impossible to effectuate the abolition of
likin. The chairman replied that such a possibility had not been considered
by the Chinese, as they were really determined to abolish likin within the
stated time.
Mr. Strawn then inquired whether there had been given any concrete
definition of the word “likin” and to this the chairman replied that the
Chinese Delegation had always understood likin to be a tax on goods in
transit or a transit duty. Mr. Strawn inquired whether that covered all taxes
at points of origin and destination as well as in transit and the reply was
simply that it covered all taxes on goods in transit. Mr. Strawn thereupon
referred to the provision in the treaty of 1903 between China and the United
States98 which authorized the collection of surtaxes on imported goods
which would free such goods from all further taxation. He considered this
to mean that this provision covered the abolition not only of likin but of all
other taxes on foreign goods. To guarantee that such additional taxes would
not be levied the American Plan contemplated that if such taxes were
collected in violation of the new treaty, the taxpayer from whom the taxes
had been collected would have recourse to the Customs for a refund. It was
his thought therefore, that likin should be clearly defined and his idea of
likin was that it should mean that any foreign articles imported into China
upon which the authorized Chinese Maritime Customs Duty should have
been paid should not be subject to any further taxation,—neither likin, or
destination tax, or consumption tax, or protection fee or any tax of whatever
nature, levied indirectly or directly upon the conveyance or handling of any
such article. He had no complaint to make about just taxation because he
felt that his nationals were perfectly willing to pay any taxes that they
should pay, but he did not want to see the taxes so high that trade would be

stifled. He asked therefore for a concrete definition of likin and Mr. Stewart
supported the request, reading an extract from the treaty of 1902 between
Great Britain and China, as follows:99
“The Chinese Government recognizing that the system of levying
likin and other goods taxes [dues on goods’] at the place of
production, in transit and at destination, impeded [impedes] the
free circulation of commodities.”
He said that this recognized the fact that the whole system of multiple taxes
on goods was one that was not considered proper in well-organized
countries. He cited particularly the case of a province in China in which a
20 per cent consumption tax was being charged on cigarettes and inquired
whether that would be regarded as a legal tax in the future. The chairman
replied that China was not the only country that imposed a consumption tax.
Mr. Stewart said that it was not customary and he feared that if the tax on
cigarettes should be considered legal it might be assessed on other goods.
The chairman replied that it was not their intention to do so. A discussion
ensued concerning various kinds of taxes and the method of assessing and
collecting them, and the question of discriminatory practices also arose.
This discussion brought out the fact that discriminations, either in rates or
otherwise, in favor of one commodity as against another, both foreign and
domestic, would not be countenanced. A Chinese member (Mr. Wei)
pointed out that the “destination taxes” were really outside the scope of the
subcommittee to which view Sir Ronald Macleay dissented. Mr. Strawn
stated that the Delegates did not wish to invade the province of China by
discussing internal taxation matters, but in discussing likin they wanted to
know what the term embraced and this might bring in other matters
incidentally. Mr. Wei described in great detail the origin of the “lo-ti-shui”
tax1 and an extended debate took place on the question of defining “likin”
every effort being made but without success, to obtain from the Chinese a
concrete definition of the word. Various phases of the tariff system were
discussed, Mr. MacMurray detailing his first experience with the “lo-ti-
shui” tax, and observing that it seemed to him that a proper definition of
“likin” should take into account the principle that no taxation should be
levied in connection with the movement of goods, whether it be levied
while the goods were still in transit or after they had surrendered the transit

pass which was their protection, or after they had in one way or another
ceased to be protected. The chairman said that this view would be taken into
consideration in later offering a concrete definition of likin. After discussing
the question of compensation, or bonus, for dismissed officers and
employees of the likin offices which would be abolished the sub-committee
adjourned.
Technical Committee on Other Purposes, First Meeting, November 21,
1925.
At the first meeting of the Technical Committee on Other Purposes held on
November 21, Mr. Tseng, the Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs, was elected
chairman. Mr. Tseng called upon Mr. Yih, who laid before the sub-
committee Tables of Inadequately Secured Foreign Loans under the charge
of the Ministry of Finance, compiled by the Commission for the
Readjustment of Finance. A statement explaining the Tables was read by
Mr. Yih and may be found on page 2, et seq. of the Minutes of the Technical
Committee Meeting of November 21, 1925, and the Tables may be found
on page 10, et seq. of the same Minutes. Discussion developed that it was
expected that the Tables would be revised and added to before any attempt
at consolidation should be undertaken. Mr. Yih mentioned particularly the
inadequately secured foreign loans under the charge of the Ministry of
Communications. He endeavored to make it plain that under his instructions
he could give information only and that he was not in a position to propose
any concrete plan of consolidation; that he would be glad to receive
information from any of the foreign Delegations concerning items owing
their nationals which were not included in the schedules submitted. Colonel
Peel, on behalf of the British Delegation, expressed a willingness to submit
his list of unsecured debts and said that he wished to arrive at an exact
figure, not an estimate of the total indebtedness of the Chinese Government.
Dr. Tsur, at this point, said that the Commission for the Readjustment of
Finance had gone into the question of debts very thoroughly and that it was
his understanding that it was the intention of the Chinese Government to
appoint the Commission for the Readjustment of Finance to undertake the
consolidation of debts and suggested that the foreign creditors communicate
directly with the Commission, since it would not seem to be a question
connected with the Conference. Colonel Peel dissented from that view,

however, but Dr. Tsur reiterated the statement, saying that it was not the
purpose of the Conference to consolidate the debts, much less the purpose
of the Technical Committee, and that the plan of having the consolidation
done by a special organ under the control of the Chinese Government had
had the approval of the Cabinet. Mr. Tripier of the French Delegation, read
a formal statement of the French Government’s attitude on debt
consolidation (see page 28 of Minutes of the Technical Committee Meeting
of November 21, 1925). Mr. Evans endeavored to ascertain whether the
material debts would be included in the statement which had been promised
from the Ministry of Communications but Dr. Tsur was not prepared to
answer. In closing the meeting Dr. Tsur said that he had communicated
informally the information concerning the plans of the Chinese Government
to create a special organ to consolidate the debts and that he could not,
under his instructions, give formal notice.
Sub-Committee on Rates of Surtaxes, First Meeting, November 23, 1925.
The Sub-Committee on Rates of Surtaxes held its first meeting on
November 23, 1925, and, on motion of Mr. Hioki, Admiral Tsai was elected
chairman. Admiral Tsai presented a revised list of “B” grade luxuries (see
Annex I next after page 14 of Minutes of November 23, 1925). He also read
a statement in explanation of the Estimated Revenue of Proposed Surtaxes
from Foreign Imports (see page 3 of Minutes of November 23, 1925). Mr.
Strawn remarked that it seemed to him that before they could come to an
understanding on rates they must know to what purposes the revenues
would be put and what amount would be required. Since there had been no
report from the subcommittee on Purposes, he asked whether it would be
appropriate to discuss the different rates before they knew the amount and
purposes for which the money would be used. He expressed the view that
under the Washington Treaty the Conference was required to consider what
were the means of abolishing likin, how much money would be required for
that purpose and how much money would be required to help China out of
the present financial difficulty. He considered that the Delegates could
interest themselves in these questions without any intention of interfering
with China’s internal affairs. Dr. Yen agreed with Mr. Strawn, but pointed
out that the Conference was really going beyond the terms of the
Washington Treaty and were negotiating a new treaty. For that reason Dr.

Yen considered that it would be necessary for the subcommittee to agree
upon certain principles before proceeding, the first being whether it was the
sense of the subcommittee that the 2½ per cent surtax must be exceeded
during the interim period and as to how much money would be required to
meet China’s needs. Mr. Strawn pointed out, as he had done several times
before, that the American Delegation was prepared to give China the 2½ per
cent and 5 per cent surtax at once and proceed to the negotiation of a new
treaty for the so-called interim surtaxes. For his part, he felt that the
subcommittee should take up each of the subjects within the scope of the
subcommittee’s work and dispose of them as they could agree and leave for
later decision those upon which they could not agree. He considered that the
uses to which the money would be put and the rates, were necessarily
related and it seemed to him that they ought to be discussed together. Mr.
Hioki agreed with this view and particularly with the order of procedure
suggested by the American Delegation, and the Delegates from Belgium,
France and Denmark also endorsed Mr. Strawn’s statement. A discussion
ensued as to the classification of certain articles, the method followed in
preparing the Luxury List, and the approximate revenues to be derived from
the several plans. Mr. Strawn remarked that if the rates proposed were not
high enough he favored considering higher rates or a readjustment which
would bring in the necessary amount of revenue. He said also that the
American Delegates would not insist on the adoption of their plan if some
better plan could be evolved, the American proposal having been submitted
merely as a basis of negotiation. Mr. Stewart announced that the British
Delegation was not prepared to discuss even the main principles suggested
by Dr. Yen because these principles depended, largely, upon what they had
been discussing at other meetings. Briefly, the position of the British
Delegates was that it was premature to discuss the principles in the mind of
Dr. Yen until several other important questions connected with the
Conference had either been thoroughly discussed or agreed upon. Mr.
Stewart suggested that, before going further, they should postpone the
meeting until some of the Delegates had expressed themselves as ready to
discuss the proposals made by the Chinese, American and Japanese
Delegations. He considered this to be most essential, but Admiral Tsai
wished his “B” Grade Luxury list discussed either by the Delegates or
Technical Advisers. Mr. Oudendijk suggested, however, that the “B” Grade
Luxury List properly belonged to all three proposals that had been

submitted and that it could be taken to their homes or offices and studied in
preparation for another meeting of the subcommittee, at which time more
definite figures might be available as to the amounts of money required to
meet the purposes of the Chinese Government. It was agreed that this
should be done.
Sub-Committee on Rates of Surtaxes, Second Meeting, November 30, 1925.
At the second meeting of the subcommittee on Rates of Surtaxes,
November 30, the chairman submitted two documents, as follows, both of
which may be found in the Minutes for November 30.
“Explanation of “B” Grade Luxuries”
“Detailed Explanations for the Estimated Revenue of Proposed
Surtaxes from Foreign Imports.”
The last named document contained tables showing the estimated revenues
from proposed surtaxes on foreign imports based on Customs returns of
1924, the estimated revenue from wine, beer, spirits, et cetera, estimated
revenue from tobacco, estimated revenue from “B” Grade Luxuries, and
estimated revenues from ordinary goods.
There was no discussion on the various documents submitted to the sub-
committee.
Committee on Provisional Measures, Fifth Meeting, December 10, 1925.
At the fifth meeting of the Committee on Provisional Measures, held on
December 10, 1925, Admiral Tsai read two documents, one “Remarks
Regarding the Valuation of Commodities” and the other “Proposal of the
Chinese Delegation Concerning the Revision of the Customs Tariff
Schedule” (see pages 2 to 6 inclusive of the Minutes of December 10,
1925.) The first named paper recited that the Washington Treaty relating to
the Customs Tariff provides that the Special Conference shall prescribe
rules by which further tariff revisions are to be effectuated; that inasmuch as
the Conference had unanimously recognized China’s right to tariff
autonomy and that it will be enforced from January 1, 1929, it would be

conceded that from that date the valuation of commodities will be done
according to the laws to be promulgated by the Chinese Government. With
that end in view for the interim period, and in harmony with the spirit of the
Washington Conference, draft regulations relating to the revision of Chinese
tariff schedules were submitted. These regulations (page 3 et seq of Minutes
of December 10) go into great detail as to how the interim revisions shall be
made and in the preamble, as a basis for the regulations, is quoted Article
IV of the Nine-Power Treaty relating to the Chinese Customs Tariff.
Colonel Peel proceeded to analyze the regulations and said that the only
kind of rules the Delegates were authorized to make under their powers
given them by the Washington Treaty were rules for the guidance of an
International Commission. He did not consider that they were authorized to
make any rules for a purely Chinese Revision Commission. He did say,
however, that he would be very glad to recommend to his Government for
its consideration the Chinese proposal and to name the reasons that
prompted the Chinese to suggest the rules. He asked for information
concerning the kind of Commission that the Chinese proposed to institute.
Admiral Tsai said that the Chinese Government had both Chinese experts
and experts from the foreign staff of the Chinese Customs and as a basis of
valuation they also had the prices in Shanghai, Hankow, Canton, Tientsin
and Dairen as representing the four geographical centers of the Country. A
further explanation was made by Admiral Tsai as to plans for the revision,
but it did not appear that the Delegates wished to discuss the question
further, whereupon the chairman submitted two documents, one a
“Declaration of the Chinese Government Regarding the Levying of Duties
and Taxes on Foreigners Residing in China” (see page 11 et seq of the
Minutes of December 10, 1925), and the other a “Declaration of the
Government of the Republic of China Regarding the Abolition of the
Export Duty and Coast Trade Duty on Native Goods not Destined for
Exportation to Foreign Countries” (see pages 15 and 16 of Minutes of
December 10, 1925.) Regarding the question of the taxation of foreigners, it
was pointed out by the Chinese Delegates, in their statement, that in no
treaty is there to be found any provision which concedes to foreigners living
in or outside the settlements in China an exemption from taxation.
However, the practice had grown up of foreigners declining to pay such
taxes in the Settlements because they had not received instructions from

their Governments. This practice had also extended to foreigners residing
outside the Settlements and in the Railway Zones and even the Chinese had
resorted to the practice of not paying their taxes in the Settlements and
Railway Zones. This, according to the Chinese view, ran counter to the
spirit of the Washington Conference which was designed to respect the
territorial and administrative integrity of China. The statement submitted
gave a brief historical and legal review of the question of the taxation of
foreigners in the Settlements.
The Declaration Regarding the Abolition of the Export Duty and Coast
Trade Duty, as its name implies, proposed to discontinue the collection of
export duty on native goods not destined for exportation to foreign
countries and on native commodities entering into the coast trade. This was
announced to be an initial step in the direction of the ultimate abolition of
likin. After Sir Ronald Macleay had expressed his appreciation of this
practical demonstration of the intention of the Chinese Government to make
early progress toward the abolition of likin, the Committee adjourned.
Sub-Committee on Rates of Surtaxes, Third Meeting, December 23, 1925.
Admiral Tsai opened the third meeting of the subcommittee on Rates of
Surtaxes by presenting a condensed list of “B” Grade Luxuries. The old “B”
Grade Luxury List containing 152 items, was reduced to 104 items. Mr.
Fox, on behalf of the British Delegation, inquired whether the
reclassification would increase the revenues, and if so, he would like some
statement with regard to it. Other inquiries were made in this regard, but no
reply was forthcoming. Mr. Hioki wished to know what was meant by
Article 4 of the Rules which read as follows: “The final decision in any
future case of dispute as to what is covered by each item in this List of
Luxuries is to be given solely by the ‘Board of Review’.” The chairman
replied that it was intended to create a Board, consisting of the Shui-Wu-
Chu,2 the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Agriculture and
Commerce, and also technical advisers, to pass on questions relating to
goods and imports.
Committee on Provisional Measures, Sixth Meeting, February 18, 1925
[1926].

At the beginning of the Sixth meeting of the Committee on Provisional
Measures, held on February 18, 1926, Dr. Yen presented, on behalf of the
Chinese Delegation, two resolutions, one “Regarding the Estimated Amount
of Customs Revenue Derivable from the Interim Surtaxes” (see page 3 of
Minutes February 18, 1926) and the other “Relative to the Levying of the
Surtaxes as Provided in Article III of the Treaty Relating to Chinese
Customs Tariff signed at Washington February 6, 1922” (see page 4 of
Minutes of February 18, 1926). In presenting the statements, Dr. Yen stated
that the public might think that the Conference had had rather a long
vacation, but that, as a matter of fact, there had been frequent and informal
exchanges of views and the first resolution embodied a part of the result
achieved in the interim. It was pointed out that the period since the last
meeting had been devoted to a careful study of the requirements of the
Chinese and it had not been an easy matter to reach an understanding, as
there were a large number of correlated questions. While they had not
reached a complete agreement, it seemed reasonably certain that the figure
stated in the Resolution, namely, between ninety and one hundred million
dollars, Chinese Currency, as the sum required to meet the needs of the
Chinese Government, was really necessary and he felt that the passing of
such a resolution would create a most excellent impression not only in
China but elsewhere and would prove that the Conference had been
progressing in a really friendly and sympathetic spirit.
Colonel Peel protested against so important a resolution being circulated so
late. He voiced vigorous objection to that part of the Resolution reading:
“do resolve and agree that the annual revenue derivable from the interim
surtaxes on foreign imports shall amount to between ninety and one
hundred million dollars,” and said that it seemed quite impossible to assert
in a resolution that the revenue from any particular tax would yield a
definite sum. He thought all that could be done would be to agree to the
levying of certain definite taxes and to express the hope that these would
bring in certain sums. He particularly emphasized that all the discussions
which their experts had had on the subject of surtaxes and the views which
they had expressed as being willing to agree to certain taxes, were entirely
dependent on the other parts of the treaty being satisfactory. Colonel Peel
discussed in a general way the abolition of likin, the purposes to which the
new revenues would be put, compensation to the Provinces, transit passes

and the consolidation of the unsecured debts as these questions relate to the
general Chinese plan of raising more money from Customs duties. Colonel
Peel wished particularly to know the aggregate amount of the debts to be
consolidated, how the debts would be consolidated, what security there
would be and whether any special treatment would be given for railways,
and whether the debt of the Ministry of Communications would be taken
care of in the general consolidation or in some other plan. He called
attention to the fact that expenditure for constructive purposes would
depend upon how these questions were solved. This was true he said also of
administrative expenses. He discussed rather in detail various phases of the
financial difficulties of the Chinese Government and said, in conclusion,
that, in his opinion, it would be premature to pass the resolution until a
clearer idea could be had of the Chinese program with reference to likin,
debts, constructive plans and various other correlated subjects. Mr.
MacMurray concurred in Colonel Peel’s view and recalled that the work of
the Conference was, after all, to authorize the levying of a surtax on
dutiable imports as from such date, for such purposes and subject to such
conditions as the Conference may determine. The amount of surtaxes to be
levied and the conditions had been the subject of their whole deliberation
which during the past month had been carried on with a surprising degree of
success as seen in the very gratifying progress made in the informal
conversations which had done much to clear up misunderstandings and
harmonize divergent views. For the purpose of these conversations, it was
necessary to adopt certain hypotheses, one of which related to the amount
of money that it was expected would be raised from the surtaxes over and
beyond those authorized by the Washington Treaty. The informal
conversations had brought out fairly definitely that probably between ninety
and one hundred millions of dollars would be necessary and could be
raised, but Mr. MacMurray, in his discussion of the subject, made it plain
that this was simply a tentative hypothesis on which to work out the terms
and conditions upon which the surtaxes would be granted. It appeared to
him that the effect of the passing of the resolution as proposed in Yin 703
would be an acceptance of the hypothesis as a fact, which would vastly
complicate matters and retard the work of the Conference. Mr. MacMurray
said that, for his part, he was quite unable to accept the proposal that they
should, prior to the working out of the conditions, agree to a definite
amount of money to be raised by the surtaxes. He spoke of the ambiguity of

the wording of the Resolution, to which Colonel Peel had also referred, and
which possibly left it to be assumed that the Powers would guarantee or
subsidize the Chinese revenue in order to make up the amount specified. He
felt that the adoption of the Resolution would be a very considerable
departure from the purposes which they were endeavoring, with a gratifying
degree of success, to work out through other means, and that the passage of
the Resolution would be premature. He suggested that the matter be
dropped until after they had made further progress with the purposes laid
down by the terms of the Treaty.
Admiral Tsai said that he did not believe that the Chinese Delegation ever
intended that the Delegations of foreign Governments should guarantee or
subsidize the amount. He said, further, that he thought Dr. Wang had in
mind naming the $90,000,000 or $100,000,000 merely as a hypothetical
sum on which they could begin the discussion of the 2½ and 5 per cent
surtax question. Admiral Tsai said that what he had in mind principally was
the preparation of the way for beginning the collection of these taxes with
as little delay as possible, as the Chinese Government was losing
$2,500,000 a month by not being able to collect these duties.
Mr. Strawn remarked that, at the very beginning of the Conference, the
American Delegation offered to the Chinese Delegation the immediate
implementing of the Washington Treaty surtaxes of 2½ and 5 per cent, and
that he heard at that time no dissenting voice except that of China. He said
that the American Delegation was still willing to allow it to go into effect
immediately, or as soon as possible, and that if China was being deprived of
the 2½ per cent it was not the fault of the foreigners, so far as he was able to
discover. Admiral Tsai then said that Mr. Strawn was right and that the
reason China did not accept the 2½ per cent surtax without condition or
understanding was because of the state of public opinion last autumn which
would have exposed the Chinese Delegation to the charge of accepting only
the 2½ per cent in order to get something for government expenses and
letting the rest go. However, as the public had become aware that the
foreign Delegations had really approached the matter in a most generous
spirit the fear of the Chinese Delegation had passed away and they were
ready to begin the collection of the 2½ per cent surtax. Mr. Strawn
suggested that other Delegations should be heard from on the subject and

Mr. de Warzee and Count de Martel gave their consent to the imposition of
the 2½ per cent surtax as early as possible, but they both voiced disapproval
of the plan to consider Yin 70 which named the specific sum of
$90,000,000 or $100,000,000 as being the amount which it would be
necessary to raise. Count de Martel then laid before the Conference a
resolution designed to put into force the 2½ and 5 per cent surtaxes (see
page 14 of Minutes of February 18, 1926). Mr. de Kauffmann expressed
approval of the remarks made by members of the American and British
Delegations with reference to the 2½ and 5 per cent surtaxes but objected to
the consideration of the resolution concerning the sum of $90,000,000,
which resolution he considered premature. He said that, on the whole, the
work of the Conference had been proceeding satisfactorily and that nothing
should be done to interrupt this orderly procedure. He referred to the fact
that when the American Delegation, near the beginning of the Conference,
had expressed a desire to effectuate the Washington Treaty at once, the
Danish Delegation had supported the suggestion and it now renewed that
assurance. Mr. Oudendijk confirmed Mr. Strawn’s statement that when an
offer was made by the American Delegation to put in force the Washington
Treaty surtaxes immediately the only dissenting voice was the Chinese. He
reiterated the willingness of the Netherlands Delegation to proceed at once
to the implementing of the Washington Treaty surtaxes and to that end it
seemed to him that Count de Martel’s proposal covered the same ground as
the original American proposal. Like other foreign Delegates who had
previously spoken, Mr. Oudendijk voiced objection to Yin 70 which named
the $90,000,000 or $100,000,000 as the amount required to meet China’s
needs. Mr. Bianchi also objected to any action looking to the formal passing
of Yin 70 but was quite prepared to approve the 2½ and 5 per cent surtax
resolution, as he had been all along prepared to do. Mr. Garrido agreed with
Mr. Oudendijk’s views and Mr. Cerruti agreed with the views of the
American and British Delegations and said that, like the American
Delegation, the Italian Delegation had from the beginning been willing to
give the 2½ per cent authorized by the Washington Treaty. Mr. Hioki
acquiesced in the views expressed by the other foreign Delegates
concerning Yin 70 and Yin 71,4 and suggested that, since there were some
technical matters connected with Yin 71 it would be advisable to refer the
matter to a small sub-committee for consideration. Mr. Michelet agreed
with his colleagues concerning Yin 70, and especially with the views

expressed by Mr. Oudendijk. He suggested, however, that the scheme of
levying the taxes be simplified as much as possible and to that end
suggested that it would be well to have the 2½ per cent on ordinary goods
and 5 per cent on luxuries, enforced at the same time. Mr. Ewerlöf opposed
the proposal contained in Yin 70, but approved that contained in Yin 71 and
supported Mr. Hioki’s suggestion that the matter be referred to a small
subcommittee.
Dr. Yen said that the Chinese Delegation had no desire to force anything on
the foreign Delegations. He voiced the belief, however, that the various
Delegations were really agreed on the content of the two resolutions,
although they did not quite agree as to the form in which they had been put.
To sustain his point, he said that the French Delegation had presented a
resolution which seemed to combine both the resolutions he had introduced.
Dr. Yen took occasion to explain that at the beginning of the Conference the
Chinese Delegation had thought that the 2½ per cent surtax would not be
sufficient for the various purposes and for that reason they had declined it.
They were now, however, ready to proceed and he thought Mr. Hioki’s
suggestion that it be referred to a small subcommittee was a good one. Such
a subcommittee, in his opinion, could consider the original American
proposal, the Chinese proposal and the French proposal and he suggested
that the subcommittee resolution be prefaced with a suitable introduction
combining the three proposals. Mr. Strawn expressed doubt as to whether
Yin 70 and Yin 71 could be combined and, on behalf of the American
Delegation, said that they would not want any suggestion in Yin 70 as to the
amount which it might be expected could be raised from these revenues. He
again reiterated the willingness of the American Delegation to give the 2½
per cent and 5 per cent at the earliest possible moment, but he did not think
it would be well to attempt to combine the two proposals.
Dr. Wang went into great detail in explaining the reasons prompting the
Chinese to submit the two resolutions and he said that it seemed necessary
to fix some sum as the approximate figure around which it would be
necessary to work and that, since the general discussion had seemed to lead
to a belief that the approximate amount required for the abolition of likin,
the consolidation of debts and other needs would be in the neighborhood of
ninety or one hundred million dollars that figure had been named in the

Chinese resolution. He emphasized the need for completing the
construction of certain railways and conservancy projects, for entering upon
certain judicial reforms, for placing the diplomatic service on a sound
financial basis and for disbursements for educational purposes. He
suggested that Yin 70 and Yin 71 should be combined into one resolution
and he took occasion to say that the reason the Chinese Delegation did not
accept the American proposal to put immediately into force the 2½ per cent
and 5 per cent surtaxes was because that at the time the proposal was first
made there was a general outcry by the Chinese people against the
convening of the Special Conference for fear that it would do nothing
further than to carry out the terms of the Washington Treaty which would be
quite inadequate for the abolition of likin, or for the consolidation of the
inadequately secured debts. This fear, however, had now been overcome as
the foreign Delegations, by their sympathetic attitude, had won over the
opinion of the Chinese people. He cited particularly letters which he had
received from leaders of Chinese political thought, such as Mr. Tang Shao
Yi, and persons holding responsible positions in the Canton Government,
who had expressed satisfaction with the work of the Conference. After
proposing an Amendment to Count de Martel’s resolution by which, in the
second paragraph he would insert the so-called ninety or one hundred
million dollars provision, Dr. Wang endorsed Dr. Yen’s suggestion that the
matter be referred to a small subcommittee. After further discussion,
participated in by Sir Ronald Macleay and Mr. Strawn, it was agreed to
refer the matter to a special subcommittee of six to be appointed by the
chairman on which the Chinese Delegation should be represented. The
chairman thereupon appointed a subcommittee composed of members from
the American, British, Japanese, French, Netherlands and Chinese
Delegations, and it was agreed that the subcommittee should meet on
Saturday morning, February 20.
Sub-Committee to Draft a Resolution on the Levying of the Interim
Surtaxes, First Meeting, February 20, 1926.
The Subcommittee to Draft a Resolution on the Levying of the Interim
Surtaxes met on February 20 and two resolutions, one by the Chinese
Delegation and one by the American Delegation—designed to effectuate the
Washington Treaty, were introduced (see pages 1 and 2 of the Minutes of

February 20 for the text of these resolutions). A discussion ensued as to the
differences between these two resolutions and between them and the
resolution presented by Count de Martel at the meeting of the Committee
on Provisional Measures on February 18. Various questions of a technical
character were discussed and considerable attention was devoted to the
question of whether ratification would be required on the part of any of the
participating governments to make the treaty effective. The committee
proceeded to a discussion of the paragraph containing the reference to the
ninety million dollars which it was estimated would be required to meet the
needs of the Chinese Government. The chairman (Dr. Yen) defended the
language of the paragraph and said that instead of being a part of the
Resolution it was not put in as a statement of fact or a supposition in the
preamble and he considered that this would remove objections voiced at the
last Committee meeting. Count de Martel, Colonel Peel, Mr. Hioki and Mr.
Strawn voiced objection to the naming of a specific sum and Mr. Strawn
once more reminded the Chinese Delegation that the American Delegation
had announced last November that they were willing to let China have the
2½ per cent authorized by the Washington Treaty and the Chinese
Government declined to accept it because it feared that acceptance would
result in the interim surtaxes not being provided. However, the present
negotiation, Mr. Strawn pointed out, should plainly show that the foreign
Delegations were both willing and anxious to allow surtaxes higher than
those authorized by the Washington Treaty. These negotiations, he
considered, had progressed satisfactorily, but had not reached the point
where it could be said that $90,000,000 was the sum required to meet
China’s needs. He thought it premature to name any specific sum and to
obviate this difficulty Mr. Oudendijk proposed that after the words in the
American resolution “whereas the representatives of the Powers assembled
at this Conference are engaged in the negotiation of a treaty wherein
provision is to be made for the levying of surtaxes at higher rates” there
should be added the phrase “with a view to meeting the amounts required
for the various purposes which are being considered at this Conference”.
Mr. Oudendijk thought that this might satisfy the Chinese Delegation and at
the same time, not mention the amount to which most of the Delegations
had objected. Dr. Yen replied that the Chinese Delegation laid great
emphasis on the figure and Mr. Strawn supported Mr. Oudendijk’s
suggestion, saying that the Delegates were earnestly endeavoring to meet

the wishes of the Chinese Government and that he could not see how it
would be encouraging or discouraging to anybody to state the amount. The
point was not decided and the subcommittee passed on to the question of
impounding the funds, the Luxury List and other phases of the resolutions.
Colonel Peel supported the American resolution and he suggested a
committee of experts to consider the question of classification of luxuries
and the simplifying of procedure in administering the Customs laws. In this
connection Mr. Strawn suggested that a simple way of disposing of the
matter would be to prepare a list of commodities paying 5 per cent and then
to have all other commodities pay 2½ per cent. His idea was to make the
luxuries definite so that there would be no difficulty for the Customs
Administration to determine which were luxuries and which necessities. Dr.
Yen remarked that the idea of the American Delegation that the levying of
both surtaxes should commence at the same time was an excellent one and
Mr. Strawn, in reply to a suggestion from Colonel Peel that there would be
a further long period of waiting unless the Delegates were given a simple
list of luxuries, said that the idea the American Delegation had in mind was
that China was just as much entitled to the 5 per cent as to the 2½ per cent
and the quicker this was granted the better it would be.
 
Mr. Hioki at this point raised a question as to the effective date of surtaxes,
and Mr. Strawn said that it would be two months after the signing of the
resolution, provided, however, that goods shipped into China before the
expiration of two months should pay only the duties then in force. Mr.
Hioki thought that it would be fair that the levy should begin on the arrival
of the goods since if they should decide to make the new duties effective on
the date of shipment the Japanese goods would arrive in China much earlier
than goods shipped from Europe. Mr. Strawn remarked that if the case were
otherwise Japan would have two months’ advantage over the other
countries. It seemed to Mr. Oudendijk, also, that if the case were otherwise
it would give Japan a much longer period during which Japanese goods
could still come in at the lower rate. Mr. Strawn said that the sole purpose
was to place every country on a parity. As this question gave promise of
prolonged debate without arriving at any definite decision, Mr. Strawn
passed on to the next paragraph of the American proposal which provided

that the increased revenue which would accrue from the Washington Treaty
surtaxes should be held by the Customs Administration for the purpose of
being applied to the carrying out of such plans as shall be agreed upon by
the Conference and that the funds should not be pledged or hypothecated to
secure any indebtedness. In explaining this provision Mr. Strawn said that it
was not intended as a reflection on the gentlemen who were trying to
negotiate the treaty, but had been put in as a protection to the Chinese
Delegation in anticipation of the importunities of Tuchuns and warlords by
putting it beyond the power of anybody to raise any money on that
anticipated revenues. Dr. Yen objected to this provision and said that the
Chinese Delegation could not consent to the imposing of such humiliating
conditions, whereupon Mr. Strawn remarked that they were not humiliating,
but protective, and that in view of the financial situation in China the
problem might just as well be faced squarely and frankly. Count de Martel
supported Mr. Strawn, remarking that the last loan floated was secured on
funds available after two years, for which reason he considered that there
should be some guarantee against such transactions. Count de Martel said
that he was ready to adhere to practically all of the American proposal
because it covered nearly all of the ground in the French proposal and was
better worded. Mr. Hioki said that he considered the American draft better
than the Chinese draft, but he could not commit himself until he had made a
more thorough study.
At this point in the proceedings the third paragraph was reached and Mr.
Strawn offered an amendment which would omit any reference to the
“ninety million dollars” or to any other specific sum, merely “authorizing
the levying of surtaxes at rates higher than those provided in Article III” of
the Washington Treaty. Dr. Yen again entered protest against omitting the
ninety million dollars from the paragraph and finally said that the Chinese
Delegation would make a reservation on the point. Other paragraphs more
or less technical, were read and discussed in order, but no definite decision
concerning any of them was reached, it being the sense of the meeting that
the questions should be considered by the technical advisers.
On reading the last paragraph of the American proposal, Dr. Yen again
entered vigorous protest against the provision prohibiting the pledging or
hypothecating of any of the accumulated funds. He thought that this phase

of the matter could be covered by the clause, “the proceeds of these
surtaxes shall be employed for such purposes and subject to such conditions
as this Conference may determine.” Dr. Yen said that the Chinese
Delegation could not go beyond the plain terms of the treaty. He contended
that there was no occasion to provide a protective measure, but Colonel
Peel and Mr. Strawn dissented from this view, the latter because he wanted
to make certain that the militarists could not seize the funds. A prolonged
discussion ensued covering this paragraph and numerous amendments were
offered, but no definite decision was reached. The insistence of Dr. Yen that
the wording of the Washington Treaty should be followed and that no
reference to “custodian banks” should be made in the last paragraph made it
impossible to agree upon a resolution (see pages 30, 31 and 32 for texts of
Chinese and American resolutions relative to levying the Washington
surtaxes).
Sub-Committee to Draft a Resolution on the Levying of Interim Surtaxes,
Second Meeting, February 24, 1926.
At the second meeting of the Sub-Committee appointed by Committee II to
draft a resolution on the levying of the interim surtaxes, Dr. Yen, the
chairman, submitted an amended draft of a resolution designed to effectuate
the Washington Treaty. (See page 34 of Minutes of February 24, 1926). Dr.
Yen said that the amended draft was based largely on the one previously
submitted by the American Delegation. The first and second paragraphs
followed exactly the words of the American resolution, but the third
paragraph was altered so as to bring in the sum of ninety million dollars in
the preface. Mr. Strawn immediately protested this wording and said that he
saw no necessity for inserting the figure and suggested that it be omitted.
Mr. Hioki offered an amendment designed to obviate the necessity of
inserting a specific amount in the resolution and Colonel Peel said that none
of the foreign members of the subcommittee wished to commit themselves
in the preamble to anything in the new treaty. Dr. Yen persisted in his effort
to prevail on the foreign Delegates to consent to the naming of $90,000,000
as the sum which was to be raised and the foreign Delegates, in turn, as
strongly opposed any such commitment. Mr. Oudendijk attempted to
conciliate the differences and suggested that the words, “with a view to
meeting the amounts required for the various purposes which are being

considered at this Conference”, be substituted for the so-called ninety
million dollar clause. Mr. Oudendijk considered that this wording was
substantially the same as the Japanese wording. Mr. Strawn agreed, on
behalf of the American Delegation, to accept the Japanese draft, as did
Count de Martel, who also said that he would be willing to accept the
Chinese draft if the Chinese Delegation would be willing to omit the figure
$90,000,000. Mr. Oudendijk again attempted a compromise wording but
Mr. Strawn said that the American Delegation considered it to be entirely
out of place to make any mention of the $90,000,000 because it was
necessary first to know the purposes to which the money would be put and
the rates which would be required; that the foreign Delegations were
working to that end intelligently, faithfully and persistently. Once more Mr.
Strawn emphasized the desire of the American Delegation to give the 2½
and 5 per cent surtaxes at once and also to negotiate a new treaty giving
additional revenues to the amount required to meet the needs of the Chinese
Government. Mr. Strawn expressed the fear that a great deal of
misapprehension would arise in America, as well as in China, if the
Delegates agreed to the raising of the 90 million dollars without the
purposes having been defined. He did not wish a false impression to go out
and he did not understand why, when they were approaching an agreement
on the subject, the Chinese Delegation should insist upon naming in the
resolution the sum of 90 million dollars as the amount required, particularly
since the resolution dealt with the 2½ and 5 per cent treaty surtaxes and not
the larger interim surtaxes. Mr. Strawn stated that he had no objection to an
amalgamation of the Chinese and Japanese resolutions except that he would
insist, persistently and continually, for the reasons he had already named,
that there should be no insertion of a specific amount in the resolution.
After a further unsuccessful effort was made to reconcile the differences in
the resolution under discussion, Dr. Yen said that he would insist on his
reservation regarding the 90 million dollars, whereupon Count de Martel
observed that he thought the item was being inserted for the purpose of
obtaining credit. Dr. Yen then suggested that the subcommittee make its
recommendations to Committee II and let that Committee decide the point,
but Mr. Strawn considered that plan futile because at the last meeting of
Committee II not a single foreign Delegation had expressed a willingness to
accept the item, although, if it chose to do so, the Chinese Delegation could
make a minority report and the full Committee could accept either the

majority or minority report. Further efforts to conciliate the differences
were made by Mr. Oudendijk and others, but a compromise could not be
agreed upon because of the persistency of Dr. Yen in declining to accept any
draft which did not contain the 90 million dollars item. A large number of
amendments were offered designed to satisfy the Chinese viewpoint, but
they were all promptly and emphatically rejected because they did not
concede the 90 million dollars.
Dr. Yen considered that it would be better to permit the 2½ per cent surtax
to go into effect at once and the 5 per cent tax on luxuries to go into force at
a later date, not exceeding two months, in order to allow more time for
preparing a list of luxuries. Mr. Strawn assented to this, although he felt that
it would simplify matters if both rates went into force at the same time. A
discussion ensued as to whether the 2½ and 5 per cent surtaxes should be
based on actual rates then being paid which were slightly less than the rate
of 5 per cent provided in the Customs treaty. It was brought out that one of
the periodical revisions of the schedules of rates would probably be
necessary within the next few months. It was agreed that the Inspector
General of Customs should be consulted concerning this point. Colonel Peel
said that in his opinion, it would be preferable to have the 2½ and 5 per cent
surtaxes go into effect at the same time and that everything should be done
to simplify administrative matters. He emphasized the need for a short
luxury list and suggested that the advisers be instructed to prepare one at
once, in which suggestion Mr. Strawn concurred. A rather prolonged
discussion took place as to the effective date of the new rates and Mr. Hioki
was pronounced in his view that the levying of the new duties, after due
notice had been given, should, as is the universal practice, begin at the
moment the goods have arrived at the port of entry. This, he considered,
would be a simple method of procedure, and would place all goods on an
equal basis at the customs houses. Mr. Strawn and Colonel Peel contended
for the date of shipment rather than for the date of arrival for putting into
force the new rates. The advantages and disadvantages of the two proposals
were discussed at length, during the course of which Mr. Oudendijk
suggested the deletion of the words “country of origin” and the substitution
of the words “goods shipped to China”, his point being that the country of
shipment was not always the country of origin. Both Mr. Strawn and
Colonel Peel agreed with Mr. Oudendijk’s views on this point. As the

discussion developed very divergent views and technical phases of the
question arose, it was deemed advisable to refer the matter to a committee
of technical advisers.
Mr. Hioki proposed an amendment to the last paragraph of the Chinese
proposal concerning the impounding of the revenues derived from the
surtaxes and the custodian-ship of the funds (see page 27 of the Minutes of
February 24, 1926). This amendment was a remodeling of the American
proposal. The provision relating to custodian banks provoked considerable
adverse criticism and in reply to Mr. Strawn’s inquiry as to the purpose of
the last line of his suggestion, “in such manner as shall have been agreed
upon at this Conference”, Mr. Hioki stated that that referred to the principle
upon which the Customs revenue was to be apportioned to the different
banks, whether it was to be according to the credit which each nation had,
or to the trade, or to something else. A series of amendments were then
submitted designed to simplify the language and to provide a guarantee
against the dissipation of the funds. In discussing the amendments Dr. Yen
again referred to the 90 million dollar clause and said that the Chinese
Delegation would be prepared to go as far as possible to meet the wishes of
the foreign Delegates in regard to the security of the funds. He referred to
Count de Martel’s statement that the foreign delegates did not want to name
the figure because they feared that the Chinese Government might use the
money, or that figure, as security for making a loan. Count de Martel
replied that his objection was made because he happened to remember an
instance in which the Chinese Government pledged the surtaxes
contemplated in the Washington Treaty within a few months after the end of
the Washington Conference, and that evidence to this effect was in the files
of the French Delegation. Dr. Yen said that he had no knowledge of such a
transaction but that there were certain instances when foreign creditors had
insisted upon the proceeds of the 2½ per cent surtaxes being guaranteed to
them. Count de Martel said that the case he had in mind was the Kiangnan
Arsenal at Shanghai in connection with which the Minister of Finance
offered the surtaxes as security. Count de Martel said that he would favor
ruling out such a pledge and Colonel Peel expressed a similar view and
said, too, that the surtaxes had also been pledged to secure payment of
certain British creditors. The sub-committee returned to a discussion of Mr.
Oudendijk’s amendment designed to take the place of paragraphs 3 and 4 of

the Chinese draft and reconcile the differences between the Delegates
concerning the reference to the $90,000,000, but it developed that no
agreement could be reached and the sub-committee adjourned (see page 34
of Minutes of February 24, 1926, for Japanese draft resolution on
effectuating the Washington Treaty).
 
Technical Committee to Draw up a List of Luxuries, First Meeting,
February 25, 1926.
Pursuant to the desire of the subcommittee appointed by Committee II to
draft a resolution to levy the Washington surtaxes, the Committee of
Technical Advisers met on February 25, 1926, to draw up a list of luxuries
for submission to the sub-committee above mentioned. The Chinese
Technical Advisers submitted two tables, one giving the estimated revenues
to be derived from surtaxes shown in Yin 67 and the other the estimated
revenues on the basis of certain percentages (see pages 2 and 3 of Minutes
of February 25, 1926). Mr. Stewart of the British Technical staff inquired
what amount it would be expected the Washington surtaxes would produce.
He surmised, by a method of calculation based on luxuries listed in “A”,
“B” and “C”, that the amount would approximate $3,200,000. Mr. Perkins
read pertinent portions of the Washington Treaty and said that the matter of
arriving at what constituted a luxury rested entirely in the discretion of the
Conference. He suggested that the lists of “A”, “B” and “C” grade articles
should be taken as a tentative basis of discussion, with the understanding
that any Delegation could make a reservation, for good and substantial
reasons, on any particular item which they did not believe to be properly
placed. Mr. Perkins made it plain that the lists were purely tentative and
were not intended to have any bearing on or any connection with the
interim rates of surtaxes which were to be incorporated in the proposed new
treaty. The chairman remarked that according to Mr. Perkins’ suggestion,
“A”, “B” and “C” grades would yield $9,063,000, which answered Mr.
Stewart’s inquiry, and that grades “D”, “E”, “F” and “G” would yield
$23,456,000, making a total of $32,519,000 which could reasonably be
expected, if the figures submitted by the Chinese were correct. Mr.
Hornbeck suggested that the purpose of the meeting was to discuss the

division between the 2½ per cent and the 5 per cent and to draw up a
schedule for the 5 per cent luxuries to be levied under the provisions of
Article III of the Washington Treaty and not to discuss any amounts of
money to be raised.
Mr. Stewart suggested that to begin the discussion, the Advisers should
accept at once and without alteration “A” and “B” in the Chinese
classification as coming within the 5 per cent basis.
Mr. Hornbeck objected to this because he feared that the acceptance of
these two classes might ultimately lead to including in the luxury list only
the commodities in those two grades. He said that the attitude of the
American Advisers in regard to “A” and “B” depended somewhat on the
attitude of the other Advisers in regard to articles in Class “C”. The plan of
procedure adopted was that the chairman should read out the list item by
item, and ask if any one had any objection to the inclusion of a particular
item in the 5 per cent list.
Beginning with the Commodities in Class “A” the list was read item by
item and various reservations were made.
There had been such a large number of reservations on the “A”, “B” and
“C” lists that at the suggestion of Mr. Stewart, concurred in by Mr. Perkins,
it was deemed inadvisable to proceed to the reading of the “D” and “E”
classes of commodities.
It was agreed to leave these two lists for consideration at a further meeting,
at which the reservations made on the “A”, “B” and “C” could be adjusted.
For a table of estimated revenues derivable from the proposed surtaxes see
Appendix 1, Minutes of February 25, 1926, and for a table showing the
value of the import trade of China for 1924 on which duty was assessed see
Table I in same Minutes. For value of “free goods” see Table II and for
value of dutiable goods specially exempted from duty in 1924 see Table III
in Minutes of February 25. In the same Minutes may be found the Tables,
with explanatory notes, showing the items in Grades “A”, “B”, “C”, “D”,
“E”, “F” and “G”.

Technical Committee to Draw up a List of Luxuries, Second Meeting,
March 2, 1926.
At the second meeting on March 2 of the Technical Committee to Draw up
a List of Luxuries, Admiral Tsai submitted a list of all the articles on which
reservations had been made by the different members of the Technical
Committee, together with a table showing the rates of import duties in
foreign countries on the goods on which reservations had been made, and
also a list of the revised terms in Classes “A”, “B” and “C”. These
documents may be found on page 2 et seq of the Minutes of March 2, 1926.
Mr. Saburi read from the Minutes of the Washington Conference, in
connection with the inquiry made by Mr. Stewart at the last meeting as to
the amount of revenues expected from the Washington surtaxes, showing
that Senator Underwood’s estimate was $46,167,000.5 Mr. Saburi pointed
out that this figure differed greatly from the figure named at the last
meeting. Admiral Tsai remarked that the situation in China was now quite
different from what it was at the time of the Washington Conference. Mr.
Stewart emphasized the need of disposing of the Washington surtax
question with as little delay as possible as the American Delegation had
originally proposed, so that the Conference would be free to deal with the
new situation which had arisen since the Washington Conference. He
expressed the, hope that everyone would show the same liberal spirit and
open-mindedness which would help matters along.
 
The chairman proceeded to read out the list of reservations item by item and
in a considerable number of cases the reservations were maintained, but in
others they were withdrawn. The few reservations made by the American
Advisers at the previous meeting were withdrawn and Mr. Hornbeck
announced that the American Advisers were willing to accept the “A”, “B”
and “C” lists in their entirety. As a possible means of speeding up the work,
Mr. Hornbeck expressed the hope that other Delegations would also
withdraw their reservations on at least some items. Following this
suggestion several individual reservations were withdrawn and the
Portuguese, Norwegian, Swedish and Danish representatives all, in turn,

pursuant to the American suggestion, accepted in toto, the “A”, “B” and
“C” lists. The meeting developed that there still remained 14 reservations in
the “C” class, but since 11 items had been transferred out of “D” and “E”
there seemed to be substantially a balance and that it was therefore
considered that it was in order to report the lists to the subcommittee to levy
the Washington surtaxes.
Sub-Committee to Draft a Resolution on Levying Washington Surtaxes,
Third Meeting, March 8, 1926.
At the third meeting of the Sub-committee to Draft a Resolution on Levying
the Washington Surtaxes, the chairman stated that Mr. Strawn had been
good enough to prepare a composite draft of the resolution embodying the
various ideas which had been brought forth at the previous meetings and
that with but few changes the Chinese had practically adopted the same
wording in their draft, which he proceeded to read to the sub-committee.
(See pages 1 and 2 of Minutes of March 8 for revised Chinese draft.) The
first three paragraphs were approved without amendment, but the fourth
paragraph brought on considerable discussion and several amendments
were offered. Dr. Yen suggested that they revert to the original Chinese
idea, but both Colonel Peel and Count de Martel warned that it would be
useless to attempt again to bring in the 90 million dollar clause. The
chairman, however, further along in the discussion stated that the Chinese
Delegation thought it would be better to insert this figure in the fourth
paragraph and that an oral reservation would be made regarding it. He
proceeded to read the fifth paragraph of the preamble and thereafter the first
paragraph of the resolution itself. He insisted that the principle of making
the duties effective at date of landing instead of date of shipment should be
maintained. He explained that it was not so much the amount of money
involved as it was a desire to establish a principle that prevailed in
practically all other countries. He expressed a desire that the procedure
would be so arranged that no injustice or hardship would befall the
merchants of countries remote from China. The matter of the effective date
brought on considerable discussion and Colonel Peel remarked that as
contracts were all based on the date of shipment to enforce the principle of
the date of landing would produce a great deal of confusion in the business
world as the merchants would suddenly be confronted with a different rate.

Various suggestions were made to conciliate this question but it was found
impossible to arrive at a satisfactory solution. The Japanese insisted upon
the date of landing, whereas Colonel Peel and others insisted upon the date
of shipment. A considerable number of amendments designed to simplify
administrative features of the paragraph were offered and practically all of
them were rejected. Several of the Delegates thought it advisable to adhere
to the usual practice in China of giving at least sixty days’ notice. Colonel
Peel announced that he would not, under any circumstances, accept less
notice than sixty days. Mr. Strawn announced that he would not be disposed
to change the practice with reference to notice so as to accelerate the
effective date and thereby preclude his nationals from completing contracts
which they might have with the Chinese for the delivery of goods. He
anticipated that if such a change were made there would be protests and in
any event he did not consider that the American Delegation had authority to
give their assent to a change of this character. He emphasized the point that
he wished to move along the line of least resistance otherwise it might delay
the effectuating of the Washington Treaty. Mr. Hioki continued vigorously
to oppose the adoption of the date of shipment, but notwithstanding the
efforts of Mr. Oudendijk to reconcile the differences, the question remained
unsettled.
Mr. Strawn emphasized the need of avoiding controversial subjects by
pursuing the methods that hitherto obtained in China, so that nothing would
arise to prevent the new tariff duties from becoming effective at the earliest
possible moment.
The paragraph relating to the impounding of the increased Customs
revenues, free from all encumbrances, by the Chinese Customs
Administration was then read for discussion and the chairman explained
that the Chinese Delegation had practically embodied the ideas of the other
Delegations in this paragraph. He explained further that in order to avoid
any prejudicial or controversial questions, the Chinese Delegation had used
the exact wording of the Washington Treaty as concerns purposes and
conditions. The last part of the Chinese Delegation’s original resolution had
therefore been changed to read “as for such purposes and subject to such
conditions as the Special Conference may determine”. Various amendments
were offered to this paragraph, the most important one being that of Mr.

Hioki who suggested that at the end of the paragraph a reference should be
made to the question of custodian banks. He submitted a revised form (see
page 26, Minutes of March 8, 1926) and said that the “custodian banks”
mentioned in his draft would be different from the so-called custodian
banks at present, and that as to the manner of deposit of the money, it was
intended to propose a different basis from that in effect at the present. The
chairman objected to taking up the question of custodian banks on the
ground that he did not wish to complicate the question under consideration.
Mr. Hioki replied that the 2½ and 5 per cent surtaxes could not be levied
unless the Conference fixed the purposes and the conditions and the date,
and that in his opinion the fixing of the custodian banks was one of the
conditions which was meant in the Treaty. Colonel Peel remarked that he
was quite content to leave the matter of the deposit of the surplus funds to
the Chinese Government and the Customs Administration. Mr. Strawn said
that he thought the revenues ought to be divided among the different banks
of the several countries. The chairman continued vigorously to oppose the
inclusion in the agreement of any provision relating to custodian banks,
preferring, as he said, to defer the matter until the question of levying the
interim surtaxes should be taken up. Mr. Strawn said that his solicitude
about deferring the proposition to a later date arose from the fact that he
desired to safeguard these revenues in such a way as to put them beyond the
power of anyone to put any lien on them. Since the sub-committee was
unable to agree upon this point, Mr. Hioki made a reservation on the
question and proceeded to read a proviso which he deemed prudent to add
to the paragraph which had just been under discussion. (See page 30 of
Minutes of March 8, 1926.) The purpose of this proviso was to guard
against the contingency of an inability to agree upon the distribution of the
money collected from the surtaxes in which event the money already
accumulated was to be disposed of by the Conference. Mr. Strawn said that
he did not believe that the situation justified Mr. Hioki’s apprehension that
the Conference might possibly not agree upon the purposes to which the
funds would be applied. Since it was not possible for the sub-committee to
agree on this paragraph, adjournment was taken with the understanding that
at the next meeting the questions of shipping and landing and of custody of
funds would be taken up.

(See Appendix I for Japanese [Chinese] draft of resolution relative to the
levying of Washington surtaxes and Appendix II for the American draft on
the same subject, Minutes of March 8, 1926) Sub-committee to Draft a
Resolution on the Levying of the Washington Surtaxes, Fourth Meeting,
March 12, 1926.
At the Fourth Meeting of the subcommittee to draft a resolution on the
levying of the Washington surtaxes, held on March 12, 1926, the chairman
announced, at the beginning of the meeting, that there were only two or
three points on which agreement could not be obtained at the last meeting,
on the resolution implementing the Washington Treaty. The question of the
date of shipment arose and Colonel Peel remarked that at the previous
meetings he had objected to the principle of the date of landing on the
ground that it would be a handicap to British trade and he said that he was
still of that opinion. However, he announced that he had been instructed by
his Government to abandon, for the sake of harmony, the principle of the
date of shipping if they were allowed three months’ notice from the date of
passage of the resolution. Count de Martel supported Colonel Peel in this
position. The chairman emphasized the need of introducing the surtaxes
with as little delay as possible and said that every day of delay would cause
less money to be available to meet the purposes which might be agreed
upon. He considered that the Chinese Delegation had been very liberal in
consenting to give seventy days’ notice, which was only a difference of
about twenty days from the three months’ period suggested by Colonel Peel.
Mr. Strawn concurred in Colonel Peel’s suggestion and Mr. Oudendijk
expressed a desire to expedite the passage of the resolution with as little
further discussion as possible. Mr. Hioki said that his proposal in
connection with using the date of landing was based strictly upon a question
of principle and that so long as that principle was admitted he had no
objection to the ninety days’ notice. The chairman, however, declined to
agree to the three months, saying that the original idea was only one month,
which had been changed to a month and a half, and ten days and again to
two months and ten days, and now the Delegates had asked for ninety days.
He felt compelled, therefore, to make a reservation on the point.
The sub-committee passed on to the paragraph relating to the custody of the
funds and Mr. Hioki submitted a new draft on this point, prepared by the

Japanese Delegation6 (see page 4 of Minutes of March 12, 1926). Dr. Yen
said that the Japanese draft introduced an entirely new idea, that in his
opinion the proviso defeated the very purpose for which the sub-committee
was sitting, that is, the subcommittee was trying to agree upon the levying
of surtaxes on a certain day and the proviso practically made it impossible
for the surtaxes to become effective on that day. He disliked also to note
what he called an implied want of confidence in the work of the Conference
and that it seemed to be an admission that the Conference had done almost
nothing and that there was little likelihood of anything being done by June
15. A further objection was that the Japanese proviso would be a weapon
which could be used to upset the Conference entirely, since there might be
disagreement as to the purposes and conditions, in which case it would be
possible, in effect, to cancel the Washington Treaty. Mr. Hioki took issue
with Dr. Yen and stated that if the Conference allowed the Chinese
Government to begin the levying of surtaxes without fixing the conditions,
then they were in position to violate the Washington Treaty. He considered
that the proviso, instead of delaying matters indefinitely, would impel them
to finish their work with greater energy than before because they would all
be determined to come to an agreement just to avoid the difficulties to
which they might be brought by force of circumstances. He said that he had
offered the proviso with the best of intentions and in the hope of arriving at
a conclusion at the earliest moment. Dr. Yen replied that the latter part of
the first sentence of Mr. Hioki’s draft, namely “to be applied later for such
purposes and subject to such conditions as shall have been agreed upon at
this Conference” practically covered all that was necessary or essential, so
that he did not see the necessity of the negative side of the proviso. Dr. Yen
remarked that the main purpose was to make provision for the safe-keeping
of the revenues and to make it impossible for others to tamper with them.
Mr. Strawn remarked that he could not share the chairman’s solicitude in
any of the respects he had voiced concerning Mr. Hioki’s resolution. He
said that he did not wish to be unpleasant by recurring to the fact that the
American Delegation had offered last fall to put the Washington surtaxes
into force, which offer had been rejected by the Chinese, and that had they
availed themselves of the opportunity, the Conference could have proceeded
immediately to consider the subject of conditions and purposes. He did not
consider that the resolution manifested any lack of confidence on the part of
the Powers, and he pointed out that if there were such a lack of confidence

it would impel them not to do anything about the treaty until the purposes
and conditions had been agreed upon. A lengthy discussion ensued
particularly on the subject of purposes and Mr. Oudendijk pointed out that
the purposes which the Conference should agree upon would be exactly the
same for the 2½ per cent surtaxes as they would be for the surtaxes of the
interim period. Mr. Oudendijk also said that he concurred with Mr. Hioki’s
view that the Japanese proposal would accelerate the work of the
Conference. Count de Martel also shared this view. However, the chairman
remained obdurate. In the course of the discussion Mr. Strawn expressed the
view that the purposes and conditions connected with the 2½ and 5 per cent
surtaxes were likewise applicable to the interim surtaxes and that there was
no difference in principle as between the two. Count de Martel then pointed
out that if they proceeded to levy the surtaxes without having agreed upon
the purposes, they were no longer within the scope of the Washington
Treaty. Mr. Hioki continued to press his resolution and said that there was
no better evidence of the bona fide intentions of the foreign Delegates than
the discussions about the 90 million dollars; that this controversy showed
the difficulties under which the foreign Delegates were attempting to do
their work. Failing to arrive at an understanding on this point, the sub-
committee passed on to a discussion of the provision relating to custodian
banks. The chairman opposed the Japanese proposal on the grounds, as he
had said before, that he did not wish to prejudice a future case by discussing
a question then which ought only to be discussed later. He considered that
this question belonged exclusively to Committee III, which Committee, Mr.
Oudendijk pointed out, had not then been created. Mr. Oudendijk concurred
in the suggestion that the question properly belonged to Committee III, if
and when appointed, and he suggested to Mr. Hioki that the paragraph
should not be insisted upon at that time. On the understanding that the
question would be taken up and discussed in another Committee, therefore,
Mr. Hioki said that he was willing to defer the question. In summing up the
action taken by the subcommittee, the chairman said that they had
practically agreed on everything except the proviso and the period of three
months’ notice.
Sub-Committee to Draft a Resolution on the Levying of the Washington
Surtaxes, Fifth Meeting, March 18, 1926.

In calling to order the fifth meeting of the Sub-Committee to Draft a
Resolution on the Levying of the Washington Surtaxes, the chairman
announced that they were practically agreed on the preamble and the first
part of the body of the resolution but that there was still a reservation on his
part regarding the length of time as to notification and that the Japanese
proviso submitted at the last meeting did not have the approval of the
Chinese Delegation. After reading the Japanese proviso in an amended
form, proposed by the Chinese Delegation (page 1 of Minutes of March 18,
1926), the chairman reviewed the course of the discussion at the last
meeting and at some of the other meetings of the subcommittee. In
concluding his review the chairman expressed the earnest hope that they
could come to some sort of conclusion on that day. Mr. Hioki said that he
saw no reason why the Japanese proviso should be amended as he
understood that it had been agreed upon by all of the members of the sub-
committee except the Chinese at the last meeting. He said also that he must
frankly confess that he then saw greater need of adopting the proviso than
prevailed at the last meeting. He saw difficulties in fixing the percentage of
the allocation of the sum and, if this question should be settled, it would
then follow that the question of the custodian banks would have to be
brought up again. For these reasons he thought it would be better to drop
the amendment and agree to the original proviso which was almost
approved by the sub-committee at its last meeting. Mr. Hioki and Count de
Martel referred to certain loan negotiations which had created suspicion and
which had made it more necessary than ever to guard against the dissipation
of the funds. In the course of the discussion Colonel Peel said that he rather
preferred the original American draft on this subject but Mr. Hioki said that
he was not prepared to accept that draft, whereupon Mr. Strawn said that at
the last meeting he had, on behalf of the American Delegation, agreed to
accept the Japanese draft, and that he did not consider it prejudicial in any
way to the rights of the Chinese Government. The chairman again
expressed the willingness of the Chinese Delegation to accept the American
draft with perhaps the change of a word or two but they could not accept the
Japanese proviso. Count de Martel reiterated his support of the Japanese
draft but the chairman was unwilling to give his assent and he suggested
that the Chinese, Japanese and American drafts should be submitted to the
full committee. Mr. Strawn, Colonel Peel and Count de Martel considered
that this would not be a procedure which would expedite matters and Mr.

Strawn suggested that the matter lie dormant until an agreement could be
reached. Mr. Oudendijk, in an effort to have the committee arrive at a
definite conclusion said that he thought the question should be further
discussed with a view to overcoming the difficulties. He thought that a mere
postponement would be of no use and he urged the subcommittee to accept
the Japanese proposal as it stood. He could not see that it involved any
danger to the Chinese Government, and as he had previously said, would
expedite the work of the Conference. He strongly urged the Chinese
Delegation to reconsider its position and to come to an agreement which he
thought was also the position of the other five members of the
subcommittee. Mr. Hioki said that the only alternative which the Japanese
Delegation would accept was that the levying of the surtaxes should be
allowed to begin only when the conditions and purposes should have been
agreed upon. The chairman said that it seemed useless to discuss the matter
further and that Mr. Strawn’s suggestion to defer action would be followed.
After considerable further debate it seemed reasonably certain that the
Chinese would yield no ground with reference to the Japanese proviso and
with reference to the ninety days’ notice. Count de Martel, at this point,
reminded the Chinese Delegation that with reference to the landing they had
won on principle and the chairman replied that China had won on principle
so often that he hesitated to win much more on it. The reading of the
resolution, so far as it had been agreed upon, then took place (see pages 14
and 16 of Minutes of March 18, 1926). With certain corrections noted it
appeared that the resolution had the unanimous approval of the Delegations
composing the sub-committee, with the exception of the Chinese
Delegation who had made three reservations, one with respect to the 90
million dollar clause; another with respect to the three months’ notice and a
third with respect to the Japanese proviso. Adjournment was taken with the
understanding that the chairman would consider the question whether the
sub-committee would make a majority and a minority report, or whether
they would allow the matter to stand in statu quo holding another meeting
with a view to arriving at a definite understanding.
Technical Committee to Draw up a List of Luxuries for the Levying of the
Washington Surtaxes, Third Meeting, April 9, 1926.

The third meeting of the Technical Committee to Draw up a List of
Luxuries for the Levying of the Washington Surtaxes, was held April 9,
1926, and various items on the so-called Luxury List which had been
discussed at previous meetings were taken up and disposed of. Considerable
discussion took place as to whether the classification of an article by
number would be the guide for the Customs authorities in determining the
duty to be paid upon a given commodity. Since there had been some
confusion in the numbers in making up the revised list considerable
difficulty was encountered in fixing the exact classification of some of the
commodities previously agreed upon. With a view to simplifying matters
Mr. Hornbeck suggested that the practical thing to do was for the Chinese
Delegation to withdraw from the list then under discussion such numbers as
did not appear in the list which they had discussed and agreed upon at the
last meeting. As Yin 77 was the list referred to, a checking up of the
numbers of the two lists (Yin 77 and Yin 85) showed considerable change
of numbers of commodities, and the sub-committee consumed considerable
time in straightening out this tangle. Practically all of the time of this
meeting was consumed in discussing articles which had by rearrangement
been transferred from one list to another, or added to a list through the
interchange of certain index numbers. The chief difficulty of the Advisers
was in arriving at a definite idea as to what constituted the articles in
Classes “A”, “B” and “C”, and also to determine whether they would use
the index numbers or the names of the articles in making up the final list.
Mr. Fox suggested that there be but one list prepared, namely a list of
articles paying 5 per cent, and that all other articles would be considered as
paying 2½ per cent surtax. Mr. Saburi said that the Japanese Delegation was
preparing a list according to tariff numbers only and that it would be
submitted in due course. Mr. Van Haute of the Belgian Delegation said that
he would also prepare a list giving the tariff numbers. It was finally agreed
that the Chinese Delegation should prepare a complete new list giving the
tariff number and the definition, and that the list would be circulated with
the time allowance of one week within which any Delegation might make a
recommendation or reservation as to a particular item. (See Appendix I,
Minutes of April 9, 1926, for revised list of articles liable to a total surtax of
5 per cent; commodities being re-arranged so that all goods of the same
kind are kept together; See Appendix II for list of articles liable to a surtax
of 5 per cent as agreed upon at the meeting of March 2, 1926; See Appendix

III for list of articles reserved by certain foreign Technical Advisers for
further consideration at the meeting held on March 2; see Appendix IV for
summary of replies from foreign Delegations in regard to articles liable to
surtax of 5 per cent and articles reserved for consideration.) SECTION II
The first section of this report having been confined to a review of the
proceedings of the formal sittings of the Conference and its Committees and
Sub-committees, it seems appropriate now to give a brief resume of the
proceedings of the informal meetings of the Delegates and the Technical
Advisers which have been held at intervals since October, 1925, at the
headquarters of the various foreign Delegations.
Much of the real work of the Conference has been accomplished at these
informal sittings which have become more and more necessary as the local
political situation became increasingly chaotic. Several of the Chinese
principal Delegates and Advisers having fled from Peking in March and
April, and the two remaining Chinese Delegates, Dr. Yen and Admiral Tsai
Ting Kan, having been principally engaged in trying to find means of
preserving order and reestablishing a Government, only a few formal
meetings were held after the middle of March. Since the informal meetings
were held at irregular intervals and no fixed program was arranged, it is
deemed advisable, for purposes of convenience, briefly to summarize, by
subjects, the activities of the Conference as they developed at these
meetings.
 
The principal subjects under discussion at these informal meetings were as
follows:
Likin and Tariff Autonomy
Rates of Surtaxes
Consolidation of Debts
Washington Treaty Surtaxes

Compilation of Tables
Miscellaneous Questions Incident to the Conference.
No attempt will be made to go into details as many of the discussions
involved meticulous consideration of technical questions which had no
important bearing on the general work of the Conference. It will be
sufficient, therefore, to give only a brief summary of the more important
developments at these meetings and to enclose, for the purpose of a more
complete record, copies of memoranda covering the meetings and of
pertinent documents submitted from time to time on the several subjects
under discussion.
Likin and Tariff Autonomy.
The question of Likin and Tariff Autonomy did not occupy the attention of
the Delegates and Technical Advisers outside of the formal meetings to any
considerable extent, except as it indirectly related to the question of Rates,
Purposes and Debts. The principle of Tariff Autonomy and the abolishment
of likin was discussed at length at formal Committee and Sub-committee
meetings, and these discussions are summarized in Section I of this report.
The discussion of these questions at the informal meetings took on the
character of their bearing on the general work of the Conference, the
definition of the word “likin”, the various taxes such as transit, consumption
and destination taxes, the financing of likin abolition, likin revenues and
general plans to enable the Chinese to effectuate the abolition of likin.
It seemed clear from the discussions that the British were more interested in
likin than any other Delegation, and by common consent they took the lead
in this question and evolved certain plans designed to make possible its
gradual and ultimate abolition.
In general the British proposals contemplated leaving to the Chinese
Government and the Provincial authorities, as far as possible, the actual
abolition of likin, the foreign interest in the question being confined to
agreeing to the imposition of a special likin compensation tax on foreign
imports and articles manufactured by foreigners in China, the proceeds of
which would be allocated to the Provinces in lieu of likin. In return for the

acceptance by the foreign Powers of the likin compensation tax, it was
proposed that the Chinese Government should, first, undertake to impose
the said tax impartially on all foreign imports and on Chinese and foreign
local manufactures and products paying excise; second, to allocate the
proceeds of the tax to the Provinces in lieu of likin; and, third, to free all
goods paying the likin compensation tax from likin and all other internal
taxation. It was to be understood that the Chinese Government would obtain
the cooperation of the Provincial authorities in enforcing any plan which
might be adopted, and that the principle of uniform taxes for foreign and
domestic goods would be recognized both by the Central and Provincial
Governments; that the likin compensation tax would be collected by the
Maritime Customs and the proceeds deposited in banks to be designated by
the Chinese Government at Shanghai as a special Likin Compensation Fund
to be disbursed by a Likin Compensation Committee composed of
representatives of the Central Government, the Provincial Governments and
the National Association of Chambers of Commerce.
With reference to the definition of the word “Likin”, the British Delegation
held that the abolition of likin meant the abolition of all dues on goods in
transit and at destination, including taxes and fees levied on means of
conveyance which fall directly on the goods themselves; that abolition
should include the removal of all tax stations and barriers; that all foreign
imports and local manufactures or products paying excise will be subjected
to no taxation whatsoever except the regular import duties and excise, plus
the likin compensation tax either merged therein or collected
simultaneously therewith. While the American Delegation was disposed to
leave to the British the details of working out a satisfactory plan for the
abolition of likin, it did not entirely concur in the British plan.
The American Delegation, for example, was not disposed to favor the
introduction of the idea of an excise on foreign and domestic goods because
in agreeing to taxation of this kind the way might be opened up for the
general taxation of all foreigners in China. The action of the foreign tobacco
companies in agreeing, independently, to the payment of an excise on their
products in China was cited and it was contended that the British plan, in
this regard, simply meant the recognition of that system and its extension to
other products. The American Delegation felt also that with an excise the

question of rates of duty would be reopened, especially upon raw products,
such as leaf tobacco, and that a lower rate might be required. The American
Delegation was doubtful also of the advisability of accepting the suggestion
that Provincial approval should be required in connection with any plan for
the abolition of likin. Doubt was likewise expressed concerning the
composition of the Likin Compensation Committee and it was the opinion
of the American Delegation that there should be foreign representation on
the Committee, that a Committee composed entirely of Chinese might not
make a judicious expenditure of the funds. The American Delegation also
felt that some provision should be made for a system of rebates, or other
assurance, for the protection of the foreign trader in the event that transit
passes and exemption certificates were not honored and additional taxes
collected.
The Japanese opposed the British plan in several particulars, notably the
rate of the Likin Compensation Tax, the omission of a refund system for
illegally collected taxes, and the abolition of the coast-trade duty and the
inland export duty. The Chinese likewise voiced objection to various phases
of the British plan, particularly the treatment to be accorded native goods
and the allocation to the Provinces of the likin compensation tax.
Generally speaking, the Chinese, endeavoring to impress upon the
Delegates that this was a matter largely of domestic concern, contended for
as much freedom as possible in concluding arrangements for the complete
abolition of likin. No Delegation other than the American, British, Japanese
and Chinese seemed to have any considerable interest in the matter of
working out the details of likin abolition.
While the British plan was not definitely accepted, it may form the basis of
further discussion when the active work of the Conference is resumed.
Various memoranda and documents relating to these several subjects are
enclosed herewith and are enumerated in the list of enclosures under the
heading of Likin and Tariff Autonomy.7
Rates of Surtaxes.
Unlike the questions of Likin and Tariff Autonomy, the question of Rates of
Surtaxes occupied to a considerable extent the attention of the Delegates

and Technical Advisers in informal conferences. Perhaps more time was
devoted to this particular subject than to any other phase of the work, with
the possible exception of debt consolidation. Many interests directly
concerned with the question of rates of duty to be assessed against a given
article had representatives in Peking from the very beginning of the
Conference. The tobacco and oil interests were particularly concerned and
kept highly paid representatives here throughout the time the question of
Rates was under discussion. The California Raisin Growers, automobile and
tire manufacturers, ginseng growers, and various other interests were
directly concerned and took occasion to express their views either in oral or
written form. Many informal conferences were held with the tobacco and
oil representatives who were most anxious to keep the rates at the lowest
possible figure.
 
While there was general interest in the whole question of rates by all the
Delegations, as evidenced by the official proceedings of the Subcommittee
on Rates, the American, Japanese and British Delegations evinced much
more interest in this subject than did the others. The Japanese were perhaps
more vitally concerned, as the rates affected a wider range of Japanese
commodities than of any other country. From the beginning it was clear that
they would contend for as low rates as could be obtained, especially on
low-grade cotton goods and low-priced commodities of Japanese
manufacture. It was a slow and tedious process to bring them to assent to a
program which would yield approximately $90,000,000, knowing, as they
did, that such a program would require a substantial increase in rates over
those they had at first expected to obtain. It was only by Mr. Saburi’s
special trip to Japan in January that the Japanese Delegates were enabled to
revise their program in such way as to fall in with the general desire to
accord rates high enough to yield $90,000,000 per annum. The attitude of
the American Delegation was one of liberality towards the Chinese as far as
the American trade could consistently bear the burden. While tobacco was
looked upon by the American Delegation as a luxury, care was taken not to
allow the rate to be fixed so high that the trade in American raw tobacco
would either disappear or be seriously affected. Oil took the grade of a

necessity and revenue producer with a moderate rate. Great Britain’s prime
interest was in high grade piece goods, woollens and sugar.
Practically all of the work of fixing the rates of surtaxes may be said to have
been done in informal conferences among the Delegates and Technical
Advisers. To have attempted to thresh out these questions in formal sittings
of the Delegates or Advisers would have been a prolonged, and perhaps
futile, task and the expeditious and satisfactory manner in which it was
handled does great credit to the Technical Advisers who bore the brunt of
this work. Much of it was of a technical character and involved a
knowledge of values and commodities which some of the Delegates could
not be expected to possess. It was for this reason that it was deemed
advisable to leave this work largely to the Japanese, British and American
Advisers.
The position of the American Delegation regarding rates of interim surtaxes
was that as a tentative basis of negotiation, it was prepared to go as high as
25 to 30 per cent on manufactures of tobacco, 20 to 25 per cent on tobacco
not manufactured, 25 to 35 per cent on wines, beers and liquors, which it
was made plain were not American products. The American Delegation
objected to the placing of shoes and boots, leather and soles, cream and
milk, evaporated, sterilized or condensed, electrical materials, indigo and
India rubber manufactures and a few other articles in the list of “B” Grade
luxuries. On the broad principle of a schedule of rates the American and
British Delegations favored higher rates, on an average, than those
proposed by the Japanese. Except for individual items in the schedules, the
other foreign Delegations did not evince any considerable interest in the
question of rates, with the exception of the French and Italian Delegations,
who followed the negotiations rather closely and submitted carefully
prepared proposals and estimates.
The British and Italian Delegations proposed a 10 per cent flat rate on all
imports, with surtaxes of a flat 5 per cent on “B” Grade luxuries and a flat
15 per cent on “A” Grade luxuries. The Japanese proposed a minimum rate
of flat 7½ per cent on their low-priced imports into China and 10 per cent
on some items admitted to be luxury goods. The American Delegation felt
that a flat 15 per cent duty on all “B” Grade luxuries would bear very

unevenly upon the commodities which had been listed as “B” Grade; that
some commodities in the “B” Grade should bear less than 15 per cent and
some more than 15 per cent. So many distinctions and apparent
discriminations arose that the American Delegation proposed that there
should be created, instead of the three classes already proposed, some six to
eight grades of rates, ranging from low grade necessary goods at 7½ per
cent to highest grade luxuries at 25 per cent, keeping in mind what rate a
given commodity might bear without substantial diminution of the trade in
it. This suggestion was adopted by the Chinese in revising their
classifications. The American, British, French and Italian Delegations were
in substantial accord with regard to the amount of revenues to be raised by
the increase of duties and following numerous informal discussions a
schedule of rates and classifications was finally agreed upon by the foreign
Technical Advisers but the schedule has not yet been approved by the full
Committee having jurisdiction over rates.
As concerns the Washington Treaty surtaxes, the general plan involved the
preparation of a list of luxuries which would bear the higher surtax rate of 5
per cent and all other commodities to bear the 2½ per cent surtax. Many
revisions were required and many schedules, estimates and tables were
prepared, both as regards the interim surtaxes and the Washington surtaxes.
A considerable number of these will be found as enclosures to this report, as
also will memoranda showing the attitude of the various Delegations.8
 
Consolidation of Debts.
As in the case of Rates of Surtaxes, the question of the Consolidation of
Debts required many informal conferences among the Delegates and
Technical Advisers. In fact, except in an incidental way, this subject was
discussed but little at any formal sittings of a committee or sub-committee.
The interests, both foreign and domestic, were so divergent and the Chinese
Delegates were so sensitive to a public airing of this question, that
practically all discussion and negotiation in connection with this important
phase of the Conference work took place in informal sessions of the
Delegates and Technical Advisers. There was an evident desire on the part

of all Delegations not to create the impression that the Conference was a
debt-collecting agency. Again, the American, British and Japanese, having
more at stake than the other participating governments, took the lead in this
work and evolved most of the plans which were submitted for consideration
looking to early settlement of this problem. The Nishihara loans, as might
well have been expected, created difficulties from the beginning. Next to
rates of surtaxes, the Japanese displayed most interest in the question of
debts. The Nishihara loans constituted the bulk of the Japanese loans and
the Japanese Delegation diligently pursued a policy of having all these
loans included in any consolidation scheme which might be evolved.
In general the Japanese were disposed to favor a long period of time at a
low rate of interest. The American Delegation, at the very outset of the
Conference, was importuned by numerous American creditors of the
Chinese Government, who had either themselves come to Peking or sent
representatives to be present during the Conference, to make provision for
the payment of the more than $30,000,000 gold, due them for money loaned
and materials furnished the Chinese Government. A sympathetic hearing
was invariably given to these gentlemen and on many occasions they
availed themselves of an opportunity to submit statements of their views. In
all schemes proposed for the Consolidation of Debts, efforts were made by
the American Delegation to safeguard the interests of the American
creditors, and while no definite plan has yet been agreed upon and while it
will be impossible to evolve a scheme which will be satisfactory to all, it is
felt that the American creditors, except in one or two isolated cases, realize
the obstacles that have faced the Delegates and the futility of hoping for a
solution which will speedily and at the same time satisfactorily clear up the
debt situation in China. This question proved more vexatious than any
other, at least so far as the American Delegation was concerned, and it is a
matter of great regret that the impossibility of negotiating the interim surtax
treaty has thus far prevented the adoption of a plan by which all of the debts
of the Chinese Government, both foreign and domestic, would be liquidated
in due course of time. This is a matter which must necessarily be deferred
until the Conference renews its work. It should be remarked that some of
the American creditors voiced great disappointment that any consolidation
plan which gave promise of acceptance contemplated putting the domestic
debts on a parity with the foreign debts. They considered this unfair, since

many of the foreign debts antedated the domestic debts and many domestic
loans had been made on security already pledged on foreign loans.
However, since it was clear that no distinction could be made between
domestic and foreign debts in any scheme designed completely to clear the
slate and re-establish the credit of the Chinese Government both at home
and abroad, which was one of the primary objects of the Debt Consolidation
plan, the Delegates proceeded on the basis that all debts which are actually
owed by the Central Government itself or which have been guaranteed by a
Ministry of the Central Government, or which have been officially
authorized or recognized by a Ministry or Bureau of the Central
Government, should be included in any scheme which had for its purpose
the complete rehabilitation of Chinese finance.
The British, Dutch, Belgian and Japanese Delegations evinced great interest
in the debt question, the first three particularly as regards the railways, and
the last named, as already stated, on the Nishihara loans. The other
Delegations showed only a passive concern, with the exception of the
French and Italian Delegations, who submitted concrete recommendations.
The British Delegation put forward views largely at variance with those of
the American and Japanese Delegations with respect to the allocation of
funds. The British plan, as already stated, contemplated that one-fourth of
the Customs collections on imports should be set aside as a special likin
abolition tax, not to form a part of the Customs revenues proper. After the
payment of the existing charges on the Customs revenue, the British plan
contemplated the disposition of the surplus by percentages: three-fourths to
be used for the service of the new consolidated bonds and one-fourth to be
used for constructive and administrative purposes. However, with regard to
the percentages to be used for constructive and administrative purposes,
there should be a first charge up to ten million dollars to be known as a
“railway contingent fund”. This fund was to be used, in so far as necessary,
to meet interest charges on Chinese Government railway bonds which
might be in default. Under this proposal the “likin abolition tax” and the
“railway contingent fund” would, in effect, become absolutely guaranteed
charges on the Customs revenue, whereas, the consolidated bonds would be
in a much weaker position, their service being limited to the amount that
three-fourths of the surplus, as above described, would provide. The

American and Japanese Delegations, whose views very largely coincided,
felt that the British proposals did not adequately provide for the funding of
the unsecured debt of China and that they favored unduly the service of the
railway loans. The plan put forward by the American Delegates
contemplated that the whole Customs revenue would be treated as a unit on
which the first charge would be the loans and indemnities already secured
thereon. The second charge should be whatever amount or percentage of the
Customs collections on imports might be agreed upon as a fund for the
abolition of likin. The third charge should be the full service of the interest
upon the consolidated bonds, provided that, in any case, three-fourths of the
remaining revenue should be reserved for the service of the consolidated
bonds. The remaining one-fourth should be reserved for constructive and
administrative purposes, subject to any amount that might be needed for the
service of the interest upon the consolidated bonds. The American plan also
accepted the British proposal for a railway contingent fund as a first charge
upon the “one-fourth” for constructive and administrative purposes, subject
to the reservation for interest upon the consolidated bonds. Details of the
railway contingent fund were never definitely worked out.
The discussion of these provisions of the Consolidated Plan led to a sharp
division of opinion with the result that no definite decision as concerns the
whole plan, could be reached before the departure of Colonel Peel and Mr.
Stewart for England early in May.
On May 3, at a meeting of the Technical Advisers, Mr. Stewart announced
that he could no longer carry on the informal conversations that had been in
progress on Debts because the British Delegation, as well as the British
Government itself, believed it inadvisable to join in any definite program
for presentation to the Chinese Government. He stated, further, that there
was no Chinese Government to which a program could be presented and
that, in any event, whatever the Conference might agree upon would
become public and the foreign Powers would be held rigidly to that
program in future negotiations. Mr. Stewart said that the British
Government did not wish to be bound by any such restrictions in future
negotiations with China, This attitude on the part of the British Delegation
created a situation which made it impossible to continue the negotiations.
The conciliatory attitude of the American Delegation towards the British

proposals is evidenced by the fact that the following points were conceded
to the British: (1) one-fourth of the import revenues for a likin
compensation scheme; (2) the Hukuang and Tientsin–Pukow Railway
charges should not be placed upon the likin compensation fund; (3) that
amortization of the bonds should be placed after other purposes; (4) that the
Hukuang and Tientsin–Pukow charges should be placed on the railway
contingent fund; (5) that the contingent fund be fixed at a sum which,
during the first five years, would be greater than the sum which would be
realized under the British proposal of a 75 per cent—25 per cent division of
funds. The termination of these informal conferences by the British
Delegation came as a distinct disappointment to the American Delegation
who believed that no opening should be left for the Chinese to say that the
foreign Delegations were not seriously attempting to help China and that
they were not acting in good faith. The American Delegation believed that
the Powers’ representatives should continue to endeavor to get an
agreement upon a concrete program to form the basis of a new treaty with
China. Having come to such an agreement among themselves the Delegates
could, if there were no Chinese Government competent to sign a treaty,
conscientiously lay the program on the table to be taken up at an
appropriate time. Since the American Delegation, however, could not bring
itself to approve a program which would offer creditors new consolidation
bonds for their old securities at lower rates of interest, a longer maturity and
in some cases, a reduction in principal, to say nothing of new bonds with an
arrangement for interest and principal payments based on the allocation of a
percentage of an unknown sum of money, and since the British Delegation
quite deliberately ended the negotiations, it seemed futile further to attempt
a solution of this problem.
Notwithstanding the British Delegation had previously let it be known that
they were only mildly interested in the question of debt consolidation, but
greatly interested in trade, they seemed more persistent, as this resume will
indicate, in defending their principles in the question of debts than in any
other. It was evident that they were taking every precaution especially to see
that British investors in Chinese railway securities would not suffer,
whatever the plan of consolidation might be. The situation in South China
seemed also to influence the British attitude on this question, as well as on
other questions before the Conference. The memoranda herewith enclosed

covering the meetings of the Technical Advisers on the subject of debts will
be of especial interest.9
Much remains to be done on this question, since the disappearance of a
responsible government in Peking coupled with the uncompromising
attitude of the British Delegation made it impossible to evolve the larger
scheme of rehabilitating Chinese finances through the means of interim
Customs surtaxes in excess of those authorized by the Washington Treaty.
The portion of the funds which will be allotted for the payment of debts
from the Washington surtax revenues will afford but little relief when the
whole debt question is taken into consideration. This gives promise of being
more difficult to solve than any other problem within the scope of the
Conference when negotiations are resumed in the autumn.
Numerous memoranda, statements, pamphlets and tables prepared in
connection with this subject form enclosures under the heading of
Consolidation of Debts.9a
Washington Treaty Surtaxes.
The question of implementing the Washington Treaty arose more often
during the Conference than did any other question. A reference to the first
section of this report will reveal the oft-repeated efforts which were made to
bring into force, with as little delay as possible, the Washington Treaty, a
task which, at the beginning of the Conference, seemed comparatively
simple. On each and every occasion the Chinese Delegation would find
some reason, either real or fancied, to defer action. It was not until all hope
was abandoned of being able to negotiate, before next autumn at least, the
larger interim surtax treaty, that the necessity of agreeing upon a draft treaty
for submission to the Chinese in fulfillment of the Washington Treaty arose
in the informal meetings of the Delegates and Technical Advisers. The sub-
committee of Six Delegates appointed for this purpose, who sat in formal
session, had substantially agreed upon a draft, but the Chinese member was
unwilling to accept it. (See official Minutes of meeting of March 18, 1926).
At an informal meeting of the Delegates on May 6 it was agreed that, since
no further formal meetings had been held of the Committee of Six, and
none was in prospect, the American Delegation should produce a new draft.

The American Delegates accordingly instructed their Advisers to produce a
revised draft and with the co-operation of the British and Japanese
Advisers, after a series of informal meetings, such a draft was submitted for
approval to the Advisers of the other foreign Delegations. With minor
amendments the draft was approved and submitted for consideration to the
foreign Delegates at an informal meeting on May 15, at which time it was
approved.10
There was a fundamental difference between the draft under discussion then
and the one substantially agreed to by the Committee of Six at its last
formal meeting on March 18, a report of which, as previously stated, may
be found in the Official Minutes of that date. The draft of the Committee of
Six was such, in terms, that, under it, the levying of the Washington
surtaxes could not go into effect until after the terms for the distribution of
the proceeds should have been elaborated and approved by the various
Delegations in the form of the larger (new) treaty which was being
negotiated. The revised draft submitted by the Technical Advisers was such,
in terms, that the levying of the Washington surtaxes might become
effective independently of and regardless whether the Conference should
succeed in agreeing upon a new treaty. Another fundamental difference was
that whereas the draft of the Committee of Six provided for the impounding
of the whole of the collections from the surtaxes, the revised draft provided
for the distribution of practically one-half of the collections and the
impounding of the other half during such period as might intervene until the
new treaty providing for the distribution should come into effect, within the
limit of two years, with the proviso that if no treaty or agreement should
become effective within two years, then some special agreement should be
made with regard to the principle for distribution of the accumulated fund.
At the meeting on May 15 the Advisers were instructed to prepare
recommendations for the Delegates upon the subject of Custodian Banks.
At subsequent meetings of the Technical Advisers the American Advisers
proposed that the subject should be dealt with in two parts; first, with
reference to the custody of the Washington surtax revenues; and second,
with reference to customs funds in general. The American, British and
Japanese Advisers all prepared drafts and these were used as the basis of
negotiations. On May 21 a tentative agreement based on the American draft

was arrived at with regard to the resolution on this subject to be annexed to
the Washington Treaty surtax agreement. On May 25 the British Advisers
proposed several verbal changes which opened the way for new proposals
on the part of the Japanese Advisers for change in substance. A draft,
however, was agreed upon on that date, and meanwhile the American
Advisers had circulated a revised copy of the draft on the subject of the
custody of funds in general. At a meeting on May 26 the British Advisers
introduced a draft and the Japanese made a reservation on the whole of it
and the American Advisers on three articles. The central principle of this
draft was that the existing customs revenues should be divided on the
principle that since 70 per cent was required for the service of existing loans
and indemnities, this portion should be deposited in custodian banks,
including Chinese, and the remaining 30 per cent should be left at the free
disposal of the Chinese Government. The American draft, on the contrary,
provided that the entire net customs revenue should be deposited in
custodian banks and of the portion required for the service of foreign
obligations the distribution should be among foreign custodian banks. No
agreement was reached and at subsequent informal meetings between the
American and British Advisers the latter yielded with reference to the 30–
70 per cent division and accepted the principle of requiring deposit of all
net customs funds in custodian banks, and the American Advisers accepted
the principle of requiring that percentages be fixed for the distribution
among the banks, of the portion to be deposited for the service of the
foreign loans and indemnities. The British also proposed an amendment
which would require naming the banks and specifying the percentages, but
the American Advisers could not accept this amendment. All differences
were finally composed, however, and a complete agreement arrived at
between the American, British and Japanese Advisers on the whole draft
and at a meeting of the foreign Advisers on June 1 the composite draft was
adopted. A meeting had been called for June 3 of the Delegates but at the
request of the Japanese Minister, who was awaiting instructions from his
Home Government, the meeting was postponed. On June 10 the postponed
meeting was held and Sir Ronald Macleay, at the beginning of the meeting,
suggested that, since the draft agreement implementing the Washington
Treaty had been referred to the various Governments concerned, it would be
in order to ask for the replies of the various Delegations. A poll was taken
and the British Delegation said its Government agreed, with the

understanding that the draft was merely to form the basis of discussion with
the Chinese. The French and Belgian Delegations said their Governments
assented and the Italian Delegation referred to a reservation made in a
document circulated a few days previously. The Swedish Delegate said that,
since his Government was undergoing a change he could give no definite
reply, but that he hoped to give a favorable reply shortly. The American, the
Danish, the Norwegian, the Spanish and the Netherlands Delegations
announced that their Governments approved. The Japanese Delegation,
through Mr. Hioki, went into a detailed explanation of what the Conference
had been doing for some months past and, after saying that until definite
instructions had been received from his Government no commitment could
be made, evinced a desire to proceed with the general work of the
Conference and emphasized the need of adjusting the debt question. After a
lengthy discussion on the work of the Conference, Mr. Strawn urged that
the proposal to implement the Washington Treaty be acted upon, since it
was most important that this be done without further delay. Mr. Hioki
inquired if it was still the sense of the Delegates that they would sign a
Washington Surtax Agreement with any Chinese Government that might be
present when the foreign Delegates had reached a point among themselves
of readiness to negotiate with the Chinese.
 
Sir Ronald Macleay said that this question would have to be submitted to
his Government when the moment for signing arrived. Mr. Strawn drew a
distinction between signing with a given group an agreement concerning
the Washington surtaxes and signing with that same group a larger and
more important treaty concerning the interim surtaxes. In connection with
the former he suggested that the Delegates could accompany their assent
with specifications laid down in a separate document which would impose
obligations and limitations. Mr. Strawn also said that the Diplomatic Body,
by being present and remaining here, gives an implied recognition to such
Government as exists; that they could not consistently stay here and yet
affirm that there is no Chinese Government. Mr. Cerruti shared this view
and Mr. Kauffmann said that he shared the view of the Japanese, i. e., that
the implementing of the Washington surtaxes might be the concluding and
final act of the Conference. After further discussion it was agreed that

nothing further could be done until the Japanese had heard from their
Government.
An important amendment was one offered by the British designed to require
the acceptance of the agreement by the Provinces before it should come into
force. This amendment, however, as in the case of the whole draft, was left
unapproved, since it seemed futile to proceed until the Japanese Delegation
had received further instructions. The American Delegation had not, at the
time of the meeting on June 10, definitely determined its attitude toward the
amendment.
At an informal meeting at the American Legation with the Japanese
Delegation on June 18, Mr. Hioki stated that his Government was willing to
go ahead with the implementing of the Washington Treaty surtaxes,
provided certain alterations could be made in the draft which had been
submitted at the last meeting of the Delegates. The Japanese wished to
delete the first two sections of the draft, but advanced no reason for desiring
this change. They offered no substitute, however, for the two sections and
announced that no instruction had been received from the Japanese
Government on the subject of custodian banks. It was agreed that the
Japanese Delegates should confer with the British Delegation with regard to
the changes desired by the Japanese Government in the text of the draft
agreement. The American Delegation made no commitment, but expressed
a desire for a conference of the American, British and Japanese Delegates
after the latter had conferred with the British. Mr. MacMurray took
occasion to say, in connection with a suggestion made by the Japanese that
there should be a recess for the summer, with a definite understanding that
the Conference should reconvene at the end of September, that the
American Delegation felt that the foreign Delegations should make no
move which would give the Chinese opportunity, whether fairly or unfairly,
to say that the foreign Powers had not performed their pledges and were not
acting in good faith. He suggested that it would be well to avoid any
adjournment or recess by formal action and that a recess simply by tacit
consent would be preferable.
A final effort on the part of the foreign Delegates to come to an agreement
on the question of implementing the Washington surtaxes was made on July

3. On that date a meeting was held at the Netherlands Legation and the draft
protocol as adopted ad referendum on May 15 was discussed at length.
Early in the course of the meeting the Japanese Delegation, under
instructions from their Government, and through Mr. Hioki, presented the
following statement:
“At the last meeting of June 10th I had occasion to state that it
was the desire of the Japanese Government that we should
continue our efforts for the solution of all the problems before the
Conference, and further that in regard to the draft agreement for
the levy of the Washington surtaxes we were awaiting instructions
from Tokyo.
“We have subsequently received instructions according to which
the position of the Japanese Government is as follows:
“The Japanese Government consider that the question of the
Washington surtaxes and all other questions from the interim
surtaxes and the consolidation of debts to the recovery of tariff
autonomy by China constitute an inseparable entity. They believe
that it is only by conceiving our task in this manner that we can
deal successfully with the situation, which has developed since
the Washington Conference, and which has been recognized by
this Conference from the very outset. Accordingly, our
Government deem it inadvisable to set aside the settlement of
various questions relating to the so-called general treaty after the
draft agreement for the levy of the Washington surtaxes shall have
been adopted by the foreign delegations.
“However, in view of the desire expressed by other delegations of
an early adoption of the draft agreement, the Japanese
Government, animated by a spirit of mutual co-operation and
concession, are prepared to accept it with an amendment that
Clauses I and II concerning the coast trade duty and the transit
pass dues shall be deleted therefrom. The Japanese Government
believe that the disposal of the proceeds of the Washington
surtaxes is a matter which can better be considered as part of the
program relating to the general treaty to be taken up later except

the allotment for administrative expenses [of] which the Chinese
Government are in urgent need and which may properly be
determined at this time.
“As the amendment of the draft agreement proposed by us
concerns the points originally put forward by the British
Delegation, we consider it proper to approach first our British
colleagues for their favorable consideration of our proposal.
These are the circumstances which have led us to hold
conversation with our British friends before asking to have a
meeting called at this Legation.”
 
Following the reading of the Japanese statement, Sir Ronald Macleay, on
behalf of the British Delegation, made the following statement:
“His Majesty’s Government regret that in the recent informal
discussions which have taken place between the foreign
delegations in the absence of the Chinese in anticipation of the
early resumption of the Conference and of the renewal of the
request by the Chinese delegates for the immediate grant of the
Washington surtaxes, it has not been found possible to reach
complete agreement on the proposals to form a basis of
discussion with the Chinese.
“In these circumstances His Majesty’s Government are of the
opinion that no useful purpose will be served by the foreign
delegations continuing these informal negotiations with a view to
reaching a closer degree of agreement at the present stage and that
it would be preferable to await the resumption of the Conference
and the formulation of the Chinese proposals.
“His Majesty’s Government instruct me to state that it is their
earnest desire and intention to implement the Washington Treaty
with the least possible delay and to grant the surtaxes provided for
therein, if this should be the wish of the Chinese Government, and
that they are prepared to discuss any reasonable proposals put

forward by the Chinese delegates to this end which are in
harmony with the spirit and letter of the Washington Treaty.
“His Majesty’s Government also wish it to be clearly understood
that in the event of the Chinese delegation on the resumption of
the Conference tabling a proposal for the immediate enforcement
of the Washington surtaxes, they have no intention, after
agreement on such proposal has been reached, to suspend the
proceedings of the Conference or to break off negotiations for the
conclusion of a Tariff Treaty, which have been interrupted by
recent political developments in China.”
Mr. MacMurray, at the conclusion of the British statement, said that, in
view of the attitude taken by the Japanese and British Delegations, it
appeared that a deadlock had been reached and that further progress at that
time was impossible. Mr. MacMurray said that the situation was most
disappointing to the American Delegates who had hoped that the draft
protocol of May 15 might be adopted as a first step toward tariff autonomy.
He voiced the opinion that under present circumstances no further progress
could be made until a new Chinese Government should come into being
and he particularly warned the Delegates that if a discontinuance should
lend itself to further nationalistic and bolshevist propaganda in China
serious consequences might ensue. Mr. MacMurray then inquired whether
the instructions of the Japanese and British Delegates were so categorical as
to permit of no compromise which would enable an agreement to be
reached with respect to the Washington surtaxes and thus avoid the danger
to which reference has just been made. After general discussion of the
question, Mr. MacMurray suggested that the chairman request the various
Delegations to reply definitely to the following questions:
1. “Are the foreign Delegates prepared to agree among
themselves to take the first opportunity to negotiate
with the Chinese Government, when one is recognized,
for the implementation of the Washington Conference
Treaty on the basis of the draft protocol accepted ad
referendum by the foreign Delegates on May 15?”

2. “Are the foreign Delegates prepared to agree to
undertake such negotiations on the basis of May 15
draft, subject to the amendments proposed by the
Japanese Delegation with respect to coast trade duties
and transit pass arrangements?”
To the first question all the Delegates replied in the affirmative with the
exception of the Japanese and an indefinite reply by Sir Ronald Macleay
who stated that he had been ready to proceed with the May 15 draft, but that
the case had now developed somewhat differently.
In answer to the second question the British Delegate stated that he was
unable to bind himself since his instructions were that he was to abstain
from further informal negotiations until the Chinese were able to
participate. The majority of the other Delegates also stated that they were
unable to bind themselves on this plan since, unlike the British Delegation,
they had not had an opportunity to refer such a proposal to their
Governments. In general, however, they concurred in the position of the
American Delegation, which was that although it preferred the draft
protocol as adopted on May 15, it would be willing, for the sake of
progress, to accept amendments offered by the Japanese in order to obtain
some common agreement upon a draft which might be used as a basis of
discussion with the Chinese.
It being evident at this point that unanimity could not be had with respect to
further action at the present time, the question arose whether the foreign
Delegates should undertake to agree among themselves upon a recess or
permit the Conference to remain in statu quo pending further developments.
After considerable discussion it was deemed advisable to take no action
which might be construed as indicating a desire on the part of the foreign
Delegates to bring about any definite adjournment of the Conference. The
following statement was ultimately agreed upon and given to the press:
“The Delegates of the foreign Powers to the Chinese Customs
Tariff Conference met at the Netherlands Legation this morning.
They expressed the unanimous and earnest desire to proceed with
the work of the Conference at the earliest possible moment when
the Delegates of the Chinese Government are in a position to

resume discussion with the foreign Delegates of the problems
before the Conference.”
Thus one more effort to implement the Washington Treaty surtaxes failed
and at the close of the meeting on July 3 it was generally understood among
the Delegates that no further progress could be made until the formation of
a new Government and that recognition of such new Government would, in
all probability, be a condition requisite to resuming negotiations.
The element of uncertainty which had so often threatened completely to
wreck the Conference had gained such momentum and was so persistent
that the foreign Delegates were quite prepared to believe that it would be
several months before the Conference would again be in a position to
function. The Delegates and their respective staffs, at this writing, entertain
but little hope that it will be possible for the Conference to resume its
functions before the autumn, unless in the meantime a Government worthy
of recognition is established at Peking. The political conditions, however,
are such that this is a remote possibility, since Wu Pei-fu and Chang Tso-lin,
notwithstanding professed friendship for each other, and outward evidence
of co-operation in military and civil affairs, are known to distrust each other
and to be maneuvering for such advantage as might be gained by
controlling the increased Customs funds so far as the program of the foreign
Delegates may permit.
The confused state of this question, in so far as the foreign Powers were
concerned, was brought about by the action of the Japanese in insisting on
the elimination of two of the most important sections of the agreement and
in otherwise employing tactics which prevented further action being taken.
The British also had a large part in the steps which caused the prolonged
consideration of this question and its postponement to an indefinite date.
Copies of drafts, memoranda and documents showing the development of
this matter through informal negotiations are enclosed herewith under the
appropriate heading.11
Tables.

In the preparation of data on the subject of Rates of Surtaxes, Likin,
Consolidation of Debts, and other subjects under consideration by the
Conference, innumerable tables have been prepared, both by the Chinese
Delegation and by other Delegations. Many of the Tables prepared by the
Chinese Delegation have been incorporated in the Official Minutes of the
Conference, but few, if any, of those prepared by other Delegations have
been made a part of the official proceedings. A considerable number of
these Tables contain valuable statistical information which has a direct
bearing on the work of the Conference and which it would seem desirable
to preserve as a permanent part of the record.
The American Technical Advisers compiled a number of valuable Tables
and these, together with Tables prepared by other Delegations, are enclosed
herewith and are more fully described under the heading of “Tables” in the
List of Enclosures.12 A separate section in this report has been especially
devoted to this material because many of the Tables contain statistical data
which had to do with the whole work of the Conference and could not well
be classified separately under the several headings of this report without
confusing subjects. The compilation of these Tables has been a tedious, but
important, phase of the Conference work and without them a
comprehensive understanding of the financial needs of the Chinese
Government would have been impossible.
Miscellaneous.
In the course of the informal conferences many matters of general policy
were discussed and subjects were considered which did not come within the
scope of the several headings into which the report has been divided. It is
deemed advisable, therefore, to include a section in which might be
embraced miscellaneous matters which have occupied the attention of the
Delegates and Advisers at informal conferences. Such questions as Export
Duties, Relations with Indo-China, The Spring Festival Loan, Board of
Audit for the Control of the Customs Surtaxes, and other matters relating to
the Conference were under general discussion and memoranda and other
documents in relation thereto are enclosed herewith and are more
completely described in the List of Enclosures under the heading
“Miscellaneous.”12

It will be observed that some of the enclosures to this report are copies
rather than originals. Some of the originals are being kept in the files of the
Delegation pending the conclusion of the Conference and others are
required for current use. It should be stated also that the files of the
Delegation will be kept intact until the close of the Conference after which
they will be forwarded to the Department pursuant to the Department’s
telegraphic instruction No. 297, October 19, 1925, 6 p.m.12
A further report summarizing the work of the Conference from this date
will be forwarded when final adjournment shall have taken place, which
probably will be some months hence.
The Delegation has endeavored, as occasion arose, to keep the Department
informed of important developments of the Conference and it has, in
general, exerted the utmost effort to reduce the administrative expense to a
minimum. Considering the unusual conditions in Peking, and the length of
the Conference, the Delegation feels that, in comparison with the amount
expended by other Delegations, notably the Japanese, the cost has been
small. Normally the purpose for which the Conference was called would
have been fulfilled long before now, but not since the fall of the Manchu
regime in 1911 have conditions in China been so unsettled. The obstacles
which have confronted the Conference, so far as the political situation is
concerned, have ranged from the mere disappearance of the Chief Chinese
Delegate, C. T. Wang, in March, to a state of siege in April, for the control
of Peking by the Kuominchun Army on one side and the Chang Tso-lin and
Wu Pei-fu Armies on the other, followed by the complete disappearance of
a Government.
The period from January 1 to the present has been one during which there
have been many Cabinet changes, so numerous that no attempt will be
made to enumerate them all. Dr. C. T. Wang took office as Minister for
Foreign Affairs on January 11, and a little over a month later (February 18),
Premier Hsu abandoned office and fled from Peking. It was about this time
that Dr. Wang and other Cabinet members and leaders of the Kuominchun
were finding themselves in an increasingly uncomfortable position as the
offensive by the Allied armies of Chang Tso-lin and Wu Pei-fu had begun
against the Kuominchun. The Allied troops had already made steady

advances and had gained much territory in the region north, east, south and
southwest of Peking.
On March 5 Chia Te-yao was appointed Premier and Dr. W. W. Yen,
Minister for Foreign Affairs. Dr. Yen, however, declined to accept office
and an effort was made, but without success, to induce Dr. Wang to
continue to retain the portfolio of Minister of Foreign Affairs. Following a
series of demonstrations, ostensibly in connection with the so-called Taku
Bar incident, a climax was reached on March 18 when a score or more of
students were killed or wounded by Tuan Chi-Jui’s bodyguard when a large
group of demonstrators attempted to enter the offices of the Chief
Executive. This event created grave concern and both Chinese and
foreigners entertained serious misgivings as to what the next turn of affairs
would be. The military situation was daily growing more tense. At this time
there was no Minister for Foreign Affairs and Hoo Wei-teh, to meet the
emergency, was induced to take the office.
On the morning of April 10 a coup d’état brought about the sudden
overthrow of the Tuan Government and Tuan, the Prime Minister and
several members of the Cabinet fled to safety in the Legation Quarter. The
siege for the capture of Peking had been in progress for some days at this
time and a general retreat by the Kuominchun forces towards Nankow had
already begun. Almost daily bombing of Peking by airplane was taking
place and this added much to the anxiety of the populace. There were
several killed and a number wounded from these attacks. Heavy
cannonading to the east and south of Peking was heard on practically every
night from April 11 to April 17. On the last named date a heavy attack by
the Allied troops put the Kuominchun troops to flight and by the next day
they had given up control of Peking and were rapidly withdrawing toward
Nankow. Much looting by soldiers in the suburbs of Peking was a further
factor contributing to an already deplorable situation.
After being in hiding for several days following the coup d’état, the Chief
Executive returned on April 17 to his residence with the announced
intention of continuing in office, but on April 19 he again took refuge in the
Legation Quarter and on April 20 fled precipitately to Tientsin. Before his
departure for Tientsin Tuan issued a Mandate resigning from office and

accepting the resignation of the Cabinet en bloc. With the exception of such
government as the military administered, there was no semblance of
authority in Peking from this date until May 1. The military were aided by
an unofficial Committee of Safety with Dr. W. W. Yen as Chairman. This
committee functioned for some time after the advent of the Allied soldiers.
On May 13 Dr. Yen assumed office as Premier and Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs in a so-called Regency Cabinet. In the meantime efforts had
been made to restore Tsao Kun to the position of Chief Executive but he
declined all overtures and elected to remain in semi-seclusion at Tientsin. In
addition to the rapid and sudden changes of government and the constant
activities of military rivals, there was an almost complete collapse of
railway transportation in February, March and April. For several weeks in
February and March, and in the early part of April, there were no trains in
or out of Peking, except those operated by the military. This brief resume of
the events which constantly retarded and disorganized the work of the
Conference will indicate to the Department the insuperable obstacles which
have been constantly arising to make the Conference abortive.
Almost from the beginning of the Conference the political condition in
Peking has been such that the Chinese Delegates could not exercise a free
and untrammeled course on any question. They have been constantly
harrassed by opposing political and military factions and their lot has been a
most unpleasant one. It is a great tribute to the courage, the perseverance
and the patriotism of Dr. W. W. Yen and Admiral Tsai Ting-kan, the only
two remaining Chinese Delegates, that they have weathered the storm and
remained steadfast in the purpose to achieve something for China.
The American Delegation shares the disappointment that all the other
Delegations, both Chinese and foreign, must feel that so little has been
accomplished thus far towards the fulfillment of the terms of the
Washington Treaty.
 
The Delegation desires to express its appreciation of the services rendered
by the Technical and secretarial staffs and to say that more detailed
comment in this regard will be sent in a separate despatch.14

We have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
Chairman, American Delegation, Special Conference on the Chinese
Customs Tariff
SILAS H. STRAWN
American Delegate, Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff
84 Enclosures not printed. For proceedings of the Conference, see The
Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff, October 1925–April
1926 (Peking, 1928). A copy of this publication is available in the Library
of Congress, and another in the Department of State filed as No. 500.A4e
Minutes Special Conference/18.
85 See Conference on the Limitation of Armament, Washington, November
12, 1921–February 6, 1922 (Washington, Government Printing Office,
1922), p. 1180.
86 Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, pp. 276, 278 .
87 Resolution establishing a Board of Reference for Far Eastern Questions,
adopted Feb. 4, 1922, Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 289.
88 See telegram of Oct. 31, 1925, from the Minister in China, Foreign
Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 871.
89 See telegram of Nov. 4, 1925, from the Minister in China, Foreign
Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 875.
90 Ibid.
91 See telegram of Nov. 4, 1925, from the Minister in China, Foreign
Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 875.
92 Ibid., 1922, vol. I, pp. 282, 286 .
93 See telegram of Nov. 4, 1925, from the Minister in China, ibid., 1925,
vol. I, p. 875.
94 Art. III, par. 10.
95 Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, pp. 282, 284 .
96 Ibid. , 1903, p. 551.
97 “Contracting Powers, other than China, recognize the right of China as a
sovereign state to enjoy tariff autonomy, requiring for its full enjoyment the

removal of tariff restrictions contained in existing treaties between
themselves respectively and China; and consent to the going into effect of
the Chinese National Tariff Law, subject to the carrying out of the
provisions hereinafter agreed upon, on January 1, 1929.
The Government of the Republic of China agrees that likin shall be
abolished simultaneously with the enforcement of the Chinese National
Tariff Law; and declares that the abolition of likin shall be completely
carried out by the first day of the first month of the eighteenth year of the
Republic of China, January 1, 1929.” The Special Conference on the
Chinese Customs Tariff, p. 250.
97a See footnote 97.
98 For text of the commercial treaty signed at Shanghai Oct. 8, 1903, see
Foreign Relations , 1903, p. 91.
99 Extract from art. VIII, Preamble, corrected according to text printed in
Foreign Relations , 1903, p. 553.
1 A destination tax, levied on goods after arrival at destination. See The
Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff, p. 272.
2 The Customs Revenue Council, created by edict May 9, 1906, to take
charge of the Maritime Customs.
3 Document No. Yin 70 was the first of the two resolutions presented by Dr.
Yen Feb. 18. See The Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff, p.
224.
4 Document No. Yin 71 was the second resolution presented by Dr. Yen
Feb. 18. See The Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff, p. 224.
5 See Conference on the Limitation of Armament, p. 1166.
6 “It is agreed that the increased Customs revenue which will accrue from
the levying of these surtaxes shall be held, free from all encumbrances, by
the Customs Administration, to be applied later for such purposes and
subject to such conditions as shall have been agreed upon at this
Conference, or provided for in the treaty or treaties negotiated at this
Conference; with the proviso, however, that, in case the purposes and
conditions for the expenditure of the increased revenue to be derived from
these surtaxes shall not have been agreed upon at this Conference on a date

earlier than the 31st day of May, 1926, the levying of these surtaxes shall
take effect only on and from a date fifteen days after the day on which an
agreement in regard thereto shall have been adopted.
“And it is further agreed that this increased Customs Revenue shall be
deposited in custodian banks in the manner and the proportions which shall
have been agreed upon at this Conference.” The Special Conference on the
Chinese Customs Tariff, p. 476.
7 Not printed.
8 Not printed.
9 Not printed.
9a Not printed.
10 See telegrams No. 37, May 12, from the Minister in China, and No. 39,
May 17, from the American delegation, pp. 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc.
621 and Doc. 622] and 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 624].
11 Not printed.
12 Not printed.
12 Not printed.
12 Not printed.
14 Not printed.

893.00/7561
[Document 636]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)15
CANTON, July 16, 1926.
No. 490
SIR: I have the honor to transmit a copy of an additional note of protest,
dated July 14, 1926, from Eugene Chen, the so-called Acting Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Cantonese regime, respecting the resumption of the
Special Tariff Conference at Peking. It will be observed that Mr. Chen
declares that the so-called Nationalist Government is opposed to the Powers
dealing with the representatives of the Peking government, who, according
to Chen, are the mere servitors of Wu and Chang, a brace of mediaeval
militarists.
I frankly do not relish these newspaper tirades from Mr. Chen, so obviously
written for publication and shall tell him so unofficially when I see him
again. (This note was published in the Canton Gazette of Thursday, July 15,
1926.) I should be pleased to have the Legation advise me whether or not
this note should be acknowledged by the Consulate General and if so in just
what form. It would seem to me that the occasion affords an opportunity for
the Legation to express itself respecting the attitude of our Government in
relation to the Tariff Conference and the Cantonese regime.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS
[Enclosure]
The Chinese Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs at Canton (Chen) to the American Consul General
(Jenkins)

CANTON, July 14, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to request you to communicate to the American
Minister at Peking the protest of my Government against the resumption of
the Special Tariff Conference which was lately suspended owing to the
dispersal of the Chinese delegation. We are definitely and reliably informed
that agents of Wu Pei-fu and Chang Tso-lin are now negotiating with the
American and the other foreign delegates for the immediate re-opening of
the Conference.
My Government opposes and has opposed the Conference because it
involves “the consideration of issues which only a Central Government,
representative and competent to speak and act in the name of the Chinese
Nation, can negotiate in conference with the official representatives of the
American and other interested Governments. Tuan Chi-jui’s administration,
admittedly, was not such a government, nor do the present servitors of Wu
and Chang constitute the type of governing body which America and the
Powers (assuming that considerations of political realism and international
morality and decency still rule high foreign policies) can meet and treat
with as a modern government.
None is so blind as to fail to see that the present phantom government in
Peking is a creation of a brace of mediaeval militarists and a bunch of
Mandarin statesboys and states-coolies whose obvious purpose is to grab
the proceeds of whatever tariff doles and loans that America and the other
Powers may be willing to grant in order to maintain a status quo that
conflicts with every vital interest of Nationalist China.
Any payment of tariff moneys to Wu Pei-fu and Chang Tso-lin must
necessarily mean that America and the other interested Powers—through
the machinery of the unified, British-controlled Chinese Maritime Customs
—will be (a) paying national revenues collected throughout the whole of
China to two transient usurpers of detached pieces of Chinese territory, and
(b) subsidising these two militarists to continue the prosecution of civil war
against the Kuominchun and Canton who are the two modern arms of
Nationalist China, and thus assist militarism to dominate and flourish in
China. And specifically it will mean that America and the other Powers will
be collecting the increased Customs revenues of Canton and hand over the

same to the mediaeval Wu and the ex-bandit Chang in order to enable them
the better to fight and attempt to destroy the greatest centre of Chinese
Nationalist thought and activity, which is Canton.
I have to add that any loan or loans to be contracted by the agents of Wu
and Chang on the security of the promised surtaxes shall not be recognized
by the Nationalist Government. And I have the honour deliberately to warn
America and the other interested governments that Chinese repudiation of
any such loan or loans may conceivably create a situation rendering it
imperative for the principle of repudiation to be extended to other loans
contracted in the interests of reaction and of militarist and mandarin
exploitation and plunder.
I have [etc.]
CHEN YU-JEN
15 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general as an enclosure
to his undated despatch No. 592; received Aug. 17, 1926.

500.A4e/624: Telegram
[Document 637]
The American Delegation to the Secretary of State
PEKING [,July 23, 1926—11 p.m.]
[Received July 23—6:10 p.m.]
Conference 51. Our 47, July 3, 6 p.m.15a
1. Admiral Tsai as plenipotentiary delegate recently invited
foreign delegates to an informal meeting today for the purpose of
exchange of views concerning future work of the Conference.
Meeting was in fact conducted with customary formality and a
record made by secretariat.
2. Tsai proposed resolution that the Conference should resume its
work on or about September 1st. We adhered to the position taken
by the foreign delegations at their meeting of July 3d that we
would be glad to continue work of the Conference so soon as the
delegates of the Chinese Government should be in a position to
resume the discussions, which condition did not exist then or now
and which we could not foresee would on any fixed date in the
future, and that we could not therefore commit ourselves to any
definite date. The result of the meeting was a tacit agreement that
there would be no meetings called during the hot weather which
lasts some weeks longer.
AM[ERICAN] TAR[IFF] DEL[EGATION]
15a Not printed.

500.A4e/625: Telegram
[Document 638]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 24, 1926—3 a.m.
[Received July 23—11:59 p.m.]
298. I am sending the following telegram to consul general at Canton.
“July 24, 2 a.m. Your despatch No. 490, July 16, 1926.
“1. You should immediately address the following note textually
to the so-called Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs at Canton and
give the contents to the press, as I shall do at once:
‘The American Minister has read with much interest
your note of July 14th, addressed to me, respecting the
resumption of Special Tariff Conference at Peking,
which I brought to his attention as requested by you. In
this relation Mr. MacMurray stated that your strong
opposition to the resumption of the Conference on
behalf of the Canton regime, as well as similar protests
from representatives of other regions in China, both
before and since the inauguration of the Conference,
evidence a disheartening lack of unanimity among the
Chinese people in respect to the efforts of the
Government of the United States jointly with the other
friendly Powers concerned to carry out its purpose of
bringing into effect certain readjustments of its treaty
relations with China, a lack of unanimity which gives
him very serious concern particularly at a moment
when there exists no Central Government supported by
all sections of China and recognized by the interested
powers with which to deal on a basis of mutuality of

responsibilities, such as my Government so earnestly
desires to see reestablished.
‘The American Minister believed it scarcely necessary
to observe that in any fiscal or other readjustment of
treaty relationships with China, the object which his
Government has in view is the benefit of China as a
whole and not of any individual military or political
faction.
‘In 
conclusion 
Mr. 
MacMurray 
expressed 
his
appreciation of the value of receiving information from
the various sections of China such as that afforded by
your note to me of July 34th in regard to questions of
mutual concern to the country as a whole and to the
United States.’
2. [Paraphrase.] Chen’s note interested me very much. Quite
possibly it might serve a useful purpose. This usefulness,
however, would be lost in case Chen were so unwise as to reply at
this time with more notes and to attempt for propaganda purposes
to capitalize upon my present statement. When you deliver your
note to him in person please find opportunity for making an
explanation of this point of view to him.” [End paraphrase.]
Further telegram following.
MACMURRAY

500.A4e/627: Telegram
[Document 639]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 24, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received July 24, 1926—2:55 p.m.]
301. My telegram number 298, July 24, 3 p.m. [a.m.]
1. Cabinet, whose formation was reported in my number 277, July 7, 5
p.m.,16 was organized upon the insistence of Wu Pei-fu that steps be taken
on the Chinese side to compel foreign delegations to continue work of
Conference. He was reported at the time (and the report now seems to be
adequately confirmed) to have said that announcements made by the
foreign delegations as reported in Conference telegram number 47, July 3, 6
p.m.,16a was tantamount to abandonment of the Conference and to have
threatened that if foreign delegations should refuse to proceed upon an
invitation from new Chinese administration the Chinese should assume
tariff autonomy independently. Admiral Tsai thereupon made indirect
inquiries through intermediaries as to the position of the several delegations
and found them all unwilling to commit themselves to negotiations with
representatives of the present exceedingly precarious regime. He therefore
issued invitations to informal conference reported in Conference telegram
number 51, July 23, 11 p.m. This supposedly informal discussion with
Admiral Tsai and his newly appointed colleagues was in fact so conducted
as to be palpably an attempt to commit the powers to a recognition of the
present regime and compel them to accept it as competent to deal in behalf
of China for the purposes of the Conference. Despite the fact that no
agreement was reached by the meeting there was a general feeling among
the foreign delegations that the Wu faction would exploit as evidence of the
recognition of this regime by the foreign powers the mere fact that their
delegates had met with the Chinese for a discussion of Conference matters.
This apprehension is confirmed by statements in this morning’s press
evidently emanating from Chinese delegation.

2. There has meanwhile been apparent a revulsion of Chinese feeling
against the continuance of the Conference under present circumstances
from which expected financial advantages would accrue to sole benefit of
allied Wu and Chang factions. Violent protests have been made to me by
Eugene Chen in behalf of the Canton regime and by a spokesman of the
Kuominchun. Although previously published in local press, texts of both
these protests were in fact received only yesterday afternoon. The following
are extracts from Chen’s letter addressed to the consul general at Canton,
July 14, for communication to me.
[The extracts have been omitted. For full text of the letter, see page 844 [Pg.
844 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636].]
3. There seemed to me so great a danger that the present unrecognized
Peking regime would misrepresent us as committed to support Wu and the
allied factions as against claims of other factions in China, that I felt it was
a matter of urgency to offset any such impression of partiality by replying
to Chen’s protest, and making public that reply, in terms which would make
clear our freedom from commitment to any particular group and emphasize
our desire in this and related matters to act for the’ benefit of China as a
whole. After consultation with Strawn, I accordingly telegraphed Jenkins as
reported in my July 24, 3 a.m.
4. I regret that, under the necessity of taking immediate action to avert our
being placed in false light of partisanship towards the military coalition now
occupying capital, I was compelled to take a positive position in this
delicate matter without the opportunity of obtaining your instructions; and
my having done so may indeed result in diminishing chances that this
Cabinet might obtain recognition either of our own or of other
governments; and it must be realized that there is at the present time no
reasonable prospect nor any expectation among representative China
[Chinese] of the formation in the immediately foreseeable future of a
government commanding the general support of the country. I felt no
hesitancy in taking the responsibility of this decision, however, in view not
only of known internal dissensions within the coalition and of its apparently
hopeless military situation but because I feel that we could not escape
popular judgment that we were playing favorites with Wu and Chang if we

were to commit ourselves to recognizing and dealing with a regime so
adventitiously established, so precarious, and as is generally felt, so
cynically regarded even by those who have consented to hold office under
it. I trust my action in this matter meets with your approval.
MACMURRAY
16 Not printed.
16a Not printed; it contained a report of the meeting held July 3. For details
of that meeting, see pp. 837–840 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 635].

500.A4e/625: Telegram
[Document 640]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, July 26, 1926—5 p.m.
148. Your 298, July 24, 3 p.m. [a.m.], 301, July 24, 6 p.m. Department
approves action taken by you, as stated therein.
KELLOGG

500.A4e/647
[Document 641]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)17
CANTON, July 29, 1926.
No. 495
SIR: I have the honor to report that your telegram of July 24, 2:00 a.m., was
received in this Consulate General on the morning of July 26. It was
immediately decoded and embodied in a note which was delivered to Mr.
Chen by special messenger about 4:00 o’clock that afternoon. As it was not
convenient for me to call at the same time, I sent a personal note to Mr.
Chen to inform him that I would call to see him the following morning in
respect to your communication.
When I saw Mr. Chen at 11:00 a.m. the next day, I endeavored to let him
understand as you instructed that his original note might serve a useful
purpose but that this value would probably be lost if he indulged in further
communications for propaganda purposes. Mr. Chen frankly said that he
would have to reply to the American Minister’s message because “it
furnished too good an opportunity to be missed”. Mr. Chen added, however,
that he would take the precaution to couch his views in more restrained
language than in the past, and he hoped the Consulate General and the
Legation would appreciate the attitude of the Nationalist Government.
 
Mr. Chen drew my attention to the fact that the Legation had evidently
given publicity to the Minister’s instructions to the Consulate General on
July 24, whereas he (Chen) had not received the Consulate General’s note
until the afternoon of July 26. I explained to Mr. Chen that this was
undoubtedly due to the Legation’s failure to realize how slow telegraphic
communication was in these times and that the Minister was evidently

under the impression that the message would reach me much sooner than it
actually did. In this connection, the Legation will doubtless be interested to
know that Reuter’s telegram conveying the verbatim text of the Legation’s
message was published in the Hongkong Morning Post of July 26 (before
the telegram had been delivered to this Consulate General) and actually
reached Canton an hour or two earlier than the Consulate General could
deliver its note to the Canton Foreign Office.
The Consulate General is just this moment in receipt of Mr. Chen’s reply
dated July 28, which has doubtless been published in the Cantonese
newspapers this morning. Copy of Mr. Chen’s note is enclosed and the
Legation’s particular attention is invited to the final paragraph which
contains a threat against the United States and other Powers concerned in
the event of a resumption of the Tariff Conference and the perfection of
arrangements for a loan to the Peking régime based on customs receipts.
There has been considerable talk in the local newspapers of late in
advocacy of a declaration of tariff autonomy by China. Mr. Chen has not
alluded specifically to this in his conversations so far as I can ascertain, but
he has intimated on more than one occasion, as he does in this note, that the
so-called Nationalist Government will take drastic measures of some sort
should the Powers arrange for a loan to the Wu Pei-fu–Chang Tso-lin group.
As previously reported in despatches from this Consulate General, the
Cantonese regime seems to be confident of the success of its military
expedition against the North and Mr. Chen has assured the writer of this
despatch that not only would the Cantonese armies soon reach the Yangtze
River, but that there would be a real government in Peking in the near future
with which the United States and the other Powers could deal. Political
leaders down here seem to anticipate important changes in the affiliations of
military leaders in the Yangtze Valley although they have mentioned no
names and given out no details. It is felt, however, that the situation is full
of grave possibilities and that the Legation should be prepared for far-
reaching changes in the North in the near future. The Southerners may
possibly meet with an overwhelming defeat but if they should be successful
in attracting other powerful leaders to their cause, the predictions of the
Cantonese may materialize more speedily than now seems possible.

 
In conclusion may I express my hearty approval of the intimation contained
in the Minister’s telegram to the effect that further discussion with Mr.
Chen is not desired … I am still of the opinion, however, that if our
Government could permit the Legation to publish a statement more clearly
defining the attitude of the United States in relation to China, the results
might be beneficial.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS
[Enclosure]
The Chinese Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs at Canton (Chen) to the American Consul General
(Jenkins)
CANTON, July 28, 1926.
SIR: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, dated July
26, in reply to my note of protest against the resumption of the Special
Tariff Conference at Peking. In no querulous sense do I draw your attention
to the fact that the text of your reply was handed to Reuter’s Agency in time
for publication in Peking and elsewhere on July 24—48 hours before it was
delivered at this Ministry. While I do not wish to stress this lapse in
procedure, you will, I do not doubt, agree that its repetition should be
avoided in the future.
I note that Mr. MacMurray views my Government’s strong opposition to the
resumption of the Conference as evidence of “a disheartening lack of
unanimity amongst the Chinese people in respect to the efforts of the
Government of the United States jointly with the other friendly Powers
concerned to carry out its purpose of bringing into effect certain re-
adjustments in its treaty relations with China.” But what seems to Mr.
MacMurray to be a “disheartening lack of unanimity” in understanding and
appreciating the policy of the United States is, in truth, a convincing proof
that that policy is wrong at once in conception and in application.

The policy is wrong because it is an expression of American failure to
realise that the Chinese situation is fundamentally a Revolutionary situation
and that, therefore, a Revolutionary i. e. a fundamental solution is necessary
as opposed to a solution involving a series of socalled “evolutionary” re-
adjustments. And the situation is Revolutionary because the principle of
change implicit in the Revolution of 1911–12 has not yet been worked out
in the life of the Nation, particularly in its politico-economic aspect, owing
to the constant interference and intervention, direct and indirect, of certain
Foreign Powers who (to cite some signal instances) first supported Yuan
Shih-kai in his attempt to destroy the Chinese Republic and financed him
with the Re-organisation Loan of 1913, next supported Tuan Chijui in his
Anfu days and financed him with the Nishihara and other loans, then
supported Wu Pei-fu and financed him with Customs and Salt surpluses,
and are now contemplating the support of a composite strong man in the
diversified persons of Wu Pei-fu and Chang Tso-lin and the financing of
this brace of militarists with the proceeds of a loan to be secured on the
promised Tariff surtaxes.
Persistence in such a policy makes not only for Chinese disorder and what
is called “chaos” in this country but for the intellectual confusion and moral
bankruptcy of the diplomacy of the Powers. And naught but a
“disheartening lack of unanimity” will manifest itself whenever the
Government of the United States is moved to apply its “evolutionary”
policy to the Revolutionary facts of the Chinese situation.
Nationalist China insists on a fundamental solution of the group of issues
known as the Chinese question. Internally, this means that the new military
and political technique which has enabled the Nationalist Government to
unify the Liang-kuang militarily, fiscally and politically must be applied on
a national scale in order that the Chinese people may work out their own
salvation in the interests of themselves as a whole and not to subordinate
the same to such alien interests as foreign high finance and foreign trade.
And externally, the dominating feature of a fundamental solution of the
Chinese question is that America should revise its present policy of
“bringing into effect certain re-adjustments of its treaty relations with
China” and, recognising the necessity of a General Re-adjustment of such
treaty relations instead of readjustments on the instalment plan, satisfy the

demand of Nationalist China for the substitution of the unequal treaties by
other treaties consistent with the real independence and sovereignty of
China. This is a policy that has been definitely brought within the range of
practical politics and proved to be both practicable and expedient by the
bold statesmanship of Soviet Russia.
In view of the fact that “at the moment there exists no central government
supported by all sections of China and recognized by the interested Powers
with which to deal on a basis of mutuality of responsibilities”, it would be
proper and pertinent for Mr. MacMurray to ask with whom is America,
either alone or in conjunction with other Powers, to negotiate regarding a
general re-adjustment of China’s treaty relations with Foreign Powers. The
Foreign Powers can only negotiate, in the interests of all concerned, with a
National Government of China whose authority and power is a reality.
As there is not such a government at the moment, I have the honour to
repeat the warning that the Nationalist Government, whose authority is now
extending to Central China, will repudiate all and every loan to be
concluded with the agents of Wu Pei-fu and Chang Tso-lin in Peking, and to
add that the resumption of the Special Tariff Conference will be viewed by
my Government as a deliberate attempt on the part of the United States and
the other interested Powers to convert the Chinese Maritime Customs from
a politico-fiscal organ into an engine of war-finance and foreign
intervention in China’s civil or rather Revolutionary wars. In this event the
Nationalist Government will be compelled to take certain defensive
measures.
I have [etc.]
CHEN YU-JEN
17 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general as an enclosure
to his despatch No. 612, July 29; received Sept. 2.

500.A4e/645
[Document 642]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 30, 1926.
[Received September 1.]
No. 687
SIR: I have the honor to enclose herewith, for the Department’s information,
a copy in translation of a note of July 17, 1926, from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs,18 informing the Legation of the appointment by
Presidential Mandate of
Ts’ai T’ing-kan,
Ku Wei-chun,
Yen Hui-ch’ing,
Wang Chung-hui
Chang Ying-hua, and
Wang Yin-t’ai
as plenipotentiary representatives to the Special Customs Conference.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
18 Not printed.

500.A4e/646
[Document 643]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)19
CANTON, July 31, 1926.
No. 499
SIR: I have the honor to transmit the enclosed declaration by the Kuomintang
against the resumption of the Tariff Conference18 which it is believed will
be of interest to the Legation. It will be observed that the Kuomintang
openly charges Great Britain and Japan with giving assistance to certain so-
called militaristic factions. Reference is also made to “the participation of
the American Democracy”. On page 5 (near the top), the declaration goes
on to express the hope that the nations involved do not know what their
representatives in Peking are planning to do “and that particularly the
people of the United States of America are ignorant of it.”
 
There is now considerable agitation in Canton against the resumption of the
Tariff Conference, including processions and mass meetings with speeches
by political leaders. It is evident that the Government is doing what it can to
stir up popular resentment against the Conference with a view to
strengthening as far as possible its formal protests.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS
19 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general as an enclosure
to his despatch No. 615, July 31; received Sept. 3.
18 Not printed.

500.A4e/652
[Document 644]
The British Embassy to the Department of State
AIDE-MEMOIRE
His Majesty’s Government have noted with great interest the
correspondence that has passed recently between the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Canton Government on the one part, and the United States
Consul-General at Canton and the United States Minister at Peking on the
other in regard to the proceedings of the Chinese Customs Tariff
Conference and other matters relating to the status of the Canton
Government.
Copies of this correspondence were published in the Peking and Tientsin
Times of the 21st July and in the Hong Kong Daily Press of the 5th July
last, and consist in a telegram sent apparently on July 20th by Mr. Eugene
Chen to the American Minister at Peking21 and in Mr. MacMurray’s reply
thereto,22 as also in a letter addressed on 30th June last by the American
Consul General at Canton to Mr. Eugene Chen and the latter’s reply dated
July 2nd.23
His Majesty’s Government are interested in this exchange of views not only
because they were participators with the United States Government in the
tariff negotiations at Peking, which have now been suspended until an
undetermined date in the autumn, but because they are themselves at
present in negotiation with the Canton authorities for the settlement of the
boycott of British goods which, for the past year, has caused very grave
injury to the colony of Hong Kong and British trade in general.
It seems to them that this correspondence may indicate that the United
States Government may be considering such important questions as the
position of the Canton administration in regard to the central authority at
Peking, the mutual relations of the two bodies as affecting the work of the
Tariff Conference, and the prospects of that work in the future; and in view

of the attitude of the Canton Government as revealed in Mr. Eugene Chen’s
communications, they would be glad to know what course the United States
Government intend to pursue as regards both the liquidation of the promises
made in the Washington Customs Tariff Treaty and the resumption of
general tariff negotiations, and on what footing they propose to treat with
the Canton Government in the future.
His Majesty’s Ambassador would be grateful for any information that the
Secretary of State may be able to give in reply to this enquiry on the part of
His Majesty’s Government.
MANCHESTER, MASS. , September 17, 1926.
[Received September 20.]
21 Apparently refers to note of July 14 from the Chinese Acting Minister for
Foreign Affairs at Canton to the American consul general, p. 844 [Pg. 844
includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636].
22 See despatch No. 298, July 24, from the Minister in China, p. 846 [Pg. 846
includes portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and Doc. 638].
23 See article from the Canton Gazette, July 5, 1926, ante, p. 669 [Pg. 669 is
part of Doc. 536].

500.A4e/654
[Document 645]
The Department of State to the British Embassy
The United States Government has given careful consideration to the Aide-
Memoire, dated September 17, 1926, in regard to the situation in China,
which was left at the Department of State on September 20, 1926, by His
Excellency the British Ambassador. The Government of the United States
has followed with close attention the recent developments in China. It is of
the opinion, however, that the situation has not so far altered as to
necessitate any change in the policy which it has adopted in the past,
namely, to hold itself in readiness to enter into relations and to negotiate
with any Government representing China which appears to be capable of
fulfilling the obligations which it may undertake. On the other hand this
Government is not prepared to enter into negotiations with a view to
concluding a general tariff agreement with individual provinces or groups
of provinces.
WASHINGTON , Oct. 5, 1926.

500.A4e/686: Telegram
[Document 646]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, November 20, 1926—noon.
[Received 12:53 p.m.]
566. 1. In informal conversation recently Koo stated to me that he planned
shortly to circularize a proposal to the interested Legations that the Tariff
Conference be resumed. He requested me to give my opinion regarding the
prospects. I recalled that foreign delegations had made their conviction
clear at the “informal meeting” held July 23 (for which refer to conference
number 51 of July 23, 11 p.m.) that no Chinese governmental entity with
which such negotiations could be carried on was in existence. I pointed out
quite frankly that the Peking administration has since that time become not
only more definitely an agency of faction but by denunciation of the
Belgian treaty24 has aroused doubt of its sense of responsibility in regard to
foreign obligations. It was urged by Koo that his administration was amply
able, except as he said, in certain provinces in the south, to discharge its
obligations. Instancing the illegal export and import duties, the imposition
of which is being attempted by the Military Governor of Shantung, I asked
Koo where in fact his administration could control its own nominal
adherents. He replied that levies of these taxes and similar ones on foreign
trade were being made by various provinces in the place of the Washington
surtaxes. They felt that the latter were being unjustly withheld from them by
the powers. He made this remarkable statement: the Foreign Office could
not expect to turn the provincial leaders away from so obviously a just
action and it was, in fact, not so much as forwarding to them any of the
protests which were made against taxes on foreign trade which were levied
in contravention of treaties. In reply to my question of what position he
took regarding taxes levied in Peking itself on tobacco, he outspokenly
upheld such taxes as fully justified so long as the obligations the powers
had under the Washington Customs Treaty were not fulfilled. He maintained

this even though admitting that more than a year before the Chinese
delegation had rebuffed the offer of the surtaxes. However he stated that
when the surtaxes had once been put into force by the Special Conference,
faithful observance of all conditions which might be stipulated could be and
would be secured by the Peking Administration. As I knew, the argument
could be carried no further, and undoubtedly he was aware that I knew these
statements did not represent anything real.
2. Koo was most insistent concerning the matter which he termed the
universal demand by the public that the Conference be resumed. Discussion
of this pretension was similarly difficult. The situation is this: no one
unconnected with the present regime in Peking has the least desire to have
the Conference continued for the creation of a new source of revenue for
the benefit of Chang Tso-lin and his associates in the warfare going on.
3. Nevertheless, the fact is that such public opinion as exists in China
regards as evidence of bad faith by the foreign powers that they do not carry
out the provisions of the Washington Treaty, although the great part of the
people, I feel convinced, would feel bitter resentment if we made an
agreement with the Peking regime implementing the recent obligations. If
we bar the highly improbable contingency of a stable, responsible central
government being established at an early date, we are confronted with a
dilemma. The sole means of escape from it that I have thought of are the
following: (1) To take [garbled group] action through the making of several
regional agreements—as to this, the disapproval of the Department is to be
inferred, in view of its telegram No. 226 of October 13;25 (2) to indicate in
outline form the general conditions upon which basis the powers would be
prepared to put into effect the Washington surtaxes, the powers to make a
statement of willingness to negotiate with any Chinese delegation for this
purpose if the delegation were constituted so as to represent the whole
Chinese people and to be competent to offer effective assurances in regard
to any agreements arrived at being generally respected; (3) the powers to
take action independently of China to enforce the surtaxes upon their own
nationals, waiving all such conditions as were contemplated by the Customs
treaty and by the Tariff Conference; (4) to take the radical action of
conceding unanimous tariff autonomy immediately, with the single
condition that most-favored-nation treatment be provided for. Only the

second and third of these alternatives appeal to me as offering possibly a
hope of such a solution as will avoid entailing new, grave developments.
Unquestionably the second if it were feasible would be the best, but I
consider it a very long shot. Whether other powers, Japan and Great Britain
particularly, would be willing to continue the Conference under conditions
involving the great practical difficulties obviously to be encountered in
negotiations with a representation which is so heterogeneous and doubtless
fluctuating as that of the Chinese, is doubtful. And whether the
administration at Peking would have any enthusiasm is rather more
doubtful, since of necessity it would be given by this plan only part of
whatever free money resulted from the surtaxes. And whether the Southern
group would consent to send representatives to negotiate for what they have
a disposition to claim as of right is extremely doubtful, for they are elated
now by their having conquered at least half of China and are now confirmed
in the rather arrogant attitude they have taken toward treaty powers and
their rights. Therefore the feasibility of this project is in question. Yet it
offers some chance for us to be able, in a manner fair to China as a whole,
to set ourselves free of our obligations. Even were it to fail we would be left
in the position that we went more than half way in endeavoring to discharge
the obligations we have and to satisfy the reasonable demands made by
Chinese national feeling. Certain theoretical attractions inhere in the fourth
project, but I am not able to believe that, considering the temper of the
Chinese at present, it would be effective in alleviating that sense of
grievance against the treaty powers which the Chinese are nursing.
Especially since it would follow the success of the Canton regime in
ignoring treaties by imposing illegal surtaxes and the riposte of Peking in
tearing up the Belgian treaty, I am afraid that it would only intoxicate the
Chinese further with a sense of triumph, with the result that their zeal for
the ousting of foreigners out of China altogether would be diverted merely
to other questions. For the Department’s consideration I suggest the
question whether action by us on this project might also not affect our
relations with the Japanese most seriously and, in a lesser degree, possibly
our relations with the British, in view of the creation by it of
embarrassments of a kind more vital by far to their commercial interests
than they would be to ours.

4. In submitting these comments, it is my hope that some indication of the
lines along which the foreign policy of the Department is proceeding may
be given to me if the Department is able to do so. I know that the
Department feels an anxiety in this matter to avoid failure in fulfilling our
obligations under the Washington Conference (according to telegram 171
from the Department, August 24, 2 p.m.,26 ) and that it concurs in the
conviction I hold that to do this is impossible through negotiations with the
unrepresentative, irresponsible regime at Peking (according to telegraphic
instructions from the Department, No. 148 of July 26, 5 p.m. and No. 267
of November 15, 6 p.m.27 ). But beyond these facts I have no idea as to
what course it is the desire of the Department that I should follow nor as to
what attitude it is the wish of the Department that I should take in the
imminent event that a request is made from the Chinese side that the Tariff
Conference be resumed. The few, rather unpromising alternatives that
through months of thought and discussion have been developed here I have
presented above. Perhaps the Department has in mind other possibilities. I
venture to make a request, in view of the probability that I shall find myself
in the very near future under the necessity of taking in behalf of our
Government some position on the practical and urgent question concerning
the course to be taken toward the Tariff Conference, for such instructions in
this regard as the Department may have to give me.
MACMURRAY
24 See pp. 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 758, Doc. 759, and Doc. 760] ff.
25 Not printed; it transmitted the Department’s memorandum of Oct. 5 to
the British Embassy, p. 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc.
646].
26 Ante, p. 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 540].
27 Latter printed post, p. 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772].

500.A4e/686: Telegram
[Document 647]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, November 23, 1926—6 p.m.
278. Referring to third paragraph of your number 566, November 20, noon.
Concerning your second proposition, the Department does not have any
objection to holding a conference for implementing the Washington Treaty
surtaxes and specifying the conditions, provided any prospect exists that
compliance with the conditions would obtain throughout China and if a
willingness to participate in a conference such as this were shown by the
treaty powers and if such a course is recommended by you. However, if the
resumption of the Conference with the purpose of having a discussion
generally of the subject of China’s tariff is insisted upon by the present
Peking Government, the Department still is of the opinion that probably the
existing Peking Government would not have the power to bind any
considerable part of China and that the so-called Canton authorities would
probably repudiate such a conference. However, it has been the attitude of
the United States to do everything it can do to make clear that it is willing
to meet the aspirations of China in regard to the tariff question. If such a
demand is made, your recommendations would be desired as to what ought
to be done. The cooperation of the other treaty powers would certainly be
necessary for any such general conference.
As you suggest, your fourth proposition would mean probably a break with
the other powers. To the Department, it seems that at present this is
inadvisable. If, however, control of most of China is secured by the Canton
authorities, perhaps we may have to give consideration to entering into a
treaty by which our tariff control will be given up but in which most-
favored-nation tariff treatment will be insisted upon. Probably the best
course to pursue at present in order to show that we are willing to comply
with the Treaty of Washington is the adoption of your proposition number

three, which to the Department seems to be feasible and worth considering.
See in this connection telegram No. 273 from the Department, November
19, 4 p.m.,28 which communicated the telegram received from London28 in
which is contained Wellesley’s opinion that the better course for the treaty
powers would be to grant the additional surtax of 2½ percent at once and
without reservations, the surtax to be collected if possible by the Customs
Administration. You should consult your British and French colleagues for
the purpose of getting, if possible, agreement upon joint action. It should be
possible, it seems to the Department, for the Powers simply to give
notification to the Chinese Government that an authorization is given for
the surtaxes to be collected through the Chinese Maritime Customs.
KELLOGG
28 Not printed.
28 Not printed.

500.A4e/657: Telegram
[Document 648]
The Secretary of State to the American Delegation
WASHINGTON, November 24, 1926—2 p.m.
279. Department’s telegram No. 237, October 20, 3 p.m.30 What is present
status of Russo-Asiatic Bank matter and question of reallocation of customs
funds among banks in China?
KELLOGG
30 Not printed.

500.A4e/689: Telegram
[Document 649]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 27, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received 3 p.m.]
583. Department’s 279, November 24, 2 p.m.
1. Russo-Asiatic Bank is in process of liquidation, as reported in
Legation’s despatch number 784, October 15th.30
2. Customs revenues are being deposited in accordance with the
agreement of January 30th, 1912.31 The German and Russian
banks having been eliminated, Hongkong and Shanghai Banking
Corporation remains the sole custodian bank, receiving all
deposits. It is reported that Chinese banks recently petitioned the
Chinese delegation to the Customs Conference, asking that funds
hitherto deposited in the Russo-Asiatic Bank be apportioned
among Chinese banks. As yet no proposals to this effect have
been received from the delegation or the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs.
3. The whole question of the reallocation of customs deposits was
examined in detail last summer by the technical advisers of the
Special Conference who worked out a scheme whereby the
revenues from the Washington surtaxes were to be allocated
according to the terms of a special agreement of the Conference
and revenues from existing tariff were to be allocated through
revision of the 1912 agreement. The Conference being in
abeyance no further progress has been made.
4. Although it is inequitable and unsound in principle that one
bank should be sole custodian of the customs revenues, there are
very practical difficulties and dangers in attempting to bring about

a change at the present time. Revision of the 1912 agreement
between the Chinese Government and the diplomatic body might
well be considered tantamount to recognition of the present
Peking regime. A proposal for revision would at once be met with
a demand, on the part of the Chinese banks, for a large part of the
revenues, at least all that portion above an amount necessary to
meet foreign obligations secured on the customs; and under
present conditions it would hardly seem advisable to precipitate a
demand which will at the most not be long in forthcoming. Such a
proposal would also involve demand for participation by foreign
banks, not of the best standing, and of nationalities not having
large interest in foreign obligations secured on the customs.
5. In view of these various considerations the Legation, while
appreciating inequity of present arrangement, regards with some
apprehension, any immediate move to alter the status quo.
MACMURRAY
30 Not printed.
31 John V. A. MacMurray (ed.), Treaties and Agreements With and
Concerning China, 1912–1919, vol. II, p. 946.

500.A4e/690: Telegram
[Document 650]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 3, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received December 3—10:30 a.m.]
595. Department’s 273, November 19, 4 p.m.32 With reference to London’s
283 [253], November 17th,32 it may be recalled that in the instructions of
the British Government to the British delegation made public September
18th, 1925, there appeared the following:
“His Majesty’s Government recognize that consolidation of the
unsecured debts is one of the tasks which will confront the
Conference.”
The British, in association with the other delegations, were engaged on and
off throughout the Conference in discussions relating to debt consolidation
until May 3rd when Stewart of the British delegation announced that he was
under instructions to discontinue all further discussions looking toward the
negotiation of general agreement providing for interim tariff rates and the
disposition of revenues accruing therefrom. Up to that time when the
discussions were thus abruptly terminated, Stewart had been engaged with
the Japanese and American technical advisers in the discussion of such a
general agreement, and negotiations were proceeding with excellent
prospects of reaching an amicable arrangement. From that date until July
3rd, when the work of the Conference was discontinued, negotiations
among the foreign delegations were directed solely toward reaching an
agreement for the implementing of the Washington surtaxes and did not
embrace a discussion of debt consolidation; and the latter question was not
under consideration by the foreign delegations on July 3rd when action was
taken in effect discontinuing the work of the Conference. In this connection
see delegation’s despatch of September 9th33 enclosing a record of the
conference studies numbers 1 and 2, in particular page 17 of the latter. If

debt consolidation was the fundamental cause of the unwillingness of the
British delegation to proceed with the work of the Conference, then
Wellesley’s statement that this question wrecked the Conference would
appear to be explicable only on the theory that the British Government
preferred to see the Conference wrecked rather than meet in a spirit of
compromise the views of the other delegations, or that on or about May 3rd
the British Government reversed itself as to its willingness to discuss any
plan of debt consolidation whatsoever.
The text of the telegram shown by Wellesley to MacMurray in 1923 should
be in the files of the Department as an enclosure to a personal note dated
February 10, 1923, from Craigie to MacMurray.34 It will be noted the
Department was in agreement with Wellesley upon the principle of policy
“of [eliminating] if possible from Special Conference discussion of
unsecured debts.” The understanding reached between Wellesley and
MacMurray contemplated eliminating the discussion of debts from the
Conference provided that this problem could be taken care of by the debts
being secured upon other than customs revenues prior to the Conference
and the contingent understanding reported by Wellesley in 1923 is by no
means the equivalent of the categorical statement reported by the
Embassy35 that “he and MacMurray were in accord that debt consolidation
should not be discussed at the Tariff Conference.”36 Whatever degree of
misunderstanding may have existed on this point in January 1923, however,
was wholly dispelled by the Department’s number 67 to London, March 26,
1923;33 see conference 38, May 12, 5 p.m.
With reference to the advisability of granting the Washington surtaxes
without reservations, see Legation’s 594, December 2, 5 p.m.37
MACMURRAY
32 Not printed.
32 Not printed.
33 Not printed.
34 Neither printed. R. Leslie Craigie was Secretary of the British Embassy
at Washington.

35 i. e., the American Embassy at London.
36 The statement was reported to the Department in telegram No. 253, Nov.
17, which was repeated to the Minister in China in telegram No. 273, Nov.
19.
33 Not printed.
37 Post, p. 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695].

500.A4e/691: Telegram
[Document 651]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of
State
[Paraphrase]
LONDON, December 8, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received December 8—2:05 p.m.]
267. Referring to my number 253, November 17, 1 p.m.38 Yesterday
afternoon Sterling39 was called to the Foreign Office by Tyrrell.40 The
situation in China was again reviewed by Tyrrell, and he reviewed the
suggestion that the additional surtax of 2½ percent should be granted by the
powers with no reservations and with no conditions regarding likin or debt
consolidation.
His insistence that it was necessary to make this concession immediately
constituted the importance of the interview.
HOUGHTON
38 Not printed.
39 Frederick A. Sterling, counselor of the American Embassy.
40 Sir William G. Tyrrell, British Permanent Under Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs.

Efforts of the United States and other
powers to meet situation created by
imposition in China of taxes in conflict
with treaty provisions
[652] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Chargé in China
(Mayer)
Canton, September 29, 1926.
893.512/438
[653] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 30, 1926—11 a.m. [Received September 30—5:55 a.m.]
893.512/401: Telegram
[654] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 3, 1926—7 p.m. [Received October 3—7:19 p.m.]
893.512/402: Telegram
[655] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 4, 1926—5 p.m. [Received October 4—12:16 p.m.]
893.512/403: Telegram

[656] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 5, 1926—7 p.m.
893.512/402: Telegram
[657] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 6, 1926—noon. [Received October 6—12:18 p.m.]
893.512/404: Telegram
[658] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Chargé in China
(Mayer)
Canton, October 8, 1926.
893.512/440
[659] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 8, 1926—8 p.m. [Received 9:30 p.m.]
893.512/407: Telegram
[660] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 13, 1926—noon.
893.512/407: Telegram
[661] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 14, 1926—noon. [Received October 14—6 a.m.]
893.512/411: Telegram

[662] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 14, 1926—2 p.m. [Received October 14—5:50 a.m.]
893.512/412: Telegram
[663] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 14, 1926—3 p.m. [Received October 14—6:05 a.m.]
893.512/410: Telegram
[664] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 15, 1926—1 p.m. [Received October 15—6:38 a.m.]
893.512/416: Telegram
[665] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 15, 1926—3 p.m.
893.512/411: Telegram
[666] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 16, 1926—1 p.m. [Received October 16—9 a.m.]
893.512/417: Telegram
[667] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 16, 1926—2 p.m.
893.512/416: Telegram

[668] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 16, 1926—4 p.m.
893.512/417: Telegram
[669] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Chargé in China
(Mayer)
Canton, October 16, 1926.
893.512/449
[670] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 18, 1926—6 p.m. [Received October 18—9:05 a.m.]
893.512/418: Telegram
[671] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 19, 1926—3 p.m.
893.512/418: Telegram
[672] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 20, 1926—9 a.m. [Received October 20—6:16 a.m.]
893.512/420: Telegram
[673] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 20, 1926—11 a.m. [Received October 20—4:25 a.m.]
893.512/421: Telegram

[674] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 20, 1926—7 p.m. [Received October 21—9 a.m.]
893.512/422: Telegram
[675] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 22, 1926—4 p.m.
893.512/422: Telegram
[676] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 23, 1926—7 p.m. [Received October 23—9:45 a.m.]
893.512/423: Telegram
[677] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 23, 1926—5 p.m.
893.512/423: Telegram
[678] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 25, 1926—9 a.m. [Received October 25—8 a.m.]
893.512/424: Telegram
[679] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 25, 1926—10 a.m. [Received October 25—2:45 a.m.]
893.512/425: Telegram

[680] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 25, 1926—6 p.m.
893.512/424: Telegram
[681] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 26, 1926—3 p.m. [Received October 26—11:58 a.m.]
893.512/426: Telegram
[682] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 27, 1926—3 p.m.
893.512/425: Telegram
[683] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 28, 1926—3 p.m. [Received October 28—8:50 a.m.]
893.512/427: Telegram
[684] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 28, 1926—8 p.m. [Received October 28—2:15 p.m.]
893.512/428: Telegram
[685] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 29, 1926—11 a.m. [Received October 29—1:03 a.m.]
893.512/429: Telegram

[686] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 29, 1926—4 p.m. [Received October 29—9:45 a.m.]
893.512/430: Telegram
[687] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 30, 1926—2 p.m. [Received October 30—10:12 a.m.]
893.512/432: Telegram
[688] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 30, 1926—11 a.m. [Received October 31—2:15 a.m.]
893.512/433: Telegram
[689] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 1, 1926—1 p.m. [Received November 1—9:10 a.m.]
893.512/434: Telegram
[690] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, November 1, 1926—1 p.m.
893.512/428: Telegram
[691] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 3, 1926—4 p.m. [Received November 3—11:25 a.m.]
893.512/437: Telegram

[692] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 16, 1926—2 p.m. [Received 6:35 p.m.]
893.512/447: Telegram
[693] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Canton, November 17, 1926.
893.512/484
[694] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, November 19, 1926—3 p.m.
893.512/447: Telegram
[695] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 2, 1926—5 p.m. [Received 8:05 p.m.]
893.512/467: Telegram
[696] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 4, 1926—4 p.m. [Received December 5—10:40 a.m.]
893.512/468: Telegram
[697] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, December 4, 1926—6 p.m.
893.512/467: Telegram

[698] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 6, 1926—4 p.m. [Received December 6—9:50 a.m.]
893.512/456: Telegram
[699] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 7, 1926—4 p.m. [Received December 7—10:30 a.m.]
893.512/469: Telegram
[700] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, December 8, 1926—6 p.m.
893.512/456: Telegram
[701] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, December 8, 1926—7 p.m.
893.512/468: Telegram
[702] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 9, 1926—1 a.m. [Received 7:22 a.m.]
893.512/459: Telegram
[703] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 9, 1926—noon. [Received December 9—7:54 a.m.]
893.512/460: Telegram

[704] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, December 9, 1926—5 p.m.
893.512/459: Telegram
[705] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 11, 1926—3 p.m. [Received December 11—10:40 a.m.]
893.512/470: Telegram
[706] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, December 13, 1926—7 p.m.
893.512/470: Telegram
[707] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 14, 1926—4 p.m. [Received December 14—9 a.m.]
893.512/471: Telegram
[708] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, December 14, 1926—8 p.m.
893.512/471: Telegram
[709] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 17, 1926—4 p.m. [Received December 17—3:50 p.m.]
893.512/472: Telegram

[710] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, December 18, 1926—5 p.m.
893.512/472: Telegram
[711] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 19, 1926—3 p.m. [Received December 19—11:20 a.m.]
893.512/475: Telegram
[712] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Washington, December 20, 1926—3 p.m.
893.512/472: Telegram
[713] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 22, 1926—4 p.m. [Received December 22—2:55 p.m.]
893.512/479: Telegram
[714] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, December 28, 1926—1 p.m.
893.512/479: Telegram
[715] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
Washington, December 23, 1926.
893.512/497

[716] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 28, 1926—6 p.m. [Received December 28—1:40 p.m.]
893.512/485: Telegram
[717] The Consul General at Hankow (Lockhart) to the Secretary of
State
Hankow, December 29, 1926—3 p.m. [Received 7:37 p.m.]
893.512/489: Telegram
[718] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, December 29, 1926—4 p.m.
893.512/485: Telegram
[719] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 30, 1926—5 p.m. [Received December 30—2:20 p.m.]
893.512/490: Telegram
[720] The Chinese Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs at Hankow
(Chen) to the Secretary of State
Hankow, December 31, 1926. [Received December 31—8:15 p.m.]
893.512/491: Telegram
[721] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
[Washington,] December 31, 1926.

893.512/504
[722] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, January 3, 1927—6 p.m.
893.512/492: Telegram
[723] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 5, 1926 [1927]—9 a.m. [Received 11:18 a.m.]
893.512/501: Telegram

893.512/438
[Document 652]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Chargé in China
(Mayer)41
CANTON, September 29, 1926.
No. 535
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my telegrams of September 27, 10 a.m.,42
September 28, 9 a.m., and September 28, 12 a.m.43 concerning the declared
intention of the Canton regime to levy so-called consumption and
production taxes on all merchandise passing through the maritime customs
at this port, the proceeds therefrom to be used in compensating the strikers
connected with the anti-British boycott.
It will be recalled as already reported telegraphically by this Consulate
General, that the Canton régime has informed the British Consul General
officially that arrangements have been made to end the anti-British boycott
before October 10, and that properly constituted Chinese authorities would
levy special taxes on imports and exports. The tax on ordinary imports will
be two and a half percentum, ad valorem, according to the notice, and five
per centum on luxuries. Exports are also to be taxed according to the new
plan, but the amount has not yet been definitely stated, although it is
understood it will be at the rate of two and a half percentum.
These taxes are to be known as consumption and production taxes and to
this extent should not be confused with import and export duties. Although
it is understood the new taxes are to apply to all commodities regardless of
nationality, no consular representative other than the British has yet
received any official intimation from the local authorities and the Consular
Body as such has not considered the matter.

It is understood that the Cantonese contemplate using the so-called Customs
Memo for valuation purposes, although the Customs authorities are not to
take any part in the actual collection of the new taxes.
It is evident that the Cantonese authorities intend to levy these taxes
regardless of protests from the Powers concerned. It is also equally clear
that once these taxes are applied they will be continued indefinitely. In a
conversation with Mr. Eugene Chen, so-called Acting Minister of Foreign
Affairs, the writer of this despatch was informed that the Cantonese régime
expected to raise $500,000, Canton currency, monthly through the new
taxes, the money to be paid over as collected to the strikers, who would
then be expected to find other employment. When questioned as to what
would be done about the tax after the strikers had been paid, Mr. Chen said
this question had not yet been decided, but the taxes would probably be
continued indefinitely if the Government found it expedient and necessary
to do so.
The Acting British Consul General, Mr. Brenan, is frankly in favor of
allowing the Cantonese régime to institute the new system of taxation
without objection on the part of the Powers. Mr. Brenan believes that the
Powers are not in a position to do more than file the usual protests and since
these would have no effect, he thinks an effort should be made to regularize
and control the collection of the taxes through the existing machinery of the
maritime customs.
Colonel Hayley Bell, the Commissioner of Customs, is of the same opinion,
and a copy of a private letter just received from him by the writer of this
despatch is enclosed herewith for the information of the Legation.48
Colonel Bell draws attention to the fact that the local government probably
intends to use the existing picket machinery for the collection of the new
taxes. He points out that if this is not done the present system of extortion,
intimidation and illegal interference with foreign trade may be expected to
continue indefinitely. For these reasons, Colonel Bell believes that the
Powers should endeavor to induce the Cantonese régime to consent to the
collection of the taxes through the customs with the understanding that the
money will be paid over at stated intervals to the Cantonese régime, instead
of being sent on to Peking.

The writer of this despatch is strongly inclined to agree with the views of
Colonel Bell and Mr. Brenan. It scarcely seems likely that the Powers will
agree to do more than protest against the proposed taxes and if this should
prove to be the case, the Cantonese authorities will disregard the protests
and proceed as though nothing had happened. They have done this
repeatedly during the past year or two and say quite frankly in private
conversation that mere protests from the Powers will not influence them in
any way whatever.
The scheme hinted at with respect to the collection of the new taxes
although quite indefinite as yet, appears to follow the general plan
suggested by the Washington Conference, and there should be no objection
apparently to the taxes as such, but merely to the fact that they are being put
on by an unrecognized government and without the concurrence of the
Powers concerned.
It seems highly desirable, in view of the existing circumstances, to endeavor
to arrive at some plan by which these proposed new taxes may be collected
through the maritime customs and paid over to the Cantonese régime. At the
same time, however, it is recognized that when this is done, the rights of the
Powers generally to supervise the customs’ tariff and the administration of
the maritime customs should be preserved as far as possible. It is not certain
that the Cantonese régime would consent readily to the collection of the
taxes through the customs, but if the Powers are firm, the writer of this
despatch is inclined to believe some arrangement as outlined above could
be effected.
It would be a fatal mistake in the opinion of the writer merely to protest
against the institution of the taxes and then permit the Canton régime to
proceed as though the Powers took no further interest in the matter. The so-
called Nationalist Government is now far stronger than it has ever been in
the past and the Powers must find some means either to prevent its growing
interference in our trade rights or to control and regularize its activities in
the interests of all concerned.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS

41 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general as an enclosure
to his despatch No. 669, Sept. 29; received Nov. 2.
42 See telegram No. 440, Sept. 30, from the Chargé in China, p. 866 [Pg. 866
includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654].
43 Neither printed.
48 Not printed.

893.512/401: Telegram
[Document 653]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 30, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received September 30—5:55 a.m.]
440. My 419, September 20, 5 p.m.49
1. Following from American consul general at Canton:
“September 27, 10 a.m. Your September 22, 5 p.m., received the
25th. New tax is to apply to all imports and exports. Collections
will be made by Chinese officials appointed by this Government.
Funds will be deposited in the Central Bank of Canton and used
for paying off strikers. [Paraphrase.] Cantonese authorities do not
contemplate that Maritime Customs will have anything to do with
the tax collection other than furnish memoranda for purposes of
valuation, but Hayley Bell urges that the powers, if they cannot
prevent the tax, should insist that the collection and distribution of
the tax be through the Customs. In this I concur fully in spite of
fact that the funds would be turned over to Canton Government.
A despatch follows. [End paraphrase.]”
2. I am waiting further information from Canton and from MacMurray50
before commenting on this telegram and in general on the tax situation at
Canton.
MAYER
49 Ante, p. 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, and Doc. 601].
50 Minister in China.

893.512/402: Telegram
[Document 654]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, October 3, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received October 3—7:19 p.m.]
449. My telegram 440, September 30.
1. Following from me to MacMurray:
“September 28, 1 p.m. For MacMurray.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2) From what information I have been able to gather from
British, Japanese, and Customs sources the new situation at
Canton would appear to force us either to take decisive
international action backed up by threat of naval force in the
event that the Customs becomes directly involved and refuses to
participate or on the other hand to negotiate at once with the
Cantonese regime toward putting into effect a regional
arrangement policy and to obtain satisfactory guarantees from
that regime before we are confronted with a complete fait
accompli and thus deprived of bargaining power.51
(3) I have been given to understand clearly by the Acting
Inspector General of Customs52 that the Customs authorities, as is
quite natural, cannot decide whether compliance with any
instruction from the Cantonese to collect the new taxes should be
refused unless adequate support is guaranteed to the Customs by
the interested powers. Seemingly, he felt convinced that should a
decision be made by the United States, Great Britain, and Japan to

oppose the new prorata, and should they be ready to use force if
necessary prior to the Customs being forced to obey any demand
from the Cantonese for direct participation in the taxes, almost
certainly the so-called Central Government would give an order
to the Inspector General of Customs to refuse to obey the
command of the Cantonese, which at least would add to the
strength of the position of the powers before the world. In view of
present circumstances I concur in the above regard with
Edwardes, although I remember the Central Government’s
attitude in 1923 toward the Canton customs conflict, when the
Peking authorities, in effect, as you will recall, gave their support
to the Cantonese against the foreigner, even though this was
illogical in the light of the attitude they held toward Canton in
regard to the matter of distributing customs funds.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Following from MacMurray:
“September 30, 2 p.m. Referring to your September 28, 1 p.m.
(1) I was informed by the British consul general at
Canton that while the Cantonese are naturally insistent
that the new taxes should be imposed in connection
with ending the boycott, each of these is completely
distinct from the other. The British have made no
commitment as to taxes, and remain free to make
resistance to them. The Hongkong Governor who also
holds this opinion has informed me that as yet he has
not had an indication of the attitude of the British
Government in regard to these taxes, but that he is
personally strongly disposed not to accept them,
considering that to do so would be tantamount to
unconditionally granting tariff autonomy, also involving
the breakdown of the Administration of the Customs. It
was his expressed hope that in regard to the new taxes
Great Britain, the United States, and Japan, and perhaps
France, might possibly act together in refusing to accept

them. But he acknowledged having doubt whether
cooperation could be expected from those nations to the
point, if necessary, of supporting a refusal to allow the
taxes to be levied by means of a naval demonstration.
Further he informs me that Aglen,53 in consulting the
Foreign Office, has stated that unless the powers
principally interested in resisting the demand of the
Cantonese for their cooperation in collecting taxes gave
support to the Customs Administration, the latter must
yield to force majeure.
(2) It is my view that in fact the proposed taxes,
although levied under other names, are substantially
import and export taxes and doubtless are purposely
designed to anticipate the levies of the Washington
surtaxes, and that their enforcement would have the
result of putting those surtaxes into force independently
of the powers in all sections of China, in disregard of
the conditions which were contemplated by the
Washington Treaty.54 Moreover, once a break had been
made away from treaty obligations by any Chinese
group, nothing would be left to prevent the forces in
control of any given region from making at will an
indefinite increase of such taxes. Thus there would be a
new situation in which in effect both the previous treaty
provisions as to customs and the Washington Customs
Treaty itself would be repudiated. Neither a possibility
of securing relief in behalf of our unsecured creditors
would then be left to us nor of doing what has for us in
the long run far more importance, maintaining the
safeguards against arbitrary exactions upon foreign
trade.
(3) I believe that resolute action by the powers chiefly
interested should be taken against this method of
indirect piecemeal repudiation of treaties, even so far as
to give naval protection to the Canton Customs and to

take any action which may prove to be feasible in
preventing the levy of the proposed taxes by Cantonese
authorities.
(4) No drastic action would be necessary I believe if the
fact that the powers were in earnest were realized by the
Cantonese. When in Canton I gathered an extremely
strong impression that the Kuomintang has a real desire
to adopt towards the powers a policy of conciliation, in
part owing to its present aspiration to receive
recognition and treatment as the Government of China,
but in the main because it has a dread of any such
complication arising at the rear as might embarrass its
present military and political endeavors in the North.
Particular effort was made by Eugene Chen55 and
Sung56 to impress me with the idea that treaty
obligations had not been repudiated by them and that
they were ready to accept those obligations as the point
for beginning negotiations for eliminating by mutual
consent the features they erroneously describe as
“unequal.” Further, Chen insisted upon Cantonese
political “realism” and admitted that they knew that
successful defiance of the powers could not be made by
them. I was very definitely impressed with the belief
that, whatever degree of sincerity attached to his
professions, the authorities at Canton feel a need now
that their relations should be friendly with the powers,
not excluding Great Britain.
(5) Chen stated quite frankly in adverting to his earlier
championship of a regional agreement that they had
been led by the improvement in their political prospects
recently to hope that they could achieve more than
regional 
recognition 
and 
to 
oppose 
any 
such
arrangement with other regions. In any case this altered
viewpoint apparently precludes the possibility of the
special arrangement suggested as an alternative in your

paragraph number (2). To me it seems that if we are not
to stand by and see the treaties torn up, we must make a
determined resistance to the proposed taxes. However,
the attempt might be worth while—and politic even if it
were unsuccessful—to persuade the Cantonese and
other factions to lay their differences aside to the extent
that they appoint representatives for the purpose of
discussing with representatives of foreign powers at
Peking whether it is possible to find a foundation for
such an agreement on tariff problems as would meet
with the approval of the various political groups in
China. A suggestion to this purpose might be made
informally and publicly simultaneously with the refusal
of the powers to accept the taxes proposed by the
Cantonese.”
Received September 30, at 6 p.m.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Before I received the Minister’s telegram of September 30 I had reached
exactly the conclusion at which he arrived. To me this appears as a final test
whether we shall stand by while treaties and all obligations and rights due
to the American Government and American citizens, if not in fact their
personal safety and their commercial interests, are disregarded and
jeopardized, according as the case may be, or whether we shall take action
preventing this, producing a change in the atmosphere and ceasing to be
longer in the defensive position into which the Chinese have cleverly
maneuvered us. The Canton situation presents, in my opinion, the best
opportunity for this promulgation that we have had or may hope to get. I am
completely in agreement with the Minister in believing that the Cantonese
are anxious to avoid contending with the foreign powers in a group and that
they are not in a military position to do so. Their campaign is now at a stage
that is critical. Should it become more successful, there will be an increase
in their political aspirations, with the result that probably they will look
forward more immediately to the powers’ recognition. On the other hand,

they will prove to be easier to treat with at Canton if they do not win in the
North.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4. In view of the facts, I cannot recommend too strongly that everything
possible be done by the Department to gain an agreement between the
United States and Great Britain and Japan to prevent, even by means of a
naval blockade or of some feasible measure of force similar to that, the
imposition of the new taxes. It is respectfully suggested to this end that
since the time is limited an exchange of views take place at once between
Washington and Tokyo and London with the object of giving instructions to
the respective missions at Peking to compose immediately a practical plan
for achieving the end desired. Seemingly, a way to do this is open to the
Department either in a reply to the note from the British Ambassador,
September 20, 1926,57 or alternatively, to use the opportunity afforded by
the fact that the only foreign consular representative at Canton to be
officially advised of the proposed taxes by the Cantonese is the British
consul general. Thus it would appear to be entirely appropriate to
interrogate the British Foreign Office on what attitude in this regard it plans
to take, offering at the same time a suggestion that common action by Great
Britain, the United States, and Japan is extremely advisable. If the
Department were so minded, in informing the British of our opinion that it
is expedient to oppose the new taxes, etc., it would appear to be desirable to
suggest that any communication sent to the Cantonese on this matter
should, in addition to making our decisive demand that treaty rights be
complied with and the taxes withdrawn, advert to the fact that for some
time the powers concerned have considered plans for placing in operation
the Washington Conference surtaxes or other increases in Chinese customs
duties that may be desirable—temporarily and provisionally in view of the
absence of a central government—in a manner advantageous to the people
of China and not disadvantageous to the ultimate political stability of
China, while safeguarding our treaty relations at the same time; in effect,
that we shall gladly undertake an informal discussion of this subject, with
the regime at Canton and with other Chinese regional authorities also, when
the Canton situation has been regularized again by means of the withdrawal
of the proposed new taxes which contravene the treaties.

5. In case the Japanese fail to act in accord with this plan for forcible, if
necessary, prevention of the taxes, I strongly advocate that we proceed on
the plan with the British alone. I have a feeling that the Italians and French
would cooperate on the project.
6. Telegram repeated to Tokyo by mail.
MAYER
51 This paragraph has not been paraphrased.
52 A. H. F. Edwardes.
53 Sir Francis Aglen, Inspector General of Chinese Maritime Customs.
54 Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 282 ff.
55 Minister of Foreign Affairs of the so-called Canton Government.
56 Sung Tsu-wen, also known as T. V. Soong, Minister of Finance of the so-
called Canton Government.
57 Apparently refers to British note of September 17, which was received
September 20, p. 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644].

893.512/403: Telegram
[Document 655]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, October 4, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received October 4—12:16 p.m.]
451. My telegram 449, October 2 [3], 7 p.m.
1. A telegram has been received by the Japanese Legation from its
Government to the general effect that it is in opposition to the
new taxes being imposed and believes that a conference of the
Washington Conference powers is advisable. How far the
Japanese desire to go in opposing the new taxes is not indicated.
2. The British Minister gave me a promise to apprise me of his
Government’s attitude when he was informed of it, but so far no
word has come from him. The cause of this may be … that he has
not received instructions.
3. Although in a forceful opposition to the new taxes proposed it
would be desirable to have France and Italy eventually participate
in any action at Canton, yet I greatly favor from a practical
standpoint a preliminary agreement among Japan, Great Britain,
and ourselves.
MAYER

893.512/402: Telegram
[Document 656]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, October 5, 1926—7 p.m.
217. Your 449, October 3, 7 p.m., and 451, October 4, 5 p.m. Proposed
taxes on imports and exports at Canton appear to have been mentioned only
to the British Consul General at Canton in connection with a proposal of the
Cantonese authorities for settlement of questions pending between Canton
and Hongkong (see your telegram No. 419, September 20, 5 p.m.58 ).
Unless proposal is broader than thus far made known the Department fails
to perceive necessity for Chinese Customs Administration collecting
proposed taxes or otherwise becoming involved except in connection with
memoranda to enable Cantonese tax collectors to use Customs valuations as
basis for tax (see Jenkins’ telegram of September 28, Noon to you59 ).
Department believes adoption of proposal that Customs Administration
collect taxes would only result in involving Administration, now collecting
treaty tariff, in a dispute between the Powers and China and in making of
the Chinese National Customs Administration a regional collecting agency
for taxes not covered by tariff treaties. With regard to suggestion of
MacMurray in Paragraph 3 of his telegram to you, September 30, 2 p.m.,60
and your suggestions contained in Paragraph 4 of your 449, Department
does not perceive the urgency of initiating discussions with Great Britain
and Japan looking to naval demonstrations or other forceful means of
preventing collection of taxes which have not yet been put into effect. You
should, however, authorize Jenkins in his discretion to bring to the attention
of the authorities at Canton the grave concern felt by this Government over
the report that new taxes are to be imposed on American goods in violation
of existing treaties between the United States and China. When and if the
new taxes are imposed on American trade Jenkins should protest to the
Canton authorities in accordance with the procedure which has been
followed in the past in connection with other taxes which have been
imposed from time to time in different parts of the country contrary to

American treaties with China. A similar protest should of course be made
by you at Peking.
KELLOGG
58 Ante, p. 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, and Doc. 601].
59 Not printed.
60 See telegram No. 449, Oct. 3, from the Chargé in China, p. 866 [Pg. 866
includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654].

893.512/404: Telegram
[Document 657]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 6, 1926—noon.
[Received October 6—12:18 p.m.]
456. My 449, October 2 [3], 7 p.m.
1. Following telegram dated October 5th has just been received
by Acting Inspector General of Customs from Commissioner of
Customs, Canton:
“Urgent. Mandate will be issued tomorrow as follows:
Temporary internal tax on consumption or production
of articles of trade between Liang-Kwang Provinces61
and other provinces in China and foreign countries to
come into effect 11th October or as near that date as
possible. Half usual Maritime Customs and native
customs tariff duties on general articles and full tariff
duty on articles of luxury, i. e., silk, toilet articles, fur
and leather, articles of decoration, gems and precious
stones, et cetera. Cigars, cigarettes, imported wine,
kerosene, gasoline, being already subject to special
taxes, are exempt from this tax. Minister of Finance will
collect ‘at or near respective Maritime Customs and
native customs barriers’. Minister for Foreign Affairs
writes me Minister of Finance would prefer if possible
to borrow rooms customhouse for use of a small staff to
carry on collection. I solicit instructions or any early
indication of policy and probable action.”
2. Acting Inspector General of Customs gave me a copy of this in
confidence preliminary to his reporting the matter to the Senior
Minister and the Peking Government for its information and

action. He asked me whether our Government would support the
Customs in the event that the Canton regime attempt to force it to
collect the taxes. I stated that I could not give him an answer but
would report the matter immediately to the Department.
3. Edwardes stated that he will probably direct Commissioner of
Customs at Canton not to associate himself with the new taxes in
any manner whatsoever. Whether this attitude is maintained
depends of course upon the decision of the powers concerned
either to oppose the new taxes by force if necessary or to
acquiesce in them.
4. It is obvious that these taxes whether collected through the
agency of the Customs or otherwise will constitute a direct
imposition on American traders of additional customs levies by
the unilateral act of the Cantonese authorities, being in effect the
nullification of fundamental treaty rights. This will be all the
more flagrant, in appearance at least, in the event that Customs
refuses to participate, since then the application of force by the
Cantonese directly against American firms seems necessarily
implied.
5. There will doubtless be a meeting of the Heads of Legations in
the immediate future. If possible I should greatly appreciate an
early indication of the line the Department would wish me to
follow.
MAYER
61 Kwangtung and Kwangsi Provinces.

893.512/440
[Document 658]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Chargé in China
(Mayer)62
CANTON, October 8, 1926.
No. 545
SIR: I have the honor to confirm my telegram of October 7, 10 a.m.,63
concerning the determination of the so-called Nationalist Government to
begin collection on October 11 of the new consumption and production
taxes and to enclose a copy of a note dated October 6 from the Acting
Minister of Foreign Affairs. It will be observed that the mandate quoted by
Mr. Eugene Chen refers to these taxes as temporary and provides that they
shall be applicable on such articles as are subject to trade between the
Liang-Kwang Provinces and other provinces in China and foreign
countries.
According to Mr. Chen, these taxes are to be collected by officers appointed
by the Ministry of Finance and are not to be considered in any sense as
Customs duties. Mr. Chen intimates, however, that if the maritime customs
service would lend its assistance possible friction and misunderstandings
might be avoided. It is understood that the Ministry of Finance
contemplates using so-called customs memos as a basis for levying these
taxes and if the Commissioner of Customs declines to permit the carrying
out of this plan, the Treasury Department’s appointees will probably
experience considerable difficulty in fixing values on merchandise coming
in and going out.
As already explained in reports from this Consulate General, Colonel
Hayley Bell, the Commissioner of Customs, is afraid that if the collection
of these new taxes is permitted to go unchallenged, other provinces will
soon follow suit and in the course of time, there will be no limit on these so-

called production and consumption imposts levied on merchandise passing
through the Customs. Colonel Bell fears also that the very existence of the
maritime customs service will be endangered. He is still hopeful that the
Powers concerned will either decide to prevent the Cantonese from levying
the taxes or will insist that the entire matter shall be administered through
the customs service.
According to the Canton Gazette, the cooperation of the maritime customs
desired is indicated in a letter addressed to the Commissioner of Customs
by the Chinese Superintendent of Customs who states that “further with
reference to the collection of the new consumption and production tax, I
wish to reply to your specific questions as follows:
“1. A tax will be levied basing on the Customs Tariff,
unless for any technical reason such would prove
unsatisfactory in which case an effective two and a half
per centum and five per centum will be charged for
general articles and luxuries respectively.
“2. The Ministry of Finance would prefer, if possible, to
borrow a room or rooms in the Customs Building for
the use of a small staff to carry on the collection of the
new taxes, which would facilitate the work of both the
Ministry and the Customs Administration.
“3. The tax will come into operation commencing
October 11th, 1926, or as near that date as possible.”
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS
[Enclosure]
The Chinese Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs at Canton (Chen) to the American Consul General
(Jenkins)
CANTON, October 6, 1926.

SIR: I have the honour to communicate to you the following translation of a
Mandate issued by my Government on October 4:
“1. The Ministry of Finance is hereby instructed to levy
a temporary internal tax on the consumption or the
production of such articles as are subject to trade
between the Liang–Kwang provinces and the other
Provinces in China and foreign countries.
“2. The rate of taxation shall be equivalent to half the
usual Maritime or Native Customs Tariff (as the case
may be) on general articles and to a full tariff on articles
of luxury, such as silk, silk stuff, toilet articles, fur and
leather, articles of decoration, gems and precious stones
and similar goods. Cigars, cigarettes, imported wines,
kerosene and gasoline which are the subject of other
special taxes are exempt from this tax.
“3. The Ministry of Finance, for purposes of
convenience, may collect such taxes at or near the
various Maritime and Native Customs barriers, and is
instructed to make detailed regulations governing the
collection of the said tax.
“4. Any person selling or buying or otherwise dealing
with articles on which the said tax has not been paid,
shall be liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding
three years and/or a fine equivalent to ten times the
value of the article or articles, which shall also be
confiscated.
“5. This Mandate shall come into effect on the 11th
October, 1926.”
It seems desirable to emphasize the fact that the new tax is, in principle, an
internal tax to be distinguished from the imposts levied as Customs duties
under the Chinese Maritime Customs system. There is of course no
intention to interfere with the latter as at present administered, though

possible misunderstanding and friction would be avoided if Maritime
Customs cooperation should be available in the collection of the new tax by
the fiscal authorities to be appointed by my Government.
I have [etc.]
CHEN YU JEN
62 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general as an enclosure
to his despatch No. 685, Oct. 8; received Nov. 9.
63 Not found in Department files.

893.512/407: Telegram
[Document 659]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 8, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received 9:30 p.m.]
462. Department’s 217, October 5, 7 p.m., my 456, October 6, noon, and
449, October 2 [3], 7 p.m.
1. At diplomatic body meeting[s] yesterday and today tax situation at
Canton was discussed from a point of view, first, of what if any action the
powers concerned should decide to take in reference thereto, and, second,
what reply could be made to the Acting Inspector General of Customs’
inquiry of the Senior Minister as to support the Customs could expect from
the powers should the Canton regime endeavor to force it to collect the new
taxes. The 2 days’ discussion revealed complete unanimity except for the
British Minister, whose position will be later discussed, in opposition to the
new taxes; but efforts to arrive at unanimous concurrence in method of
opposing them could not be achieved. It was realized finally that the two
questions were too vital and broad to be determined by the diplomatic
representatives at Peking and therefore it was agreed that each should place
them immediately before his Government with the request that a reply be
made to reach Peking on October 11th, if possible, when a further meeting
it was hoped could take place. In order to furnish respective Governments
with something concrete, a formula for joint protest was drafted as give 2.
In placing this matter before our Governments, each agree[s] to inform his
respective Foreign Office that it was our considered and unanimous opinion
that the powers had arrived at a parting of the ways; that they should clearly
realize that if Canton taxes were allowed to be carried into effect it meant
beginning of the end of our treaty rights in China since undoubtedly the
new taxation would be increased as to Canton and its action followed by the
other semiautonomous regimes. We all believed that we could not warn our
Governments too solemnly in this regard and that we should earnestly
solicit them to decide upon a means of preventing the success of the effort

of the Canton authorities to tear up the treaties with the alternative that
foreign persons and interests in China would be increasingly and inevitably
imperilled. It was further consensus of opinion among all the diplomatic
representatives, except for the Japanese Chargé d’Affaires, that the only
practical method of procedure in the above respect was to bring the Canton
regime up sharply with a determined protest to be backed by force if
necessary; that once the Cantonese realized the powers were in earnest there
would be the very least likelihood of the necessity of a resort to force. In
this connection I repeat a statement which the Senior Minister informed us
Wellington Koo made to him on October 6th, to wit, that if the powers
agreed to the new taxes at Canton he foresaw the early breakup of the
Customs Administration.
3. Herewith the draft formula mentioned above:
“In view of the intention of the Canton authorities to levy certain
taxes on foreign trade the diplomatic representatives in Peking of
the powers concerned declare that they cannot recognize the
legality of this proposed measure which is a direct violation of the
treaties and against which they protest most emphatically.
“The Powers concerned have repeatedly shown their willingness
to negotiate with China for an increase in her customs tariff.
Unfortunately their efforts to assist the Chinese Nation as a whole
in the spirit of the Washington Treaties and resolution[s] have
been frustrated by the present unhappy internal strife in China and
by the opposition of certain regional authorities to the Special
Tariff Conference.”
I see no particular advantage or disadvantage in the second paragraph of
this draft since it is simply a repetition ad nauseam of the expressions of
good will and kindly intentions which have accompanied practically every
statement the powers have made [concerning?] China within the past years,
having had no other effect if any than to give the Chinese reason to believe
that the powers are not prepared to defend their rights. If anything is joined
to a formal protest it seems to me preferable to add something of a
constructive character such as set forth in last sentence, paragraph 4, of my
449, October 2 [3], 7 p.m., and in paragraph 5 of MacMurray’s September

30, 2 p.m., repeated in my telegram just mentioned. However, I continue in
the belief that this should only be done if the powers are in earnest in a
protest and are prepared to follow it up to a logical conclusion. Any show of
weakness at this time, either through acquiescence to the Canton taxes or in
the wording of a protest they accept, will, in my opinion, be fatal to its
success as well as contributory to the unfortunate result which must follow
a failure to present [prevent] imposition of the new taxes at Canton.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6. I have today received a despatch from the American consul general at
Canton, dated September 29th, from which I make the following pertinent
quotations: “It is evident that the Cantonese authorities intend to levy these
taxes regardless of protests from the powers concerned. It is also equally
clear that once these taxes are applied they will be continued indefinitely,”
and “when questioned as to what would be done about the tax after the
strikers had been paid, Mr. Chen said that question had not yet been decided
but the taxes would probably be continued indefinitely if the Government
found it expedient and necessary to do so,” and “it would be a fatal mistake
in the opinion of the writer (Jenkins) merely to protest against the
institution of the taxes and then permit the Canton regime to proceed as
though the powers took no further interest in the matter. The so-called
Nationalist Government is now far stronger than it has ever been in the past
and the powers must find some means either to prevent Government[’s]
growing interference in our trade rights or to control and regularize its
activities in the interests of all concerned.” I entirely concur in this sound
presentation of the matter.
7. The Department’s instructions are solicited at the earliest moment
practicable.
8. American group representative Peking requests Department to inform
American group, New York, of full details of proposed taxation in regard to
which he is commenting by telegraph.
9. Commercial attaché requests his Department be informed.
10. Repeated to Tokyo by mail.

Mhaver

893.512/407: Telegram
[Document 660]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, October 13, 1926—noon.
225. Your 462, October 8, 8 p.m. did not reach the Department in time to
get a reply to you before meeting of Legations in Peking. Please wire me
result of the meeting and attitude of different governments as to the
collection of Canton taxes.
KELLOGG

893.512/411: Telegram
[Document 661]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 14, 1926—noon.
[Received October 14—6 a.m.]
477. Your 225, October 13, noon, just received.
1. Meeting did not take place on October 11th.
2. Senior Minister informs me that all diplomatic representatives
except those of Great Britain, Italy and the United States, have
received replies from their Governments assenting to the draft
protest set forth in paragraph 3 of my telegram aforementioned
with a minor amendment in phraseology of second paragraph of
protest proposed by the Japanese Government which makes the
last sentence read after “resolutions” as follows: “Have so far
failed to succeed on account of the unhappy internal situation
existing in China which has been complicated by the opposition
of certain regional authorities to the Special Tariff Conference.”
MAYER

893.512/412: Telegram
[Document 662]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 14, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received October 14—5:50 a.m.]
478. My 469, October 12, 11 a.m.64 Following from American consul
general, Canton:
“October 13, 3 p.m. Referring to my telegram of October 11,
noon.64 New taxes are now being collected on imports and
exports. All China [Chinese] and some foreigners are paying, but
other foreigners are asking their consuls for instructions.
“Canton foreign Chambers [of] Commerce have written consular
corps recommending that new taxes be collected through the
Maritime Customs or on values fixed by Customs.”
MAYER
64 Not printed.
64 Not printed.

893.512/410: Telegram
[Document 663]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 14, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received October 14—6:05 a.m.]
479. 1. In connection with first sentence, paragraph 2, of Legation’s 462,
October 8, 8 p.m., I report that Shantung provincial government has
instituted a so-called “goods tax” of 2 percent ad valorem on all
merchandise, foreign and Chinese, arriving or shipped into Shantung
Province. The American consuls at Tsingtau and Tsinan have protested
locally, and I have taken similar action with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The Standard Oil Company has just lodged a protest against this new tax
with the Legation.
2. Japanese and British consuls at Tsingtau have also protested locally
against tax.
MAYER

893.512/416: Telegram
[Document 664]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 15, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received October 15—6:38 a.m.]
483. My 479, October 14, 3 p.m.
1. The Senior Minister has received and is circulating among the
diplomatic representatives concerned a letter dated October 11th
from the Senior Consul at Tsingtau (Japanese consul) stating that
the consular body there has protested against the 2 percent so-
called “goods tax” in Shantung including the area of Tsingtau and
asking that the diplomatic representatives concerned take
immediate effective steps to bring an end to these illegal practices
of the Chinese authorities. The Senior Minister’s circular
concludes with the statement that before taking any steps in this
matter he purposes to await decision of Heads of Legation with
regard to illegal taxation at Canton.
2. An English translation of the regulations governing the goods
tax which accompanied Senior Consul’s communication to Senior
Minister defines extent of tax as follows: “All goods exported
from or destined for this Province will be required to pay goods
tax as provided by these regulations.”
MAYER

893.512/411: Telegram
[Document 665]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, October 15, 1926—3 p.m.
231. Your telegrams 462, October 8, 8 p.m. and 477, October 14, Noon.
Department considered that its instructions No. 217, October 5, 7 p.m.
sufficiently covered the matter to enable you to join your colleagues in
protest outlined in paragraph 3 of your urgent telegram 462, October 8, 8
p.m. No objection to wording of protest as amended is perceived by
Department.
KELLOGG

893.512/417: Telegram
[Document 666]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 16, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received October 16—9 a.m.]
485. Department’s 231, October 15, 3 p.m.
1. Following from American consul general at Cantoitem:
“October 14, 4 p.m. Referring to my telegrams of October 10, 10
a.m.65 and October 13, 3 p.m.66 [Paraphrase.] I am told by the
French and British consuls that no action will be taken by them in
regard to the new taxes until they are instructed further by their
respective Governments. They inform me also that a joint protest
is now being considered by the diplomatic body. If this is correct,
I am hesitant about filing the protest. I shall wait, therefore, for
further instructions before I act. In my opinion we ought to use
care to avoid letting ourselves be maneuvered into such a position
as will make us appear to lead the opposition to the taxation
policies of the Kuomintang while France and England are
acquiescing to them.” [End paraphrase.]
2. I am notifying Senior Minister of assent to the draft protest outlined in
paragraph 3 of my 462, October 8, 8 p.m., as amended by Japanese
Government (see my 477, October 14, noon, paragraph 9 [2]). Should
unanimous consent not having [have] been obtained by October 20, I shall
direct American consul general, Canton, unless instructed to the contrary, to
file protest as authorized in Department’s 217, October 5, 7 p.m.
MAYER
65 Not printed.

66 See telegram No. 478, Oct. 14, from the Chargé in China, p. 878 [Pg. 878
includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664].

893.512/416: Telegram
[Document 667]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, October 16, 1926—2 p.m.
233. Your 479, October 14, 3 p.m., 483 October 15, 1 p.m. Department
approves action taken as stated in your 479, paragraph 1.
KELLOGG

893.512/417: Telegram
[Document 668]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, October 16, 1926—4 p.m.
234. Your 485, October 16, 1 p.m. Action proposed by you has approval of
Department which is of the opinion that the record should be clear on the
subject of taxes such as those proposed at Canton and in Shantung.
KELLOGG

893.512/449
[Document 669]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Chargé in China
(Mayer)67
CANTON, October 16, 1926.
No. 552
SIR: I have the honor to refer to this Consulate General’s despatch No. 545
of October 8, 1926, concerning the imposition of certain so-called
production and consumption taxes, and to enclose a translation of an
additional despatch on the same subject dated October 11, 1926.
This despatch refers to the previous communication of October 6, but goes
somewhat further in that it purports to quote a communication from the
Ministry of Finance in which it is requested that the consuls of the various
Powers be notified in order that foreign merchants should be directed to
comply with the new regulations. This seems to settle any doubt that might
have been entertained as to whether or not these taxes would be applicable
to foreigners.
The regulations referred to in the second despatch are identical with those
already forwarded to the Legation with the exception that they contain an
additional article providing for amendments in future if necessary.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS
[Enclosure]
The Chinese Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs at Canton (Chen) to the American Consul General
(Jenkins)

[CANTON,] October 11, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to inform you that I have received a communication
from the Ministry of Finance reading as follows:
“An instruction has been received from the Nationalist
Government to the effect that inasmuch as regulations governing
the levy of internal taxes on the production and consumption of
goods have been prescribed and publicly announced as on record,
the Minister of Finance, to whom a copy of such regulations is
sent, is hereby directed to have them carried out accordingly.
Acting upon the above instruction, in addition to instructing the
Customs Administration to immediately establish offices to
collect such taxes, and to notify the business community to obey,
I have the honor to transmit a copy of these regulations with the
request that the Consuls of the various Powers be promptly
notified in order that foreign merchants be directed to comply
therewith.”
It appears that a communication relative to the levy of these new taxes has
already been forwarded to you as on record. Since the receipt of the above,
in addition to writing separately to the Consuls of the other Powers, I have
the honor to send this for your information and to request that you will be
good enough to direct all American merchants to comply therewith.
I have [etc.]
CHEN YU JEN
67 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general in his despatch
No. 695, Oct. 16; received Nov. 22.

893.512/418: Telegram
[Document 670]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 18, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received October 18—9:05 a.m.]
490. Your 234, October 16, 4 p.m.
1. Following from American consul general, Cantoitem:
“October 17, 10 a.m. Chen tells me Canton regime wishes to
follow as near as possible Tariff Conference in fixing schedules of
new taxes and has asked me unofficially to obtain list of luxuries
tentatively agreed upon by the [omission] also minutes of the
Conference, if and when available. Please reply by telegraph.”
2. Consonant with the Department’s desire to keep the record clear by
protesting either independently or jointly with the other powers concerned
as the case may be against the new taxation at Canton, I request
authorization to instruct Jenkins to refuse Chen’s request.
MAYER

893.512/418: Telegram
[Document 671]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, October 19, 1926—3 p.m.
235. Your 490, October 18, 6 p.m. Paragraph 2. Your recommendation
approved.
KELLOGG

893.512/420: Telegram
[Document 672]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 20, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received October 20—6:16 a.m.]
494. My 490, October 18, 6 p.m.
1. Following is résumé of telegrams recently received by the
Acting Inspector General of Customs from Commissioner of
Customs at Canton.
2. Tax collection not yet in full swing, 100 men being trained at
the tax office for service at other ports. Superintendent of
Customs (a Chinese) is appointing men to Customs Bank and
others to attend daily to collect information at harbor department
in connection with collection of tax. Increased intrusion into
Customs must be looked for with inevitable weakening of its
position. As time goes by and confidence gained, likelihood of
Customs being required to collect will lessen. Valuable
opportunity appears to be passing. No prospect of serious foreign
protest against taxes. Shipping firms now to send import
manifests to collecting office.
MAYER

893.512/421: Telegram
[Document 673]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 20, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received October 20—4:25 a.m.]
495. Your 234, October 16, 4 p.m. I am deferring action contemplated in
third paragraph my 485, October 16, 1 p.m., in view of diplomatic body
meeting called for this morning further to discuss Canton tax situation in
particular relation to certain instructions from his Government which the
British Minister, I understand, intends then to bring to our attention.
MAYER

893.512/422: Telegram
[Document 674]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 20, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received October 21—9 a.m.]
497. [Paraphrase.] My 495, October 20, and other pertinent telegrams.
1. The British Minister stated at the diplomatic body’s meeting this morning
that his Government has instructed him to have further discussion of the tax
situation with his colleagues. He inquired if he might for this purpose ask in
a preliminary way certain questions bearing upon the proposal of a joint
protest.
First, was it the belief of his colleagues that the Cantonese would comply
with this protest? The unanimous opinion of the meeting was that unless the
Cantonese believed that there was a determination on the part of the powers
concerned to follow it up if necessary with force, the protest would be
disregarded. The next inquiry of the British Minister was whether it was our
opinion that our Governments were prepared to use force to follow up the
protest. The general belief was that they were not. Then the British Minister
affirmed that he questioned whether in these circumstances it was expedient
or advisable to protest at all, for the reasons that such action would not be
likely to be effective or dignified, and that probably it would result only in
weakening the position held by the Customs, who would not be willing in
the face of a protest by the powers, even a technical protest, to assume the
collection of the new taxes. Meanwhile the Cantonese would be forming, in
complete disregard of the Customs, their own bureaus for tax collection.
2. There was then considerable discussion as to some way to strike a
balance as between the question of the principle of recording a protest
against the illegal action of the regime at Canton and the question of fact:
the preservation of the Customs. At last Macleay brought up the possible
feasibility of a démarche which would simultaneously meet the requirement

of recording a protest and be constructive in hinting to the Cantonese that if
they gave suitable guarantees that there would be no further increase of
illegal taxation and if the collection of the new taxes were placed in the
hands of the Customs, etc., there would be a willingness on the part of the
powers to make an agreement in some form with the regime in Canton in
order to regularize the situation. Much discussion of this ensued. It seemed
to be the general opinion that the implications of such action would be very
far reaching but that nevertheless it was constructive, at least theoretically,
and took account of the real movement of events in China in the direction
of regional arrangements. Recognition was given to the fact that at this time
whatever we could do could be only a device for “saving face”, inasmuch
as the powers concerned were unwilling to undertake the adoption of a
resolute policy: the only practical means to check treaty violation. The
belief was rather generally held that in these circumstances perhaps some
such suggestion as was offered by Macleay was the best course to take.
Accordingly, it was agreed that a draft formula should be sent to the
respective Governments for approval or rejection. The first two paragraphs
follow: [End paraphrase.]
“In view of the levying by the Canton and other authorities in
China of certain taxes on foreign trade,68 the diplomatic
representatives in Peking of the powers concerned declare that
they cannot recognize the legality of these measures which are in
direct violation of the treaties.
In any case they cannot acquiesce in the collection of taxes on
foreign trade which is not effectuated by the Chinese Maritime
Customs and not regularized by agreement.”
The third and last paragraph being the same as the second in the original
draft. (See paragraph 3 of my 462, October 8, 8 p.m.) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5. [Paraphrase.] As to whether it is advisable for us to agree to the British
proposal, I frankly believe that it makes no particular difference what action
we take regarding the new taxation or in China in general by way of trying
to safeguard our citizens’ rights under the treaties, unless a realization is
brought home to the Chinese that there is a purpose to employ force to

protect these rights if necessary. I consider that without this any regional or
other arrangements we may make or any protest we may present will only
be respected so far as is desired by the Chinese who are the particular
authorities at the time.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7. I am rather inclined, in the premises and in view especially of the opinion
I hold and the consul general at Canton holds that it would be most
inadvisable to make an empty protest, to favor the British proposal as being
the alternative least undesirable. [End paraphrase.]
8. The modus operandi proposed to put the new draft protest into effect is to
send separate protests to Peking, Canton, and Tsinan (to cover the Shantung
tax situation, for which see my 483 October 15, 1 p.m.). In the two last-
mentioned instances through the senior consul which would mean deleting
“and other” and “in China” from the first paragraph of the draft in the case
of Canton and similarly in the case of Shantung substituting likewise in the
last instance “Shantung” for “Canton”.
9. As early instructions as possible are respectfully requested.
10. To Tokyo by mail.
MAYER
68 The files of the Department contain correspondence concerning
representations and protests against the imposition of illegal taxes during
previous months of 1926 presented to Chinese authorities, with the approval
of the Minister in China, by American consular officers at Kalgan, Tsingtao,
Tsinan, Harbin, Chungking, Hankow, Foochow, and Changsha.

893.512/422: Telegram
[Document 675]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 22, 1926—4 p.m.
240. Your number 497, October 20, 7 p.m. Department believes that
whatever the attitude of the Cantonese authorities the record on the matter
of irregularly established taxes should be kept clear by filing with the
proper authorities a protest against the imposition of taxes on American
goods in contravention of arrangements provided by treaties between the
United States and China. Filing such a protest does not necessarily carry an
implication that it is the intention of the Government of the United States to
seek by means of force to obtain its treaty rights. Failure to file a protest
may be interpreted as being an acquiescence in a situation patently contrary
to treaty rights. The feeling of the Department is that it is necessary that the
record of this Government should be clear on this question when the time
arrives to negotiate with the Government of China for revision of its treaty
provisions relating to tariffs. A protest of this kind cannot be considered to
be undignified, and the Department fails to understand how the position of
the Customs Administration would be undermined by it. The Customs
Administration should not necessarily become involved in any case in the
question of collecting these taxes. As to the form of protest, the Department
is willing to accept the form suggested in your 462 of October 8th, 8 p.m.,
and your 477 of October 14th, noon. The Department prefers that draft
formula rather than the one given in your 497, paragraph 2.
 
For the policy of the Department as to suggested regional arrangements you
are directed to the Department’s 226 of October 13, 2 p.m.70

In case the diplomatic body cannot agree as to the method of protest, you
are instructed to make the protest alone on behalf of this Government. From
your 479, October 14, 3 p.m., it is the understanding of the Department that
you have already filed a protest against taxes in Shantung with the Chinese
Foreign Office. No need for additional action in this connection is
perceived.
KELLOGG
70 Not printed; it transmitted the Department’s memorandum of Oct. 5 to
the British Embassy, p. 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc.
646].

893.512/423: Telegram
[Document 676]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 23, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received October 23—9:45 a.m.]
507. Department’s 240, October 22nd. In expressing preference for draft
formula set forth in my 462, October 8th and 477, October 14th, am I to
understand that Department is unwilling to join in draft formula presented
in paragraph 2 of my 497, October 20th?
MAYER

893.512/423: Telegram
[Document 677]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, October 23, 1926—5 p.m.
243. Your 507, October 23, 7 p.m. You will be correct in assuming that
Department is unwilling to join in draft formula presented in paragraph 2 of
your 497, October 20.
KELLOGG

893.512/424: Telegram
[Document 678]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 25, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received October 25—8 a.m.]
510. My 497, October 20, 7 p.m.
1. Following from American consul, Swatow.
“October 22, noon. My telegram of October 21, noon.71 Local
authorities now propose to extend the surtax on all imports and
exports amounting to one-half the customs duties already being
applied in Canton to Swatow. Regulations are apparently identical
with those in force in Canton. The Legation’s instructions as to
what action, if any, should be taken are requested.”
 
2. In event of institution of proposed new taxes at Swatow I assume
Department desires action there similar to that it will instruct me to take
respecting Canton, that is, to endeavor to have Swatow situation covered by
any joint protest in regard to Canton taxes which may be decided upon by
the powers concerned or otherwise by independent protest to Canton and
Peking regimes, Swatow being under Canton authorities.
MAYER
71 Not found in Department files.

893.512/425: Telegram
[Document 679]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 25, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received October 25—2:45 a.m.]
511. My 497, October 20, 7 p.m.
1. Following from American consul general at Cantoitem:
“October 21, 1 p.m. Referring to my telegram of October 13, 3
p.m.72 In connection with the collection of new taxes Canton
regime has promulgated regulations for the examination of
passengers on incoming and outgoing steamers and trains
including passports and effects. This work is to be done by so-
called Bureau for Detection of Smuggling, the personnel of which
will consist of many former strike pickets who will have the right
to make arrests including foreigners.
[Paraphrase.] This is what I feared. It shows a necessity for the
powers to determine very quickly whether to insist that the new
taxes be collected through the Customs or whether to oppose by
force. My opinion is that the consuls should immediately be given
authorization to make vigorous protest against any interference
with the documents, effects and persons of foreigners. Despatch
will follow.” [End paraphrase.]
2. Instructions respectfully requested.
MAYER
72 See telegram No. 478, Oct. 14, from the Chargé in China, p. 878 [Pg. 878
includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664].

893.512/424: Telegram
[Document 680]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, October 25, 1926—6 p.m.
245. Your 510, October 25, 9 a.m. Department assumes that protest against
taxes instituted by Canton authorities at Peking and at Canton will of course
cover situation at Swatow which it is understood is within the zone
mentioned in the mandate of the Canton authorities instituting the tax.
KELLOGG

893.512/426: Telegram
[Document 681]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 26, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received October 26—11:58 a.m.]
513. My 511, October 25, 10 a.m.
1. Following telegram has just been received by the Acting Inspector
General of Customs from the Commissioner of Customs, Cantoitem:
“The Finance Minister has notified me through superintendent
that specially organized ‘inspection companies’ have been
appointed to examine incoming and outgoing steamers, trains,
passengers, luggage and cargo. Stations are established on city
bund, at Honam, river mouth forts, Taishan and Shunchuanan
[Shumchun]. Inspection companies are under control of
Smuggling Suppression and Merchant Protection Bureau, aim of
[which?] is to maintain revenue and prevent illegal actions. I
regard occasion as calling for positive and uncompromising reply
and action, and I am warning Government that such intrusion into
Customs field of responsibility will not be tolerated until full
instructions received from Peking. I am requesting superintendent
to refrain from any overt act in the boarding of steamers, Chinese
or foreign, or interference with cargo, any case of which I will
deal with as circumstances require. Submit that very existence of
Maritime Customs is threatened by this and like calculated
methods of infiltration. I am meeting consular body today.”
[Paraphrase]
2. The British Minister, Sir Ronald Macleay, has just conferred with me. He
feels sharply the increase of danger to the integrity of the Administration of
the Customs through this further action on the part of the Cantonese, and

wished to telegraph immediately to his consul at Canton to inform the
Cantonese authorities that the British Government would give its
acquiescence to the new taxation, provided it was completely placed under
the supervision of the Customs Administration. He inquired whether I was
prepared to take similar measures. I replied to him in the negative,
explaining that my Government’s policy was to protest for purposes [of
record?], and was apparently not favorable to having the new taxes
collected by the Customs, which it was believed were not involved in this
matter in any way. The Minister then asked whether I believed my
Government would be inclined, considering the Washington Conference
agreements, etc., toward taking exception if he acted independently in the
way he desired. My reply was that his question was somewhat difficult to
answer but that I rather was of the opinion that such a feeling would be held
by my Government. Sir Ronald declared he would not act independently in
these circumstances, at least before presenting the whole matter to his
Government. He said he would at once do the latter by telegraph and
suggest in a most urgent manner to the Foreign Office that there be an
exchange of views immediately among the British, American, and Japanese
Governments. In his opinion, and I consider rightly, this latest Cantonese
move to inspect personal outgoing and incoming luggage, cargo, etc.,
makes even harder the collection of the customs and brings the whole
Canton situation before us in such a way that at the earliest possible time it
must be effectively dealt with. In accordance with the earnest
recommendation made in paragraph 4 of my number 449 of October 2 [3], I
support the British Minister’s suggestion that there be an immediate
exchange of views among the three aforesaid powers for the purpose of
reaching some common decision upon what action should be taken in the
premises.
3. Parenthetically, I ought to add with reference to Department’s telegrams
240 of October 22 and 243 of October 23 and to my number 507 of October
23, that although the Government of Japan agreed quite unexpectedly to the
new draft of the protest, agreement was not given by the British
Government which, I understand, preferred to make no categorical protest
against the new taxation out of fear that such protest would work against
their desire to safeguard the Customs by every possible means. It was the
belief of the British Government that acquiescence in the new taxes and

effort to persuade the regime in Canton to have them collected by the
Customs were rendered necessary by that desire.
4. Most respectfully I record my judgment that if the powers concerned
should not oppose the disregard of and encroachment upon the functions of
the Customs through the imposition of the new taxes, and the extension of
those taxes (shown in the new regulations, which are defined above and
which were described in my 511 of October 25), the integrity of the
Customs is undermined most seriously if not conclusively.
5. Although we do not have in the maintenance of the Customs the same
intrinsic interest the British have, it seems to me that we have a very real
reason for standing against the collection of the Customs by unlawful action
on the part of the Cantonese and on the part of other authorities in China.
My view is that by the fall of the Customs a further and most spectacular
signal would be given for an even more comprehensive and vigorous drive
against the rights and interests of foreigners in China, which inevitably and
directly must tend to produce increased loss of respect for foreigners,
thereby putting in greater jeopardy their lives as well as their property.
MAYER

893.512/425: Telegram
[Document 682]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 27, 1926—3 p.m.
249. Your number 511 of October 25, 10 a.m. When filing protest regarding
the new taxes authorized in Department’s telegram 240 of October 22, 4
p.m., protest may be included against the new regulations for examination
of passengers to the extent that they are related to collecting the new taxes.
In opinion of the Department, no objection can be raised against those parts
of the regulations which relate to passport examination, provided they are
reasonable.
KELLOGG

893.512/427: Telegram
[Document 683]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, October 28, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received October 28—8:50 a.m.]
516. Referring to last sentence of Department’s 249 of October 27.
1. I venture to invite renewed attention to Mr. Jenkins’ telegram
October 21, 1 p.m., paragraph 1, repeated to you in my number
511 of October 25. This clearly shows that passport examination
by so-called Bureau for Detection of Smuggling has been directly
and simultaneously instituted in connection with collecting the
new taxes. A difference should be noted between this examination
and the normal and substantial case of inspection of passports by
Chinese officials in the interior or by the Maritime Customs.
Examination of passports by this bureau and other acts to take
place by virtue alone of the imposing of the new taxes are, it
would seem, not susceptible of discrimination, all being
concerned, jointly and immediately, with the success of their
collection. Thus, while passport examination is merely nominal
here, in this instance it is like any other act to be performed
regarding the new taxes by the Cantonese. Therefore it would
appear that an attempt to except the regulations for passport
examination from a protest against the regulations would be both
technically incorrect and practically unwise, because in the
former regard not the slightest attention will be paid to so fine a
distinction by any foreigner or Chinese, especially the strike
pickets to whom is entrusted the enforcement of the regulations.
In that situation I apprehend that we will be considered
substantially to have acquiesced in the examination regulations in
case any part of them is omitted from our protest.

2. I request respectfully that Department’s 249 be reconsidered in
the sense of the above comment.
MAYER

893.512/428: Telegram
[Document 684]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, October 28, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received October 28—2:15 p.m.]
518. My 516 of October 28.
1. Following received from American consul, Canton, Stevens in charge,
Jenkins having left for Hongkong October 22 on 7 days’ leavitem:
“October 26, 10 a.m. Jenkins’ telegram October 21, 1 p.m.73 The
newly organized corps for the prevention and detection of
smuggling is not functioning yet. I am informed by Chen that this
corps will begin soon to board foreign vessels entering Canton for
inspection of all passengers and baggage, foreigners to be subject
to detention if they are suspected and do not have proper
passports. This is considered by Commissioner of Customs as a
flagrant disregard of the functions of the Maritime Customs. Am
informed by British, Japanese, and French consuls that they are
prepared to make resistance to boarding or interference with
passengers and goods by Chinese on their respective vessels.
While British consul general declares he will protest, he admits
that keeping British docks at Canton clear of searchers may prove
embarrassing.
Regulations have been published by the Finance Department for
collection of a military surtax of 20 percent on all steamship
passenger tickets, the levy to be on the basis of the regulations
which govern the collecting of likin and other taxes. Registration
with and obtaining of permits from the collector’s office are
required from firms and persons offering steamship tickets for

sale. I am informed by Chen that the tax on steamship tickets will
not apply to American steamers.
Chen gives assurances of order at huge demonstration planned for
today to protest the Wanhsien incident.”
2. Please instruct as to attitude our consular and naval authorities in Canton
are to adopt concerning boarding of any vessels entering Canton and
interference with passengers and goods.
3. Please refer in this connection to Legation’s number 69 of February 10,74
and correspondence pertinent thereto. In the present instance our right to
trade in China would seem as in the case discussed in that telegram to be
equally [at issue?], since the Canton regulations concerning visit and search
would clearly appear to envisage direct prevention of the landing of
American goods and passengers—an interference more dangerous and
flagrant even than that in last February—by force where compliance with
the illegal tax regulations is not given.
MAYER
73 See telegram No. 511, Oct. 25, from the Chargé in China, p. 887 [Pg. 887
includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680].
74 Ante, p. 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581].

893.512/429: Telegram
[Document 685]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 29, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received October 29—1:03 a.m.]
519. Following from American consul general, Canton:
“October 28, 1 p.m. Guise of preventing traffic in opium, Chen
announces the establishment by the Ministry of Finance of
inspection stations at Dosing and Hotow, West River, at which all
passing steamers of every nationality are required to stop and
undergo inspection. Portuguese consul favors joint protest
immediately, but the other interested consuls prefer first
consulting their respective Legations. Despatch will be
forwarded.”
MAYER

893.512/430: Telegram
[Document 686]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, October 29, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received October 29—9:45 a.m.]
520. Department’s telegram number 243, October 23, 5 p.m.
1. All representatives at meeting of diplomatic body this morning
agreed to recommend a third formula to their respective
Governments. This would amend the second formula, which was
transmitted in second paragraph of my telegram to Department,
number 497, October 20, 7 p.m., by leaving out middle
paragraph. If agreeable, this statement is to be sent to Chen by
senior consul at Canton acting in behalf of his colleagues as being
their joint action. It is to be sent similarly here to the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs by the Senior Minister. It is understood an
individual protest might be lodged by each Government
concerned, at Canton through its consul there, and at Peking as
well, if desired.
2. The objection of the Department to any action tending toward
regional arrangements is obviated by this amendment. It is
thought that the British Government may find this third formula
satisfactory since the specific word “protest” is not employed,
though the formula is a protest in substance. This seems the best
chance for unity of action in protesting against the treaty
violation, and the last chance.
3. The British Minister, in conformity with his proposal to me as
described in my 513, October 26, second paragraph, suggested at
the meeting this morning that his colleagues agree to try as a

body, or as individuals, to persuade the regime at Canton to put
under the Customs all of the collection of the new taxes, which
should then be followed by the issuance of a statement
safeguarding our treaty rights. This was rejected unanimously,
though the proposal was presented as representing the action the
British Government desired.
4. I respectfully request instructions as soon as possible.
MAYER

893.512/432: Telegram
[Document 687]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 30, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received October 30—10:12 a.m.]
520 bis. [Paraphrase.] Legation’s 518, October 28.
1. I transmit following from American consul at Cantoitem:
“October 28th, noon. At a meeting of consular body held
yesterday the consuls of Great Britain, Japan, France and other
powers were in favor of making a vigorous joint protest
immediately against regulations providing for organization of the
new examining corps. I made a suggestion that such an emphatic
protest be deferred until the corps had begun to function and
infringements of treaty stipulations had taken place. The draft
suggested by the British demands cancelation at once of the order
organizing the corps and it contains additional particulars which
the Chinese are not likely to yield or the Legation to accede to. Is
the Legation willing that I immediately protest jointly or alone
against the functioning of any Cantonese-sanctioned examining
corps likely to function in defiance of rights embodied in
treaties?”
I repeat in this regard my communication to Canton, October 29th, 11 a.m.:
[End paraphrase.]
“My October 28, 5 p.m.75 Pending receipt of instructions from the
Department you may join with your colleagues concerned in any
joint protest they may desire to make to the Cantonese authorities
against the visit and search regulations.”

2. Following telegram, dated October 29, sent by Commissioner of Customs
at Canton to Inspectorate General heritem:
“Your telegram of 26th October. Impracticable gain time as
instructed because boarding of shipping already begun.
Superintendent denied that he has any control over inspection
companies and states that preventative bureau comes under
Finance but not under Shuiwuchu.76 Consular body likely to do
nothing some days owing to absence American consul general. I
have now informed Government, informally, that if present
proposal persisted in I am issuing following notification to the
public: Agents and masters of all merchant vessels, Chinese or
foreign, arriving at or leaving port of Canton are given notice that
information regarding ship or cargo and facilities for examination
of cargo can be extended only to the properly authorized officials
of Chinese Maritime Customs. Any person making such inquiry
on board vessels, Chinese or foreign, is to be directed to the
Commissioner of Customs.”
MAYER
75 Not printed.
76 Customs Revenue Council.

893.512/433: Telegram
[Document 688]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 30, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received October 31—2:15 a.m.]
521. My 520, October 30, 2 p.m., paragraph 1.
[1.] Following from American consul general, Canton:
“October 30, 1 p.m. Your October 29, 11 a.m.77 I have concurred
in the protest against the inspection regulations which the senior
[apparent omission] will now hand to Chen.”
2. Jenkins resumed charge on the 30th.
MAYER
77 See telegram No. 520 bis., Oct. 30, from the Chargé, p. 893 [Pg. 893 includes
portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687].

893.512/434: Telegram
[Document 689]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 1, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received November 1—9:10 a.m.]
523. [Paraphrase.] I transmit telegram from American consul general,
Canton, received after much delay. It appears to antedate October 29
telegram77 (my 519 of same date) sent to Inspectorate General by
Commissioner of Customs, Canton, reporting regulations for visit and
search to be in effect.
“October 29, 1 p.m. Your October 28, 4 p.m.
1. Verbal definition of word ‘suspected’ given by Chen
is that it means persons under suspicion of smuggling
prohibited articles, of being enemies of his Government
(for illustration, persons employed by their Northern
enemies and certain White Russians), or of committing
all manner of actions that are unlawful. He gives verbal
confirmation that the corps is not organized or in
operation as yet. He says that the corps’ organization is
intended to meet pressing military necessity and that its
functioning will last only through the period of war and
in no event will interfere with the Maritime Customs.
[End paraphrase.]
[2.] Referring to paragraph 5 of the regulations sent
with Jenkins’ despatch number 557, October 21.78 Chen
now states that this paragraph will not be enforced
against foreigners enjoying extraterritoriality further
than to arrest and turn them over to their respective
consuls for examination and punishment as charged.
Chen is preparing a circular letter in explanation of the

orders to the corps which will be telegraphed to the
Legation when received.”
MAYER
77 See telegram No. 520 bis., Oct. 30, from the Chargé, p. 893 [Pg. 893 includes
portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687].
78 Not printed.

893.512/428: Telegram
[Document 690]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, November 1, 1926—1 p.m.
255. Your telegrams numbers 516 of October 28, 3 p.m., and 518 of
October 28, 8 p.m., and your numbers 519 of October 29, 11 a.m., and 520
of October 29, 4 p.m.
Wording of proposed joint protest as given in your number 520, October 29,
4 p.m., is approved. If this formula is not accepted by other Legations you
should file the protest alone at Peking and at Canton (through consulate
general) without more delay, as the Department authorized in its 217 of
October 5, 7 p.m., so that we may be free to give consideration to what
steps may further be necessary.
A statement should be included by the consulate general at Canton in its
protest that this Government cannot consent to have vessels of United
States registry entering Chinese waters visited and searched by any officers
except those who are acting in fulfillment of the provisions set forth in
treaties made between China and the United States. Consult treaty of 1858,
articles 18 and 20.79
In connection with this the Department requests you to report the names of
the American vessels, with owners and frequency of trips made each quarter
or year, calling at Canton and Whampoa and also inform commander in
chief of the Asiatic Fleet of the United States. Consult with latter for
purpose of making any arrangements which bona fide American-owned
shipping desires in order to give them protection against promiscuous visit
and search except by representatives of the Chinese Maritime Customs who
are duly accredited.

 
Referring to your number 516, October 28, 3 p.m., the protest which the
Department in its number 249 of October 27, 3 p.m., authorized to be made
against the regulations for passenger examination need not refer to the
specific question of passports. But citizens of the United States who travel
in China should not be allowed to lose sight of the fact that while they are
in China, they are required under treaties between China and the Powers to
possess valid passports which should be presented by them upon demand of
local authorities.
KELLOGG
79 Malloy, Treaties, 1776–1909, vol. I, pp. 211, 217, 218.

893.512/437: Telegram
[Document 691]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 3, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received November 3—11:25 a.m.]
527. Department’s 255, November 1, 1 p.m.
1. At the meeting Heads of Legation this morning British Minister
stated his Government could agree to the third formula (see my
519 [520], October 29, 4 p.m.) omitting the last paragraph which
in effect left only the first paragraph of the original formula as set
forth in paragraph 3 of my 462, October 8, 8 p.m. The British
Minister was unable to offer any explanation of his Government’s
attitude in this regard. As all other diplomatic representatives
agreed to this amendment, the paragraph in question being in no
way vital since the matter of first importance appeared to be to
lodge some form of joint protest against the new taxes as soon as
possible, I concurred in the unanimous decision. The Senior
Minister is now communicating the protest both to the Canton
authorities through the senior consul there and to the Wai Chiao
Pu at Peking.
2. Despite my suggestion in conformity with the last sentence of
the Department’s 240, October 22, 4 p.m., that we had already in
effect protested against the Shantung taxes through the consular
body at Tsingtau, all the other representatives were desirous of
sending this same paragraph to the Shantung authorities through
the senior consul at Tsinanfu and through the Senior Minister and
to the Wai Chiao Pu in respect of Shantung. As such action could
do no harm I concurred therein in order to prevent further delay in
the Canton protest which my colleagues desired should be
transmitted simultaneously with that regarding Shantung. I trust
the Department approves my action.

3. In accordance with procedure outlined in paragraph 1 of my
519 [520], October 29, 4 p.m., I am instructing American consul
general at Canton to make individual protest in the sense of the
antepenultimate and penultimate sentences of Department’s 217,
October 5, 7 p.m., and second paragraph Department’s 255,
November 1, 1 p.m. All diplomatic representatives I believe, even
including British, are making individual protest in one form or
another.
4. The same slight alteration in phraseology to provide for the
particular circumstances will be employed in the Peking, Canton,
and Tsinanfu joint protests as described in paragraph 8 of my 497,
October 20, 7 p.m.
5. Texts will be given to the press tomorrow noon, November 4th.
MAYER

893.512/447: Telegram
[Document 692]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 16, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received 6:35 p.m.]
555. 1. In reference to paragraph number 3 Department’s 255, November 1,
1 p.m. American consul general at Canton reported as follows:
“November 6, noon. Your November 3, 4 p.m., paragraph 4.80
Dollar Steamship Company has an average of one ship monthly
including Grace Dollar, Stanley Dollar, Hanover and Eelbeck.
Steamship Elkridge of the Shipping Board also calls at irregular
intervals. In addition Standard Oil Company tugs and lighters
under Form 35 certificates frequently call here.
[Paraphrase.] With the possible exception of the Shipping Board,
the agents of all these concerns have such fear of giving offense
to local labor and political unions that, in my opinion, any
protective interference from the Navy or the consulate general in
this connection would not be desired by them.” [End paraphrase.]
2. Replying to my inquiry as to present status of visit and search
regulations, Mr. Jenkins telegraphed as follows:
“November 13, noon. Your November 9, 3 p.m.80 On November
6th I protested against new taxes in the sense of the Department’s
instructions, forwarding a copy to the Legation on November 8th.
(2) I filed protest of visit and search of American
vessels using exact wording of your telegram
November 3, 4 p.m.

(3) [Paraphrase.] So far search of river steamers flying
British flag has been prevented by British Navy but in
retaliation these ships are being boycotted by the
Chinese. I am told by Brenan that situation is
threatening 
to 
become 
very 
dangerous. 
[End
paraphrase.]
(4) Several Americans 2 days on Chinese vessels on the
West River have had their cabins and effects searched
by the new inspection officials. In one instance no
objection was offered by the American concerned but in
another case it is reported Americans objected and
showed their passports without avail. This latter case is
not yet confirmed however.
(5) [Paraphrase.] The French are prepared, I am
informed by French consul general, to prevent visit and
search by use of naval forces. [End paraphrase.]
(6) Cantonese have evidently abandoned for the present
the intention to search foreign vessels in the harbor at
Canton but are doing all they can to enforce new
regulations on the West River and elsewhere.
(7) May I respectfully suggest that the Department’s
attention be drawn to the fact that Americans are in
danger of being searched while travelling on Chinese
and other ships and also on railroads.”
[Paraphrase]
3. As to acquiescing in such regulations, I venture to express my dissent
from any possible implication that a decision on the matter rests with
shipowners. Apart from their particular interests, they are the agents of the
mercantile marine in which inheres an essential responsibility as the carrier,
above all, of American passengers and goods. To go further than the
protests already made by way of attempting to prevent cargoes conveyed
under other flags from being illegally inspected may not be advisable or

feasible, but in regard to commerce carried on under the American flag it
seems to be clear that we cannot well decline to give protection.
4. This does not merely involve the plain treaty rights under which all the
foreign commerce with China has been established on the basis that the
vessel is controlled by its national authorities, and without which there
would be a break-up of the Customs system, which would place foreign
commerce wholly in the power of the local authorities’ arbitrary and
uncontrolled exactions. The matter involves also those dangerous realities,
rooted in sentimental considerations, that make appeal to popular feeling.
Except for persons interested financially and those who have official
responsibility, no one is likely to be excited about confiscation of mere
merchandise, even when it is glaringly illegal. A ship, however, is another
matter. Not only is a ship assimilated in many respects to the territory of its
flag, in the contemplation of international usages which are generally
accepted, but in the minds of Americans there is a feeling, and in the minds
of Chinese there is a clear recognition, that an American ship is more than
an instrumentality of commerce, that it is a symbol or an embodiment of
American interests and jurisdiction and as such, cannot, without giving
affront to our flag, be mistreated.
5. Despite the fact that the Cantonese are emboldened about the possibility
of ignoring the treaty rights of foreigners, they are evidently (see telegram
from Canton, November 13, noon) hesitating to confront this test of
criticism from foreign powers. No doubt they would force the issue were
they to attempt the test and discover a disposition on our part to yield. “Flag
incidents” would be certain to occur sooner or later, leading inevitably to
embitterment and at last to armed clashes. The only opportunity we have to
prevent such incidents from occurring is, from the outset, to take an
unmistakably resolute attitude of opposition to the course of action which
would inevitably produce them.
6. I am certain from my contacts recently with the Cantonese group that we
are dealing with men experimenting quite intelligently but unscrupulously
with the object of determining how far we foreigners, particularly American
citizens and nationals, can be driven by the apprehensions we have at
present to disregard greater possible dangers in the future. Primarily they

devote their very [considerable?] ingenuity to creating situations [causing
conflict among?] the various foreigners who are protagonists of capitalism
and tempted to yield a principle ordinarily in preference to risking an
incident. In case one power yields, the same will have to be done by the
others, and in time an end will come to those rights making commerce with
China possible. The Cantonese do not see that when once back to
conditions prevalent a century past, and complicated and worsened by
China’s present internal strife, there will come again a time when Western
pressure will force new conflicts and once more begin the old cycle:
hostilities over a long period, subjugation, and special conditions for
intercourse imposed. The United States may not become in our day—and
may not at all, though it is more likely now than in the century past—the
active agent to counteract the attitude of exclusiveness and arrogance
towards the West which today the Chinese are reviving (dating from the
taking of the [factories?] at Canton). But I for one feel we have a
responsibility for effort directed toward saving the Chinese from their own
folly. Their folly is of a historically characteristic form, whose results
[threaten?] more or less directly to involve us in the disaster of indefinitely
retarding in China the development of a rational, ordered political and
economic entity and of relationships between the Western powers and
China that are normal.
7. I hope therefore that regardless of any disposition on the part of
shipowners to acquiesce, by way of serving their immediate interests, in
regulations which are destructive of our treaty position, the Department will
decide to take a further policy of giving to American shipping naval
protection from illegal visit and search in China’s territorial waters adjacent
to Canton.
8. A reply to this telegram is being awaited before I consult with the
commander in chief on this general problem.
MACMURRAY
80 Not found in Department files.
80 Not found in Department files.

893.512/484
[Document 693]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)81
CANTON, November 17, 1926.
No. 566
SIR: I have the honor to refer to this Consulate General’s telegrams of
November 11, 1 p.m.82 and November 14, 4 p.m.83 concerning the attitude
of the Canton regime with relation to the Diplomatic Body, and am
enclosing herewith a confirmation copy of Mr. Chen’s note of November 8,
1926, to the Portuguese Consul General. Reference is also had to this
Consulate General’s telegram of November 17, 12, noon, respecting Mr.
Chen’s note to me of November 13, 1926, a copy of which is enclosed
herewith.
It will be observed that in this connection Mr. Chen invites the attention of
this Consulate General to his reply of November 8 to the Portuguese Consul
General wherein it is set forth that the status and relations of the Powers
(including the United States) vis a vis the Cantonese régime are not
regulated on a basis which can properly entitle them to raise questions of
treaty violation.
Needless to say, this Consulate General has not made any reply to this
audacious communication from Mr. Chen and shall await instructions from
the Legation before taking any further action. In the meantime, however, I
am discussing the matter with my colleagues and shall probably take the
liberty of telegraphing the Legation our views and asking for instructions as
to how to proceed.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS

[Enclosure 1]
The Chinese Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs at Canton (Chen) to the Portuguese Consul
General at Canton (Da Horta)
CANTON, November 8, 1926.
SIR: In order to avoid misunderstanding and to assist to a right perception of
the new realities of the national situation resulting from the extension of
Nationalist authority over the greater part of China, I have the honour to
return the enclosed letter, dated November 584 and transmitted through the
post, which purports to be a protest communicated by the “Senior Consul at
Canton” by direction of the “Senior Minister of the interested Powers
represented at Peking” who declare that they cannot recognize the legality
of the internal taxes authorized by “the Canton authorities” on consumption
and production of goods within the Liang-Kwang on the ground that the
same are “in direct violation of treaties”.
My Government does not recognize the existence of the “Senior Minister of
the interested Powers represented at Peking” (who lacks juridical sanction),
nor are the status and the relations of the same Powers vis-a-vis my
Government regulated on a basis which can properly entitle them to raise
the question of a “direct violation of treaties”.
I have the honour to add that my Government is ready to discuss this and
other questions as and when all or any of the Powers represented at Peking
realise that national power and authority has long since ceased to be
exercised in Peking and that the revolutionary and constructive forces of
Nationalist China have now transferred this national power and authority to
my Government.
I have [etc.]
CHEN YU-JEN
[Enclosure 2]

The Chinese Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs at Canton (Chen) to the American Consul General
(Jenkins)
CANTON, November 13, 1926.
SIR: In answer to your dispatch of November 6, 1926,85 wherein you state
that the Government of the United States considers the levying of the taxes
recently proposed by my Government on products and goods of
consumption in violation of the Treaty provisions, and instructs you to bring
forth a protest, I have the honour to inform you that on November 5, 1926,
the Portuguese Consul General at Canton had already registered at this
Ministry a protest of similar nature under the instructions of the diplomatic
representatives at Peking, to which a reply was duly given by this Ministry
to properly deal with the case.
As it is now necessary for me to deal with yours by holding the same
proposition set forth in my reply to the Portuguese Consul, I have the honor
to enclose herewith a copy of the reply for your information.86
With compliments.
CHEN YU-JEN
81 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general as an enclosure
to his despatch No. 723, Nov. 17; received Dec. 27.
82 Not printed.
83 See telegram No. 556, Nov. 17, from the Minister in China, p. 684 [Pg. 684
includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545].
84 No copy attached to file.
85 Not printed; see telegram No. 555, Nov. 16, from the Minister in China
(par. 2), p. 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 691 and Doc. 692].
86 Supra.

893.512/447: Telegram
[Document 694]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, November 19, 1926—3 p.m.
272. Referring to third paragraph, your telegram 555 of November 16, 2
p.m. The Department has no intention of declining to give protection to
commerce borne under the flag of the United States. It is the view of the
Department that consultation as to the form and scope of protection should
be had with commercial interests for the reason presented in its telegram
255, November 1, 1 p.m. The commander in chief of our naval forces
should be consulted upon arrangements for the extension of protection,
when protection is sought, to bona fide, American-owned shipping. The
nature and the extent of the protection to be extended must be determined
by naval authorities there, taking into consideration the local conditions and
particular circumstances which are involved when protection is applied for.
KELLOGG

893.512/467: Telegram
[Document 695]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, December 2, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received 8:05 p.m.]
594. 1. I was informed last night by the British Chargé d’Affaires that his
consul general at Hankow had learned that in the near future the Southern
Nationalist authorities in control at Hankow intend to levy the same illegal
taxes upon imports and exports as have been imposed at Canton (consult
419 from Legation, September 20, 5 p.m.87 ) and to make an offer that if the
powers consent, the Maritime Customs collect these surtaxes. If assent is
not given, they intend to establish as at Canton their own representative
agency and apparently to use a boycott—although there was doubt left upon
this point—directed against those nationalities which oppose the new
surtaxes.
2. Such action by the Nationalists would bring us face to face with two
obvious alternatives, the British Chargé explained. The first is to make our
clearly futile and merely irritating protests again and then to permit matters
to take a course in which not only would further promiscuous, unlimited
exactions upon foreign trade be involved, but also a fatal blow given to the
system of the Maritime Customs by the construction of a rival organization
which would serve a particular party and be animated by such personal
vested interests as soon would be acquired. The second is to compound with
the Nationalists in the matter of their surtaxes by receiving them as being a
fair equivalent to the Washington surtaxes, for which we have so far not
found ourselves in a position to make arrangements, the only stipulation
being that the Maritime Customs collect them. He considered that they may
accept the latter alternative as averting the early destruction of the system of
the Maritime Customs, the keystone of all orderly and normal relations with
China as to commerce.

3. Even in view of your 286 of November 29th, 1 p.m.,88 I believed that I
was warranted in conceding the preservation of the Customs to be a primary
consideration of expediency. But I raised the question whether the second
alternative course would prove to be a permanent and substantial protection
against the Nationalists’ determined intention to sabotage the whole system.
While I admitted the practically hopeless outlook of either horn of the
dilemma, I tended to believe that the less hopeless course was to make an
obvious formal insistence upon our rights rather than to acquiesce in the
violation of our rights, because, despite our having shown that we did not
actually mean the protests we made at Canton and at Hankow, the
Nationalists still may believe that if we really were backed up to the wall,
for instance at Shanghai, we might make our protests good. Acquiescence
on the other hand would do even more than authorize all further
encroachments in regard to Customs matters; it would give the Cantonese
courage to presume also in other matters upon our weakness.
4. Furthermore I urged that a third alternative was possible, which, if time
permitted, would be productive of better result than the dilemma of the first
two. It is this: that the interested powers by some means put in operation the
Washington surtaxes as a fulfillment of the treaty obligations we have,
rather than as a yielding to the Cantonese exactions. However, even if all
the foreign powers had all possible good will—and that we would be joined
by Japan without infinite argument and enlargement of details there is every
cause for doubt—action of any kind towards implementing the Treaty of
Washington is scarcely possible in time to forestall the issue being forced
by the Nationalists when once they present that issue. Unless we are
prepared to undertake a last-ditch stand to prevent our being bullied into
unconditionally surrendering vastly more than we took upon ourselves to
give up under reasonable safeguards, the Washington Customs Treaty and
the Special Conference would seem to be dead historical topics.
 
5. The British Chargé then expressed his opinion that the resolute
determination of the British Government was not to repeat the mistake at
Canton in lodging at Hankow a protest merely for purpose of record.
Instead, they probably would take an independent course if necessary,

concurrently acceding to these levies and attempting to make an
arrangement whereby the Maritime Customs would be entrusted with their
collection. I remarked my inability to indicate our position upon a new
situation such as this and that I would have to refer it to you. Instructions
from the Department are urgently requested.
MACMURRAY
87 Ante, p. 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, and Doc. 601].
88 Not printed.

893.512/468: Telegram
[Document 696]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, December 4, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received December 5—10:40 a.m.89 ]
598. Referring to my number 594 of December 2.
1. On December 2nd the Inspector General of Customs, the
Japanese Minister, and I were invited by the British Chargé to
discuss with him the introduction of illegal taxes proposed at
Hankow. The latter indicated that there is a determination on the
part of the British Government to avoid antagonizing the
Cantonese regime by a protest, and that if possible the British
Government will make its acquiescence the means of having the
collection of the taxes entrusted to the Maritime Customs.
2. Aglen acknowledged that he would welcome the opportunity—
to the end that the Customs Service be preserved—of having the
collection entrusted to it. However, he reached the conclusion
after careful consideration that, without the unanimous consent of
the treaty powers, collection could not be undertaken by the
Customs.
3. The Japanese Minister had already referred to his Government,
after consulting the British Chargé, the alternatives presented in
my telegram, paragraph 2, cited above. He now declared that,
until he received new instructions, it must be his position that
protests against the levy of illegal surtaxes must be continued by
his Government despite the fact that such protests may remain
futile until the time when it may be possible and expedient by
forcible measures or otherwise to make the protests good. He

insisted particularly on his Government’s view that the levy of the
surtaxes the Washington Customs Treaty has in view was to be
only upon conditions which were to be determined by the Special
Conference and therefore that to accede to those surtaxes or
similar ones would be impossible except upon the fulfillment of
such conditions.
4. The contemplated action of the Canton Nationalists, the British
Chargé d’Affaires pointed out, and Aglen and I agreed, would
create a situation in which there would actually be levies of the
Washington surtaxes in every port controlled by Nationalists and
inevitably elsewhere in China within a short time, without the
remotest possibility that the Chinese could be brought by the
other signatories even to discuss any of the considerations or the
conditions the treaty contemplated. Realizing we are not prepared
to insist that our treaty rights be respected, the Nationalists have
maneuvered us around to where talk about the Washington treaty
obligations being mutual is academic. We have a choice only of
allowing the Nationalists to destroy the Customs organization and
the treaty system of trade, or of giving the benefits of the
Washington surtaxes to the Chinese without conditions.
5. I suggested that the best exit from the dilemma was the third
alternative I mentioned in paragraph 4 of my telegram cited
above. I urged that it differed intrinsically very little from the
British proposal, and that we should consent to the surtaxes,
explaining as well as we could that after all these surtaxes were
an equivalent of the Washington surtaxes. Our taking the position
of carrying out our Washington obligations is vastly different
from yielding to a violation of our treaty rights and afterward
referring to the treaty by way of excusing our weakness. This
suggestion was very earnestly supported by Aglen, who agreed it
would make an appeal to the Chinese as being a course of action
which was much more worthy of the powers and consonant with
their dignity. The British Chargé, O’Malley, said he himself was
able to see little practical difference between this method and the
other but that he would be ready on the strength of the opinions of

Aglen and myself to recommend it to his Government.
Yoshizawa, the Japanese Minister, was not persuaded to commit
himself beyond stating that he would consult with his
Government.
6. We were all in agreement in thinking that a definite crisis
regarding the whole system of trade with China will be brought
about by the Cantonese attempt to levy these surtaxes at the port
of Hankow. Excepting Yoshizawa, who did not commit himself,
we also agreed that to anticipate this action by the Nationalists
through a declaration by the powers—which in effect would
allow the Washington surtaxes to be levied throughout China for
the benefit of whatever authorities happened to have control at the
various ports, without a quid pro quo and without conditions
except that the levy of such surtaxes would rest with the Maritime
Customs—offered the sole possible way to make a substantial
salvage out of the wreck.
7. I undertook a further discussion of this matter yesterday
afternoon with O’Malley. We were both wholly convinced that in
the possibility of action by the powers practically at once along
these suggested lines lay our best hope of avoiding a disaster to
the trading interests of foreigners. We feel that as a practical
means to this end we should continue to discuss the matter with
Yoshizawa, during which we might phrase some concrete, simple
formula, the adoption of which might be requested of the
remaining foreign delegations to the Special Tariff Conference. In
our opinion most, if not all, of the powers less interested would
likely follow our lead comparatively readily, particularly were the
Japanese Government to give approval to the proposal. However,
we feel that the position which Japan may take presents the
greatest danger to the project, though their position is not
hopeless. In view of this we agreed that in asking his Government
for authority to proceed upon the indicated lines, each of us
would request his Government also to have its Tokyo Embassy
press upon the Foreign Office there the fact that the crisis is
imminent and that, confronted by the practical and immediate

dilemma facing us, it is futile to try to impose conditions or
bargain or argue the interpretation of the customs treaty.
8. I have said on the basis of your 278 of November 23d,90 that I
had 
hopes 
of 
your 
giving 
approval 
to 
unconditional
implementation of the Washington Treaty by unilateral action on
the part of the powers, excepting China. It is my earnest hope that
the Department will give me authorization, in anticipation of the
extraordinary crisis likely soon to confront us, to proceed without
delay in this matter according to the indicated course, and that it
will authorize that support of this plan be given at the Japanese
Foreign Office by the Embassy at Tokyo cooperating there with
the British Embassy.
9. Inasmuch as startlingly rapid developments have taken place in
the situation since my telegram 566, November 20,91 seeming to
rule out every alternative from consideration with the exception
of the powers granting the Washington surtaxes of their own
volition immediately and unconditionally, I am not making any
other reply to your 278, November 23.
10. This telegram and my 594 repeated to Tokyo, December 4, 9
p.m.
MACMURRAY
89 Telegram in two sections.
90 Ante, p. 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 647].
91 Ante, p. 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646].

893.512/467: Telegram
[Document 697]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, December 4, 1926—6 p.m.
287. Paragraph 5 of your 594, December 2, 5 p.m. In case the Chinese
Maritime Customs were to become the agent for the collection of surtaxes
which are imposed in contravention of existing treaty rights by factions
which are in revolt against the so-called Chinese National Government, it
seems to the Department that the question must arise at once as to how to
dispose of the funds so collected, which inevitably must turn the Customs
Service into an agency of the local factions. This would destroy the status it
has of being a national institution. It is believed by the Department the
proper attitude for us should be that taxes so imposed contravene the treaty
existing between China and the United States, and that upon that ground
they should be protested in order to have the record of this Government
perfectly clear on the question of all such taxes when the time comes for a
discussion with a Chinese Government on the question of tariffs. In the
event that the British authorities are successful in making the Customs the
agency for collecting said taxes, such a proposal should neither be
supported nor objected to by this Government. No matter who collects the
taxes, the usual protest should be filed. It should be understood that if
American merchants pay the taxes, they do so subject to such protests.
KELLOGG

893.512/456: Telegram
[Document 698]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 6, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received December 6—9:50 a.m.]
600. Your telegram number 255, November 1, 1 p.m.
1. Commander in chief reports receipt of following from Southern Patrol
commander:
“Service of the Navy in South China waters may be divided into
two classes: first, pirate interference; second, illegal governmental
interference in every effort by naval forces to recover any seized
vessels or cargo immediately and complete transit. Interference
by Government officials is not expected, but should there be any
in connection with American steamers, it will be referred to
American consul general at Canton for action in the usual
diplomatic way. If diplomacy fails to secure the desired results,
the American consul general will request naval force present to
prevent interference with our ships and to insure safe delivery of
American cargoes by convoying American steamers or place
armed guard on them.”
 
2. Commander in chief states that he approves this procedure and inquires if
I approve. I purpose to reply in the affirmative unless the Department
perceives some objection to the policy outlined.
MACMURRAY

893.512/469: Telegram
[Document 699]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, December 7, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received December 7—10:30 a.m.]
602. Your telegram 287 of December 4, 6 p.m.
1. Your telegram 287 apparently crossed my telegram 598 of
December 4, 4 p.m. I trust the proposals outlined in my telegram
will be regarded by the Department as quite compatible with the
position it takes as outlined in its telegram respecting the national
character of the Customs.
2. I regard it as absolutely impossible—whatever mutual
agreement may be proved possible of being made in the future in
regard to increases of the tariff or in regard to surtaxes—that there
can ever be a diversion of the taxes now imposed by the
Nationalists at Canton and other places as the substantial
equivalent of the Washington surtaxes and certain to be imposed
elsewhere similarly by the Northern Group, to national purposes
instead of provincial purposes. It is upon that assumption, in my
opinion, that any consideration of matters relating to the Customs
must be predicated.
MACMURRAY

893.512/456: Telegram
[Document 700]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, December 8, 1926—6 p.m.
290. Your 600 December 6, 4 P.M. Department approves arrangement
outlined by Admiral.
KELLOGG

893.512/468: Telegram
[Document 701]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, December 8, 1926—7 p.m.
291. 1. Your number 598 of December 4, 4 p.m. and your 602 of December
7, 4 p.m. The Department’s attitude toward British suggestions to accept the
Cantonese imposition of taxes with the provision that their collection may
be made by the Customs Administration, is outlined in Department’s
telegram 287, of December 4, 6 p.m.
 
2. You were given authority by Department’s 278, November 23, 6 p.m.,92
to concur in proposal granting Washington surtaxes at once without
reservations, on the condition that their collection be made by the Maritime
Customs.
3. It is desired by the Department that before the matter is discussed with
the Government of Japan you further consider the feasibility of this
question. The Department has some doubt of the usefulness of discussing
the matter with the Government of Japan in order to persuade that
Government to adopt a policy it would not otherwise adopt on this question.
4. The question of authorizing the Washington surtaxes to be collected with
no other reservation than that the National Chinese Maritime Customs
collect them becomes of more doubtful feasibility, it has seemed to the
Department, as time passes and as the possibility increases that the
Southern regime may extend its control in China over larger areas. The only
remaining feature of a national Chinese government, which now has
departed, is the Maritime Customs Service, and to the Department it seems
that inevitably the adding of the task of making a collection of these new

taxes must involve the Customs Service in the question of how to dispose of
the revenues so derived and collected and must, since the different factions
will begin struggling to gain possession of those revenues, involve the
entire Customs Service therefore in the varying fortunes of the factions.
5. It occurs also to the Department that if consent is given at this time to the
collection of the surtaxes provided for by the Washington Treaty, without
reservation or accompanying negotiation or understanding with any
Chinese authority who is responsible, there is danger that such consent may
be so interpreted by the several warring factions in China as to indicate a
willingness to concede the right to them to impose on foreign trade other,
and even more onerous, taxes, and to use for their collection the machinery
of the Maritime Customs.
6. Yet another possibility is suggested in this connection in your 602,
December 7, 4 p.m., second paragraph; namely, that no guarantee can be
expected by us that at the same time as the surtaxes of Washington
Conference are being assessed upon our trade by the Maritime Customs we
may not find collections of other and similar taxes being made by other
agencies than the Customs, with the result that on our trade in the areas in
which the regime at Canton has established its control we shall discover
that we have doubled the tax.
 
7. The Department is inclined by the foregoing considerations to believe
that the safest and most dignified way to deal at the present time with the
difficult and complicated question of the surtaxes is the policy which was
outlined in its 287 of December 4, 6 p.m., for, pursuing this policy, this
Government would be left free to deal clearly on the whole matter of the
taxes and tariffs of China with any new Chinese government that may arise.
8. To the Department it seems to be inevitable that the taxation situation in
China must as time goes on become more complicated and that in view of
the lack of any authority at present, with which this Government could deal,
the only method to follow is to file the usual protests, based upon existing
rights under treaty, and to leave the final settlement of the question to the
time when a government will show itself able in an orderly way to deal with

the situation throughout a substantial part of the territory of China. The
difficulty of the situation facing you is appreciated by the Department and
your frank comment is desired on the considerations outlined above.
KELLOGG
92 Ante, p. 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 647].

893.512/459: Telegram
[Document 702]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 9, 1926—1 a.m.
[Received 7:22 a.m.]
607. 1. Senior Minister informs me he has been approached by Admiral Tsai
with an inquiry whether the powers would consent to the levy of a surtax to
replace the present famine-relief surtax, for the purpose of enabling the
Government to pay approximately gold dollars one million of arrears in the
Chinese contribution to the League of Nations and to pay salaries of
representatives abroad which are now approximately 19 months in arrears.
2. I am disposed to recommend that I be authorized to accede to such a
surtax for the reason that China’s membership in the League of Nations
constitutes one of the few ties which bind her to normal relationships with
the other nations; and loss of such membership would tend to force her into
the Russian Soviet camp. While less sympathetic about her failure to
maintain her foreign representation, I believe that that question cannot as a
practical matter be dealt with separately from the other.
MACMURRAY

893.512/460: Telegram
[Document 703]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, December 9, 1926—noon.
[Received December 9—7:54 a.m.]
606. My 598 of December 4th, 4 p.m.
1. I am informed by the British Chargé that the British
Government 
has 
authorized 
action 
toward 
immediate
implementing of Washington Treaty and instructed him that it
considers that action as suggested in my 598 is an obvious and
necessary next step.
2. He further gave me to understand that his Government while
gladly approving this way out of the dilemma is resolved
nevertheless in case that that course of action should prove
unsuccessful, to compound with the Cantonese in the matter of
the illegal surtaxes.
MACMURRAY

893.512/459: Telegram
[Document 704]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, December 9, 1926—5 p.m.
293. Your telegram 607, December 9, 1 A.M. This Government would make
no objection to levy of surtax for purposes mentioned.
KELLOGG

893.512/470: Telegram
[Document 705]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, December 11, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received December 11—10:40 a.m.]
611. 1. The sympathetic understanding of the perplexities confronting us
expressed in your number 291 of December 8th, 7 p.m., was exceedingly
gratifying. However, I am led to doubt whether I have made sufficiently
clear in my telegrams that our treaty position is nearly at the point of
collapse and that to forestall the catastrophe the time element is vital. This
statement is literally what, in giving practical consideration to our position,
we must anticipate.
2. I recommended a particular action in my 598 of December 4th, 4 p.m. I
also requested authorization to proceed with it as an extremely urgent
matter. Shall I or shall I not go on in the hope of reaching an agreement
with the British, and then with the Japanese Minister, and in the end with
my other colleagues, for the interested powers to declare that the
Washington surtaxes are applicable to their nationals immediately without a
quid pro quo or any conditions with the exceptions that the Maritime
Customs should collect the taxes and that the revenues which are obtained
are to be turned over at each port to those authorities who exercise actual
control? I believe this course offers quite clearly the best hope of escaping
the two horns of the dilemma, either of which would injure our trading
interests fatally. But your authorization must be received before I can act.
The Department must make a decision, and to delay in doing so would be
equivalent in fact to making its decision to stand aside while events take the
course which soon would lead to the undermining of our position.
MACMURRAY

893.512/470: Telegram
[Document 706]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, December 13, 1926—7 p.m.
297. Your telegram 611 of December 11th, 3 p.m. The authorization to
proceed on course suggested in your 598, December 4th, 4 p.m., is granted.
It would be the preference of this Government to avoid being involved in
the matter of directions to the Customs as to which of the parties at each
port in China the collected revenue should be paid. Department does not
believe that in the authorization to impose the surtaxes this should be made
one of the conditions. The entire settlement of this question should be left to
the Maritime Customs. However, in view of the fact that on the
requirements of the situation you have a more intimate knowledge than the
Department, this question is left to your discretion.
KELLOGG

893.512/471: Telegram
[Document 707]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 14, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received December 14—9 a.m.]
613. 1. I beg to express my appreciation of your telegram number 297,
December 13, 7 p.m.
2. Has the Department authorized Embassy at Tokyo to support our
proposed plan of action as suggested in paragraph 8 of my number 598,
December 4, 4 p.m.? With a view to that, I am repeating to Tokyo your
number 297.
MACMURRAY

893.512/471: Telegram
[Document 708]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, December 14, 1926—8 p.m.
298. Your telegram No. 613, December 14, 4 p.m.
1. The Embassy at Tokyo has not been authorized by the
Department to support the plan.
2. The Japanese Ambassador called some days ago. When the
question of surtaxes was mentioned during the conversation, I
stated that the Department was not informed as to the attitude of
the Japanese Government toward the question of surtaxes.
3. The Japanese Ambassador came to see me today. He stated that
he had been informed by his Government, in reply to this
question, that the Japanese Government understood that the
British Government proposed to accept the Cantonese imposition
of surtaxes on condition that their collection be made by the
Maritime Customs; and it understood that at Peking the American
Government favored a proposal authorizing the Chinese
Government to levy Washington surtaxes without other
reservation than that these taxes be collected by the Chinese
Maritime Customs.
4. The Ambassador declared that the Japanese Government was
opposed to these proposals since the Government felt that its
assent at the present time to the surtaxes would mean that by such
consent the powers would encourage the Chinese leaders to
believe that the powers were interested no longer in their treaty
rights and that they could attempt in disregard of treaty rights to

levy any taxes they might please upon foreigners and foreign
trade without fear of being called to account. The Ambassador
went on to say as his informal opinion that the Japanese
Government believed that encouragement would be given to the
Chinese by such a step to cease respecting any of the provisions
of China’s treaties with foreign countries.
5. The Ambassador declared that the suggestion to have the
surtaxes made generally applicable throughout the territory of
China was opposed by his Government because a situation such
as that would require that the powers authorize the payment of the
revenues collected by the Customs to one or another of the
warring factional leaders. In regard to leaving this question for
decision by the Customs, he believed there would be an
unfortunate effect upon the leaders of the Cantonese if the
collected monies were all placed in one fund by the Customs and
paid over to such government at Peking as might have control
there.
6. He further stated that the feeling of the Japanese Government
was that a decision as to how the situation in China was going to
develop could not yet be made. Therefore it preferred to wait,
meanwhile lodging protests against the levies of taxes contrary to
the provisions of existing treaties, with whatever factions might
levy such taxes. He declared that there was no intention on the
part of his Government to use force to make such protests good,
but that Japanese merchants would be directed to pay, subject to
protest, if such taxes against themselves or their goods were
levied and if it were necessary to pay the taxes.
7. I stated that this Government was informed that the Cantonese
taxes would be accepted by the British Government without
protest provided their collection was made by the Maritime
Customs; that this Government believed that on a question of this
kind, to enter into arrangements with one or another Chinese
faction was unwise because of the danger that a policy such as
that would result merely in dividing China more or less

permanently into separate parts; and that this Government, rather
than to pursue that policy, had been in favor of giving you, its
Minister in China, authorization to consider with your colleagues
a proposal by which the Chinese Government would be
authorized to make a levy, uniformly upon foreign trade
throughout China, of the surtaxes provided by the treaty at
Washington, the only reservation to be that the Chinese Maritime
Customs should collect the taxes. I said that we wished to avoid
being involved in any questions as to disposing of the funds so
derived among the warring factions.
8. The Japanese Ambassador reiterated that there was not a
disposition on the part of the Government of Japan to favor at this
time a granting of the surtaxes provided by the Washington Treaty
without reservation and before having the formal negotiations
which the treaty implied should occur at the time the taxes were
granted.
9. He remarked that it was his belief that an instruction had been
given to the Japanese Minister to inform you respecting these
matters.
10. You will perceive from the foregoing that it appears that the
Japanese Government is unwilling to accept the proposal. It is not
desired by the Department that proposals should be advanced
unless the interested Governments all agree.
KELLOGG

893.512/472: Telegram
[Document 709]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, December 17, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received December 17—3:50 p.m.]
621. 1. Immediately before receiving your 297 of December 13, 7 p.m., I
was informed by O’Malley, British Chargé d’Affaires, that he had received
information from the Japanese Minister that the Government of Japan was
unwilling to accept the British suggestion that the assent of the powers be
given to the levy of illegal taxes by the Southerners. When your instructions
were received, I called upon the Japanese Minister. He confirmed the
information that his instructions were opposed to the plan of the British, but
his instruction, he pointed out, indicated opposition only casually to the
modification I originally suggested by which the Washington surtaxes
would be accepted by the powers unilaterally and unconditionally.
2. On December 15th the British Chargé and I made a strong effort to
persuade our Japanese colleague that the proposed acceptance of the
Washington surtaxes is, for Japanese interests as well as other foreign
interests, the least harmful course of action among the various
unsatisfactory courses available. He created the impression upon both of us
that he agreed personally with our views but that categorical instructions, of
which an informal abstract had been furnished to us in the meantime, bound
him. The fact that his Government considers it to be essential that the
surtaxes only be granted upon conditions which involve, quoting him,
“pecuniary considerations”, was brought out in the discussion. These
considerations, we understood, referred to funding unsecured debts and to
establishing in the treaty now under negotiation between Japan and China,
satisfactory rates upon Japanese imports. He said that the Japanese Foreign
Office could scarcely look forward hopefully to securing the necessary
approval of the Privy Council unless a satisfactory showing as to these

considerations were made. He promised us that he would telegraph to his
Government the arguments we urged upon him; namely, in effect, that if our
treaty situation is to be saved, no bargaining is possible. However, he did
not give us much hope of reconsideration.
3. I was convinced, as was O’Malley, that these are the objects which the
Japanese have in view: (1) to postpone the imposition of the Washington
surtaxes as long as possible, and (2) to keep their assent to such surtaxes in
reserve as the price they will pay to secure a treaty which will establish
upon Japanese products satisfactorily low rates. We considered it to be
certain, therefore, that unless the Japanese Government is forced by the
unanimous concurrence of the remaining powers interested in granting the
surtaxes to come into the open, it will not reconsider its position. With this
in view, the fact that the British Government is determined upon the policy
of proceeding along this line was put forward to Yoshizawa very explicitly
by O’Malley. The British Chargé stated that he would consult with all other
interested colleagues to secure their concurrence; and that he would ask
after waiting a reasonable time for instructions to be received that a meeting
of representatives be held, and there he would call for a show of hands.
With that done, O’Malley continued, his Government would consider that
its duty to consult under the Washington treaties with the other parties to
them had been fulfilled, and it would regard itself as free to undertake
whatever course of action it then chose, singly or by cooperating with the
other powers who might adopt a position the same as the British adopted.
Since I did not believe my instructions warranted my going so far as to
declare that I would, even in the face of Japanese dissent, join with the
British, I for my part declared that in the eventuality contemplated by the
British Chargé I would be obliged to secure further instructions from my
Government, but that I inclined to the belief that in regard to the
Washington surtaxes the United States would be anxious to fulfill its
obligations as best it might under existing circumstances.
4. During the morning of the next day, the 16th, O’Malley and I went
together to the Dutch Minister and then went to the Italian Minister. We
found that they were prepared to give their Governments a strong
recommendation of the proposal. O’Malley had already been informed by
the Dutch Minister, who later also informed me, that he favored the plan

enthusiastically and was seeking authorization that he might proceed with
it. O’Malley also obtained a promise from our Belgian colleague similarly
to make such a representation to the Belgian Government.
5. I received a call on the afternoon of the 16th from a representative of
Chang Tso-lin. He represented courteously, but positively for all that, that
funds were being obtained by the Southerners in disregard of the treaties;
but that the Northerners frowned upon such acts violating treaties and they
proposed to make an appeal to the powers asking to be placed in a practical
position no less favorably, by being enabled through agreement of the
powers to raise funds by means that were legitimate. He urged the taking of
steps to put into force the surtaxes provided by the Washington Treaty. I
inquired whether as a practical matter the Northern authorities would expect
that they would receive the revenues collected from such surtaxes in ports
under Nationalist control. His reply was that such diversion of funds to their
enemies naturally would not be formally assented to, but as practical men
they realized that this might be done. They would be content to have the
revenues collected from the surtaxes in ports located within the territory
they themselves controlled. He hinted unmistakably that in case the
Northerners were not thus granted the surtaxes, the Northern military
coalition will find itself, regardless of treaty obligations, obliged to act upon
its own initiative, and that perhaps it might become more red than the Beds
in the South.
6. After the above conversation I received a circular, dated December 15,
from the Senior Minister. Enclosed in it was a memorandum which had
been received from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, regarding tariff revision
at Shanghai at present. It stated that:93
“This Ministry has received a communication from Ho, the
Japanese Minister, to the effect that he has been instructed by his
Government that the newly revised tariff must be approved and
made effective by the Special Customs Conference.
“The Chinese Government is of the opinion that in this way the
newly revised tariff can become effective at an early date and that
this is also in accordance with the resolution of the Washington

Conference which speaks of the rates becoming effective as soon
as possible. Therefore the Chinese Government of course fully
approves the early reopening of the Customs Conference
engagement.”
7. I received practically at the same moment the code room’s reading of
section 2 of your 298, December 14, 8 p.m.94 I felt obliged then to call
O’Malley in and say that I was precluded by your latest instruction from
further cooperation with him along the lines we had been following, your
desire being that unless all interested Governments agreed, the proposal we
had been advocating jointly should not be put forward. Regret was
expressed by the British Chargé that I was prevented by instructions from
going along further with him, but he reminded me that the fact of my efforts
in the matter being discontinued could not prevent his Government from
proceeding upon its determination in the matter to bring it to an issue and
have a public showing as to which of the powers are willing and not willing
to have the Washington surtaxes implemented without conditions. The
furtherance or the quashing of this proposal does not rest with us. The
British Government is going on with it. We will have to elect within a few
days whether to side with them, and it is probable, with all other powers
participating in fulfilling our obligations under the Washington Treaty,
under the terms which are the least disadvantageous possible in the
circumstances now existing, or to side with the Japanese in obstructing such
carrying out of our promises until considerations satisfactory to themselves
have been obtained by the Japanese. To choose the latter would be
humiliating for us as having been the authors of the Washington Conference
and also would be disastrous in regard to the moral and material interests
we have in China. In the light of this contingency I await your further
instructions … [garbled groups]. Repeated to Tokyo by mail.
MACMURRAY
93 Memorandum not paraphrased.
94 Not printed.

893.512/472: Telegram
[Document 710]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, December 18, 1926—5 p.m.
300. Paragraph 7 of your number 621, December 17, 4 p.m. The preference
of this Government would be that the interested Governments should all
give consent to the proposal prior to putting it into effect. If this cannot be
done, however, and if the proposal is brought before the diplomatic body
for a vote, the Department authorizes you to vote with your British
colleague for it.
KELLOGG

893.512/475: Telegram
[Document 711]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 19, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received December 19—11:20 a.m.]
628. 1. British Chargé d’Affaires yesterday under instructions of his
Government had Senior Minister urgently summon a meeting of the
interested Chiefs of Mission to whom he read and gave copies of a
statement in behalf of the British Government, of which the general purport
is that the powers should grant the Washington surtaxes immediately and
unconditionally and recognize China’s “right to enjoy tariff autonomy as
soon as she herself has settled and promulgated a new national tariff,” act at
once upon such recommendations of the Extraterritoriality Commission
report as may be capable of being carried into immediate effect, and “while
calling upon China to maintain that respect for the sanctity of treaties which
is the primary obligation common to all civilized states,” yet “recognize
both the essential justice of China’s claim for treaty revision, and the
difficulty in present conditions of negotiating new treaties in place of the
old” and therefore “modify their traditional attitude of a rigid insistence on
the strict letter of treaty rights.”
2. It is understood that full texts of this statement are being communicated
by the British Government to the interested Governments.
3. I shall shortly submit my own comments upon the British proposals.
MACMURRAY

893.512/472: Telegram
[Document 712]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, December 20, 1926—3 p.m.
301. Your 621, December 17, 4 p.m. New York Times of today prints a news
despatch from Peking dated December 19 referring to contents of a note
alleged to have been addressed to the Diplomatic Corps at Peking by the
British Chargé. News item states British Legation refused information as to
contents of note but intimates that “note outlines what Great Britain feels
should be the policy of the powers toward China and was put forward with
the object of ascertaining whether the other powers signatory to the
Washington Treaty would support it or suggest a better one.” Times article
goes on to say “this program, according to some, is said to be liberal,
among other things suggesting granting the Washington surtaxes and their
collection by the Maritime Customs.”
Inference might naturally be drawn from this news item that Great Britain
desired to be more liberal with regard to putting into effect of Washington
Treaty than other powers, including ourselves. You may consider it wise to
destroy such an impression if such an impression had been created publicly
in Peking by making public our own attitude in favor of putting into effect
surtaxes of the Washington Treaty without reservation.
GREW

893.512/479: Telegram
[Document 713]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 22, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received December 22—2:55 p.m.]
632. Supplementing my 628, December 19, 3 p.m.
1. As my telegram 628, December 19, 3 p.m. will have made clear
the British memorandum communicated to the diplomatic body
on the 18th was not restricted to the matter of immediate
unconditional grant of the Washington surtaxes as was to be
inferred from the press report upon which was based your
telegram number 301, December 20, 3 p.m. Memorandum goes
so much farther that it relegates to subsequently incidental
discussion previously clear out [-cut?] issue as to these surtaxes. I
assume it also removes any occasion for such action on my part
as your telegram suggested.
2. Larger proposal which the British Government has not [now?]
referred to the powers appears to be the result of determination on
the part of the British Foreign Office to abandon the policy of
assailer [assailant] and take the initiative in formulating a definite
and positive policy of conciliation towards China. It contains in
essence only two new points—first, and most important, the
ambiguously expressed willingness to accept immediately and
unconditionally what is referred to as “tariff autonomy” and,
second, the proposal that the powers adopt the policy of
condoning all but graver contraventions of treaty rights on the
part of the Chinese.
3. There is already in effect what purports to be a national tariff
(see Conference summary number 2, October 27 [28], 192595 );
and unless, in offering to recognize China’s tariff autonomy “as

soon as she herself has settled and promulgated a new national
tariff,” the British Government intended to hedge its offer by a
condition which implies indefinite postponement, it would appear
that it contemplates recognizing any schedules of tariffs which
may be put into force by the competent authorities in the various
regions of China. The latter appears to be the more probable
interpretation, especially since the settlement itself presupposes
that there will be no competent central government of China in
the near future. Whether or not this is the intention of the British
Government, it will be construed by the Chinese as a profession
of willingness to pay any import duties that may be assessed
anywhere in China.
4. While it is justifiable and perhaps advisable for the powers in
their relations with China to adopt a mighty querulous and petty
attitude in the matter of protests against insignificant infractions
of the treaties, broad formula now proposed by the British with
regard to condoning disregard of their obligations by the Chinese
in all matters which the powers may not unanimously consider
vital, is, in effect, an invitation to the Chinese to carry the
principle of repudiation to whatever may prove to be the limit of
tolerance on the part of the powers.
5. It seems to me a matter of grave doubt whether these two
fundamental points of the British program are well advised. With
regard to obviously necessary modification of existing treaty
rights there are in general three possible courses to pursue: First,
renunciation by the powers with a view to placating China[’s]
nationalistic feeling; second, acquiescence by the powers
(whether willingly or grudgingly) in a policy of repudiation by
the Chinese; third, orderly negotiation with a view to
readjustment of unsatisfactory or illiberal treaty provisions by
mutual consent, simultaneously with insistence upon full respect
for existing obligations until thus modified. The last-named seems
to me to offer the only possibility of making the necessary
readjustments reasonably and with fairness to the interests of both
parties. The British program appears to ignore that possibility and

to be directed towards placating Chinese feeling by concessions
which I fear will scarcely at all appease nationalistic aspirations
but will on the other hand encourage them to force other issues
which are not contemplated by the British—such as the integrity
of the Maritime Customs organization, the existence of Shanghai
International Settlement, and of the various concessions,
extraterritorial, special privileges of missionaries with regard to
residence and ownership of land in the interior, and (what may
prove of particular importance to us) the question of restrictions
upon Chinese immigration into foreign countries.
6. The fact remains however that once the British program is
made public (as it seems likely it will be within a brief time) the
mere fact that such radical concessions have been made by the
nation which is still predominant in the trade of China will
compel us whether we like it or not to offer the same concessions
on our part. The British will have forced our hands in view of the
impossibility of our maintaining consistently or with any hope of
success an attitude ostensibly less liberal than theirs. And, if we
are to be compelled to fall in with this policy, it seems to me
advisable that we should do so with a good grace and in spirit of
loyal cooperation towards making it a success in the interest of all
foreign powers, recognizing that though not ideal it offers
possibility of uniting the treaty powers in what the statement itself
terms “a constructive policy in harmony with the spirit of the
Washington Conference but developed and adopted to meet the
altered circumstances of the present time.”
7. These are some, indications that the Japanese will vigorously
oppose the British program. It would nevertheless seem that if the
British force the issue the Japanese cannot any more than
ourselves afford to be put in the wrong in the eyes of the Chinese,
especially in view of the great sacrifices they have for the past
two years been making in the interests of a “friendship policy.” It
would seem that they must either join the British or attempt the
dangerous expedient of trying to outbid them by the
relinquishment, for example, of the rights of extraterritoriality.

This latter desperate alternative would quickly prove fatal to
foreign rights and interests. It seems to me that we may best
contribute to averting this possibility by adopting for our part the
British program as the least destructive of the courses now open
to us even though it offers us no definite assurance of obtaining a
satisfactory adjustment for such claims as we have against China.
MACMURRAY
95 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 867.

893.512/479: Telegram
[Document 714]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, December 28, 1926—1 p.m.
308. Your telegrams number 628, December 19, 3 p.m., and number 632,
December 22, 4 p.m. It is my desire that you fully support the British
program in the conferences of the diplomatic body. As you well know, since
the Washington Conference this Government has been anxious to place
those surtaxes into effect that were agreed upon in the Washington Treaty,
and it is now willing that they be put unconditionally into force throughout
China. It has been and is willing to negotiate with China concerning
relinquishment of its treaty control over duties which the Chinese
Government levies on imports of products of American origin into China.
In this connection we desire most-favored-nation treatment. Our urging the
powers to broaden the scope of the Special Conference on the Chinese
Tariff which last winter met at Peking was done with a view to making
certain that that Conference would take up, as between the several powers
and China, the question of granting tariff autonomy to China.
With reference to the extraterritoriality, you are instructed to give support to
the British program favoring international agreement for immediate action
upon those of the recommendations made in the Extraterritoriality
Commission’s report96 which may be susceptible of having immediate
effect given to them. It is the Department’s belief that, to the extent that this
Government’s policy is concerned in regard to these matters, it has made
already effective certain of that Commission’s recommendations as they
have to do with interference by American citizens in China’s control over
her own citizens. In this connection it is certain that every effort to prevent
any abuse of the United States flag has been made.

… There is no reason that I can see why you should not publicly make
known at Peking that the British recommendations have formed part of the
United States Government’s policy for a long time. And I wish you to know
that I contemplate making an address soon on the subject of our relations
with China. In this I expect to make a statement of the readiness of this
Government to negotiate with a Government representing China for the
purpose of revising the existing American treaties in the directions of
relinquishing the extraterritorial privileges of Americans in China and of
granting China the right to establish her own tariff rates on products of
American origin.
… I would appreciate having an opinion from you as soon as possible.
KELLOGG
96 For summary of the report, see telegram No. 412, Sept. 17, from the
Chargé in China, p. 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755].

893.512/497
[Document 715]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State96a
WASHINGTON, December 23, 1926.
No. 816
SIR: I have the honour, on instructions from His Majesty’s Government, to
transmit herewith the text of a telegram addressed by His Majesty’s
Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs on December 2nd last to His
Majesty’s Minister at Peking, copies of which were communicated by His
Majesty’s Chargé d’Affaires at that capital on December 18th last to his
eleven colleagues representing the Washington Treaty Powers other than
China.
This telegram contains a statement of the principles which it is the
considered opinion of His Majesty’s Government should in future guide the
policy in China of the Washington Treaty Powers.
The annex, to which reference is made in paragraph 12 of the enclosed
statement consists of the memorandum communicated to the United States
Embassy on May 28th last explaining the attitude of His Majesty’s
Government towards the Chinese Tariff Conference. Copies of this
document are also transmitted herewith for convenience of reference.96b
I have [etc.]
ESME HOWARD
[Enclosure—Telegram]
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain) to the British Minister in China
(Lampson)

For some time past His Majesty’s Government have watched with growing
anxiety the situation in China, and they believe that this anxiety will be
shared by the Governments of the interested Powers. Five years ago the
Powers assembled at Washington and, taking into consideration the
circumstances then existing in China, they agreed among themselves, in
conjunction with the representatives of the Chinese Government, that their
future policy should be guided by certain general principles designed to
safeguard the integrity and independence of China, to promote her political
and economic development and the rehabilitation of her finances. It was
agreed to grant her certain increases on her treaty tariff in order to provide
the revenue required for these purposes. It was further agreed that a
commission should examine the question of extra-territoriality with a view
to amending the system now in force by the elimination of abuses and
accretions and by the removal of unnecessary limitations on China’s
sovereignty.
 
Unfortunately the Tariff Conference did not meet for four years, and during
that period the situation had greatly deteriorated. During a succession of
civil wars the authority of the Peking Government had diminished almost to
vanishing point, while in the south a powerful Nationalist Government at
Canton definitely disputed the right of the Government at Peking to speak
on behalf of China or enter into binding engagements in her name. This
process of disintegration, civil war and waning central authority continued
with increased acceleration after the Tariff Conference had met until
eventually the conference negotiations came to an end because there was no
longer a Government with whom to negotiate.
The Commission on Extra-territoriality96c has meanwhile completed its
labours and presented its report, but here, again, we are faced with a similar
difficulty due to the disintegration of China. The recommendations
contained in the report, while suggesting certain reforms capable of being
carried into immediate effect, presuppose for their full execution the
existence of a Government possessing authority to enter into engagements
on behalf of the whole of China.

During all these civil wars it has been the consistent policy of His Majesty’s
Government to abstain from any interference between the warring factions
or Rival Governments. Despite the disorders which civil war engenders and
the grievous losses inflicted on the vast commercial interests, both Chinese
and foreign, His Majesty’s Government have declined to associate
themselves with any particular faction or to interfere in any way with the
civil commotions. His Majesty’s Government believe that the Powers have
adopted a similar attitude and that this is and will continue to be the only
right attitude to maintain.
The situation which exists in China today is thus entirely different from that
which faced the Powers at the time they framed the Washington treaties. In
the present state of confusion, though some progress has been made by
means of local negotiation and agreements with regional Governments, it
has not been possible for the powers to proceed with the larger programme
of treaty revision which was foreshadowed at Washington or to arrive at a
settlement of any of the outstanding questions relating to the position of
foreigners in China. The political disintegration in China has, however,
been accompanied by the growth of a powerful nationalist movement which
aimed at gaining for China an equal place among the nations, and any
failure to meet this movement with sympathy and understanding would not
respond to the real intentions of the Powers towards China.
 
His Majesty’s Government, after carefully reviewing the position, desire to
submit their considered opinion as to the course which the Washington
Treaty Powers should now adopt. His Majesty’s Government propose that
these Governments shall issue a statement setting forth the essential facts of
the situation; declaring their readiness to negotiate on treaty revision and all
other outstanding questions as soon as the Chinese themselves have
constituted a Government with authority to negotiate; and stating their
intentions pending the establishment of such a Government to pursue a
constructive policy in harmony with the spirit of the Washington
Conference but developed and adapted to meet the altered circumstances of
the present time.

His Majesty’s Government propose that in this joint declaration the Powers
should make it clear that in their constructive policy they desire to go as far
as possible towards meeting the legitimate aspirations of the Chinese
nation. They should abandon the idea that the economic and political
development of China can only be secured under foreign tutelage, and
should declare their readiness to recognise her right to the enjoyment of
tariff autonomy as soon as she herself has settled and promulgated a new
national tariff. They should expressly disclaim any intention of forcing
foreign control upon an unwilling China. While calling upon China to
maintain that respect for sanctity of treaties which is primary obligation
common to all civilised states, Powers should yet recognise both essential
justice of Chinese claim for treaty revision and difficulty under present
conditions of negotiating new treaties in place of old, and they should
therefore modify their traditional attitude of rigid insistence on strict letter
of treaty rights. During this possibly very prolonged period of uncertainty
the Powers can only, in the view of His Majesty’s Government, adopt an
expectant attitude and endeavour to shape developments so far as possible
in conformity with the realities of the situation so that ultimately when
treaty revision becomes possible, it will be found that part at least of the
revision has already been effected on satisfactory lines. It would therefore
be wise to abandon the policy of ineffective protest over minor matters,
reserving protest—which should then be made effective by united action—
only for cases where vital interests are at stake. Every case should be
considered on its merits and the declaration should show that the Powers
are prepared to consider in a sympathetic spirit any reasonable proposals
that the Chinese authorities, wherever situated, may make, even if contrary
to strict interpretation of treaty rights, in return for fair and considerate
treatment of foreign interests by them. The declaration should show that it
is the policy of the Powers to endeavor to maintain harmonious relations
with China without waiting for or insisting on the prior establishment of a
strong Central Government.
It is the earnest hope of His Majesty’s Government that the Powers will
agree to adopt the principles of the policy outlined above and apply them to
the realities of the present situation. Certain recommendations in the reports
of the Commission on Extra-territoriality referred to in paragraph 3 above
and certain other reforms not covered by that commission’s report but

falling under the general heading of extra-territoriality can be carried into
effect even in present conditions without great delay. There is, however, one
step of more immediate importance which in the opinion of His Majesty’s
Government the Powers should agree to take at once. His Majesty’s
Government believe that an endeavour should be made to undo the evil
results which have flowed from the failure of the Tariff Conference to
implement the promises as to tariff increases made by the Powers to China
nearly five years ago, and they propose, therefore, that the Powers should
agree to the immediate unconditional grant of the Washington surtaxes.
By the China Customs Treaty signed at Washington on the 6th February,
1922,96d the Powers promised to grant China certain tariff increases
(commonly known as the Washington surtaxes) “for such purposes and
subject to such conditions” as the special conference might determine. That
special conference is the Tariff Conference which, after a delay of nearly
four years, met in Peking on the 26th October, 1925, and has now to all
intents and purposes definitely failed. The promised surtaxes have not been
granted. The foreign delegations were not satisfied with the assurances
which the Chinese delegation offered at the session of the 18th March as to
the purposes to which the Chinese Government would themselves devote
the proceeds of the surtaxes. They were prepared to grant them only upon
conditions which ensured that the proceeds would be placed under foreign
control and applied—in great part—to the liquidation of the unsecured debt.
From the very outset His Majesty’s Government were opposed to the
question of the unsecured debt being dealt with by the Tariff Conference at
all, and they frankly expressed this view in a confidential memorandum
communicated to the Consortium Powers early in 1923.96e They foresaw
that it might defeat the intentions of the Washington Conference, which
were to assist the economic and political development of China and to relax
—not to tighten—foreign control. They held that, the object of the
concessions proposed at the Washington Conference being to benefit China,
the principal purposes to which the customs surtax should be devoted ought
to be productive objects, such as railway construction, and social or
economic reforms which would be a permanent benefit to China as a whole.
The most promising of these reforms was in their opinion the abolition of li-
kin, which moreover, was expressly contemplated in the treaty itself.

It has been argued that debt consolidation would also be a permanent
benefit to China because it would restore China’s credit. This argument
would doubtless be valid if there were a Government in effective control of
the whole country, but in China to-day debt consolidation could only enable
the faction which happened to be in power in Peking to resort to fresh
ruinous and unproductive borrowing. His Majesty’s Government were
therefore opposed to making the consolidation of the unsecured debt one of
the purposes to be attained by the Tariff Conference, although their own
nationals were directly interested in the funding of some of these debts.
A further objection to the inclusion of the unsecured debt among the
subjects to be dealt with at the Tariff Conference was brought into relief by
the grant in principle of tariff autonomy. That raised at once in acute form
the question of control over customs revenues. His Majesty’s Government
viewed with grave misgiving the proposal that foreign control should be
extended over additional revenues which might be increased by tariff
autonomy. In 1921 it was natural that the Powers should demand guarantees
for the due fulfilment of the benevolent purposes which the Washington
Conference aimed at achieving. But what might have been practicable in
1921 was no longer possible in 1926. It was obvious that China would not
now submit to any extension of foreign control either for debt consolidation
or for the abolition of li-kin, and it seemed to His Majesty’s Government
that for the Powers to unite in an attempt to impose control upon an
unwilling China would be entirely opposed to the spirit of the Washington
treaties, and to the policy which His Majesty’s Government had consistently
advocated. At the same time His Majesty’s Government felt that it was
essential that the Washington promises, so long overdue, should be
implemented. Accordingly, on the 28th May last, in reply to an enquiry
from the United States Government as to the attitude of His Majesty’s
Government towards the Tariff Conference, they proposed in a
memorandum, copy of which is annexed hereto,96f that the Powers should
abstain from any attempt to exact guarantees or conditions, but should
forthwith authorise the levy of the surtaxes.
Owing to the collapse of the conference no action on this proposal was
possible. The situation, however, suddenly developed in the very direction
which was anticipated when the proposal was made. The Cantonese did, in

fact, seize the Washington surtaxes by levying, in defiance of the treaties,
certain additional taxes on the foreign trade of the port. His Majesty’s
Government have with much reluctance joined in the protest against the
new taxes for the sake of maintaining solidarity with the Powers, but they
are not satisfied that this is the right policy for the present situation. They
regret that they did not more insistently press their views at an earlier stage
of the conference, but they think that it is still not too late, despite the
protest already made, to return to the alternative course proposed in the
memorandum of 28th May. His Majesty’s Government therefore strongly
urge that the Powers should now authorise the immediate levy of the
Washington surtaxes unconditionally throughout China. They hope that this
may provide a basis for regularising the position at Canton.
The principle [sic] objection that will probably be made to this proposal is
that in strict logic it would amount to condoning a breach of treaty. This
argument, however, does not sufficiently take into account the realities of
the situation. The basic facts of the present situation are that the treaties are
now admittedly in many respects out of date, and that in any attempt to
secure a revision the Chinese are confronted on the one hand with the
internal difficulty of their own disunion and on the other with the external
difficulty of obtaining the unanimous concurrence of the Powers. The latest
instance of this is the failure of the attempt to alter the tariff of 1858.96g His
Majesty’s Government attach the greatest importance to the sanctity of
treaties, but they believe that this principle may best be maintained by a
sympathetic adjustment of treaty rights to the equitable claims of the
Chinese. Protests should be reserved for cases where there is an attempt at
wholesale repudiation of treaty obligations or an attack upon the legitimate
and vital interests of foreigners in China, and in these cases the protests
should be made effective by the united action of the powers.
His Majesty’s Government have consistently carried out the obligation of
full and frank consultation imposed upon all the Powers alike by article 7 of
the Nine-Powers Pact96h and it has been their constant aim—sometimes
even when this involved a sacrifice of their opinion—to maintain the
solidarity of the Powers. It is in pursuance of this aim that His Majesty’s
Government are now communicating to the Powers this statement of the
principles by which they believe that policy should be guided in future.

They feel assured that the Powers will share the anxiety of His Majesty’s
Government to act towards China in the spirit which inspired the
Washington Treaties, and it is their earnest hope that the Powers will agree
that that spirit cannot better be fulfilled than by adopting the policy which is
now presented for their consideration.
It seems to His Majesty’s Government that the first step towards the
carrying of this new policy into effect should be the immediate
unconditional grant of the Washington surtaxes. Lest it be supposed that the
grant of the surtaxes might favour one faction at the expense of the others
and so provide a further incentive to civil war, His Majesty’s Government
deem it important to point out that, as no conditions would be attached to
the grant the proceeds of the surtaxes would not necessarily be remitted by
the Commissioners of Customs to the custodian banks at Shanghai. It would
in each case be for the competent Chinese authorities to decide all questions
as to the disposition and banking of these additional revenues. His
Majesty’s Government will be glad to learn at the earliest possible moment
whether the Powers agree to the unconditional grant of the Washington
surtaxes.
96a This paper bears the annotation: “Handed to Secretary of State by
British Ambassador this 24th day of December, 1926.”
96b Ante, p. 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 627].
96c See pp. 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744] ff.
96d Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 282.
96e Not printed.
96f Ante, p. 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 627].
96g Malloy, Treaties, 1776–1909, vol. I, p. 222.
96h Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 276.

893.512/485: Telegram
[Document 716]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, December 28, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received December 28—1:40 p.m.]
644. Department’s 308, last paragraph. My earnest advice is not to offer or
to commit ourselves to make concessions, at present, beyond those in
contemplation in the decisions of the Washington Conference as enlarged
later in the Special Customs Conference. It would gain us no consideration
or respect on the part of the [Chinese] to do so. Indeed it would give them
courage to deprive us and other foreigners of all special privileges, and
ordinary rights as well, and to open up again the issue of Chinese
immigration. Furthermore, to do so would enable the charge to be made by
the Japanese and the British that we had, to use the terms which would be
used, betrayed the collective interests common to the powers …
MACMURRAY

893.512/489: Telegram
[Document 717]
The Consul General at Hankow (Lockhart) to the Secretary of
State
HANKOW, December 29, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received 7:37 p.m.]
Eugene Chen, Minister for Foreign Affairs, stated to me today that he has
been advised from an absolutely reliable source that the Secretary of State
is preparing a statement to be made public on the subject of the two and a
half percent surtaxes. Chen stated that in view of the fact that he will
telegraph an important announcement to Washington within the next 48
hours it is his view that the American Government should await this
announcement of the new government before making public the statement.
Although making no direct request, Chen is extremely anxious that the
Department’s statement be held in abeyance until his announcement is
received at Washington and made public there.
The British statement on the two and a half percent surtaxes has made a
distinctly unfavorable impression on the new government, the main
objection apparently being that the surtaxes will supply millions of dollars
to the Northern military forces, especially through the Shanghai and
Tientsin customs collections. Chen stated that it merely means prolonging
of the struggle and much further bloodshed.
LOCKHART

893.512/485: Telegram
[Document 718]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, December 29, 1926—4 p.m.
311. Your 644, December 28, 6 P.M. Following is text of reply to British
memorandum left with me December 24 by British Ambassador, now under
consideration and subject to changes. I desire your comment.
“On June 24, 1925, the Chinese Government addressed identic
notes to the Powers asking for revision of existing treaties.97 On
September 4, 1925, the American Legation at Peking, acting
under the instructions of this Government, informed the Chinese
Foreign Office98 that it was prepared to consider the Chinese
Government’s Proposal for the modification of existing treaties in
measure as the Chinese authorities demonstrated their willingness
and ability to fulfill their obligations and to assume the protection
of foreign rights and interests safeguarded by the exceptional
provisions of those treaties. In that note the Government of the
United States stated that it sympathized with the feeling of the
Chinese Government that the tariff schedules attached to the
various treaties beween China and the other Powers had become a
severe handicap upon the ability of China to adjust its import
tariffs to meet the domestic economic needs of the country. It
stated that this matter had received consideration at the
Washington Conference and that it was the belief of the
Government of the United States that the most feasible method
for dealing with the question was by the constant and scrupulous
observance of the obligations undertaken at that Conference. The
Chinese Foreign Office was informed that the Government of the
United States was then ready to appoint its delegates to the
Special Conference on China’s tariff matters provided for in the
treaty of February 6, 1922, and was furthermore willing, either at

that Conference or at a subsequent time, to consider and discuss
any reasonable proposal that might be made by the Chinese
Government for a revision of the treaties on the subject of the
tariff.
The Government of the United States duly appointed its delegates
to attend this Special Conference which was called by the
Chinese Government to meet in Peking on October 26, 1925.99 Its
delegates were instructed not only to carry out the letter and spirit
of the Washington Treaty respecting China’s customs tariff but, as
indicated in the above note, to discuss any reasonable proposal
that might be made by the Chinese Government for a general
revision of the treaties on the subject of the tariff.
Shortly after the opening of the Conference and on November 3,
1925, the American delegation proposed1 that the Conference at
once authorize the levying of a surtax of two and one-half percent
on necessaries, and, as soon as the requisite schedules could be
prepared, authorize the levying of a surtax of up to five percent on
luxuries. Our delegates furthermore announced that the
Government of the United States was prepared to proceed at once
with the negotiation of such an agreement or agreements as might
be necessary for making effective other provisions of the
Washington treaties of February 6, 1922. They affirmed the
principle of respect for China’s tariff autonomy and announced
that they were prepared then to negotiate a new treaty that would
give effect to that principle and which should make provision for
the abolition of likin, for the removal of tariff restrictions
contained in existing treaties and for putting into effect of the
Chinese National Tariff Law.
On November 19, 1925, the Committee on Provisional Measures
of the Conference adopted the following resolution:2
‘The Delegates of the Powers assembled at this
Conference resolve to adopt the following proposed
article relating to tariff autonomy with a view to

incorporating it, together with other matters, to be
hereafter agreed upon, in a treaty which is to be signed
at this Conference.
The Contracting Powers other than China hereby
recognize China’s right to enjoy tariff autonomy; agree
to remove the tariff restrictions which are contained in
existing treaties between themselves respectively and
China; and consent to the going into effect of the
Chinese National Tariff Law on January 1st, 1929.
The Government of the Republic of China declares that
likin shall be abolished simultaneously with the
enforcement of the Chinese National Tariff Law; and
further declares that the abolition of likin shall be
effectively carried out by the First Day of the First
Month of the Eighteenth Year of the Republic of China
(January 1st, 1929).’
Continuously from the beginning of the Conference our delegates
and technical advisers collaborated with the delegates and
technical advisers of the other Powers, including China, in an
effort to agree upon a tariff schedule which it was estimated
would yield to China all the additional revenues she would
require to begin the abolition of likin, to pay interest and
ultimately to retire her unsecured and inadequately secured debts,
foreign and domestic, and for her administrative expenses.
The Chinese delegation declared that China would endeavor, with
the means at her disposal, to see to it that definite arrangements
would be made for the unsecured and inadequately secured debts
of the Central Government, foreign and domestic, so that all
payments of principal and interest on them might be duly and
promptly met. It was recognized that a condition precedent to the
reestablishment of China’s credit and the necessary rehabilitation
of her railroads must be the funding of her unsecured and
inadequately secured debts.

Shortly after the substance of a tariff schedule had been agreed
upon, the then existing Government disappeared. The delegates
representing the foreign Powers, however, continued their efforts
to reach an agreement among themselves on the subjects under
discussion at the Conference. Ultimately, there being no Central
Government of China, the delegates of the foreign Powers met on
July 3, 1926, and issued the following statement:
‘The Delegates of the foreign Powers to the Chinese
Customs Tariff Conference met at the Netherlands
Legation this morning. They expressed the unanimous
and earnest desire to proceed with the work of the
Conference at the earliest possible moment when the
Delegates of the Chinese Government are in a position
to resume discussion with the foreign Delegates of the
problems before the Conference.’
The Government of the United States was ready then and is ready
now to proceed with the program of the Special Conference as
indicated in the identic note of September 4, 1925, and in the
statement of its delegates at the Conference on November 3,
1925, and as reiterated in common with the delegates of the other
Powers in the statement of July 3, 1926, just quoted. The
Government of the United States is nevertheless prepared to
consent to the immediate imposition of the surtaxes provided in
the Washington Treaty of February 6, 1922, as a preliminary step
even before the resumption of negotiations.
Resolution No. 5, adopted at the Washington Conference on
December 10, 1921,3 provided for the constitution of a
Commission, composed of one representative from each of the
Powers having extraterritorial treaties with China. This
Commission was to inquire into the present practice of
extraterritorial jurisdiction in China and into the laws and judicial
system and the methods of judicial administration in China with a
view to reporting to the Governments of the several Powers its
findings of fact in regard to these matters and its

recommendations as to such means as it might find suitable to
improve the existing conditions of the administration of justice in
China and to assist and further the efforts of the Chinese
Government to effect such legislation and judicial reforms as
would warrant the other Powers in relinquishing, either
progressively 
or 
otherwise, 
their 
respective 
rights 
of
extraterritoriality. An additional resolution provided that China
should have a representative under the Commission, and that
China was prepared to cooperate with the work of the
Commission and afford every possible facility for the successful
accomplishment of its tasks.
In the identic note of September 4, 1925, above referred to, the
Government of the United States expressed the hope that the
Commission might be able to begin at an early date its
investigation of the existing conditions of the administration of
justice in China and to make a report which would serve as a
basis for recommendations to be made in pursuance of the
resolution, for the purpose of enabling the Governments
concerned to consider what, if any, steps might be taken with a
view to the relinquishment of the extraterritorial rights.
The Commission convened in Peking on January 12, 1926, and
concluded its labors by a report signed by all of the Powers,
including China, on September 16, 1926.4 The report was divided
into four parts: Part 1—the present practice of extraterritoriality in
China; Part 2—the laws and judicial system; Part 3—
administration of justice, and Part 4—recommendations. The
Chinese Commissioner stated, ‘By signing this report my
approval of all of the statements contained in parts 1, 2 and 3 is
not to be implied.’ He made no reservation as to part 4, which
contained the recommendations.
The United States has always regarded the system of
extraterritoriality in China as a modus vivendi, necessary for
harmonious relations between China and the Powers until the

evolution of the laws and legal conceptions of China should
render it unnecessary.
In the treaty between the United States and China dated October
8, 1903,5 the Government of the United States agreed to give
every assistance toward the attainment by the Chinese
Government of its expressed desire to reform its judicial system
and to bring it into accord with that of Western nations, and
declared that the United States was prepared to relinquish its
extraterritorial rights when satisfied that the state of the Chinese
laws, the arrangements for their administration and other
considerations warranted it in so doing.
One of the recommendations of the Commission is that the
administration of justice with respect to the civilian population in
China must be entrusted to a judiciary which shall be effectively
protected against any unwarranted interference by the executive
or other branches of the Government, whether civil or military.
Another of the recommendations is that prior to the reasonable
compliance with all of the recommendations of the Commission,
but after the principal items thereof have been carried out, the
Powers concerned, if so desired by the Chinese Government, may
consider the abolition of extraterritoriality according to such
progressive scheme (whether geographical, partial or otherwise)
as may be agreed upon.
Many of the recommendations of the Commission are in accord
with the fixed policy of the Government of the United States. As
soon as a Government of China is established which demonstrates
its ability to insure peace and security to its people in the
legitimate pursuit of their affairs, the Government of the United
States will be prepared immediately to enter into negotiations for
the relinquishment of its extraterritorial control over its citizens in
China.
The Government of the United States has watched with
sympathetic interest the nationalistic awakening of China and

welcomes every advance made by the Chinese people toward
reorganizing their system of Government.
During the difficult years since the establishment of the new
regime in 1912, the Government of the United States has
endeavored in every way to maintain an attitude of the most
careful and strict neutrality as among the several factions that
have disputed with one another for control in China. Continuing
its policy of non-interference in the internal affairs of the Chinese
people, the Government of the United States awaits anxiously the
day when a Government will appear in China which will be
prepared to negotiate in China’s behalf concerning the many
questions outstanding. This Government wishes to deal with such
a Government and the people of China in a most liberal spirit. It
holds no concessions in China, enjoys no special privileges, and
has never manifested any imperialistic attitude toward China. All
that the United States desires is that its citizens be given equal
opportunity with the citizens of the other Powers to reside in
China and to pursue their legitimate occupations without special
privileges, monopolies or spheres of special interest or influence.
[”]
KELLOGG
97 See telegram No. 247, June 24, 1925, from the Chargé in China, Foreign
Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 763.
98 Ibid. , p. 831.
99 See note of Aug. 19, 1925, from the Chinese Minister, ibid. , p. 839.
1 See telegram No. 4, Nov. 4, 1925, from the Minister in China, ibid. , p.
875.
2 See telegram No. 6, Nov. 19, 1925, from the American delegation, ibid. ,
p. 881.
3 Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 289.
4 See pp. 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744] ff.
5 Malloy, Treaties, 1776–1909, vol. I, p. 269.

893.512/490: Telegram
[Document 719]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 30, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received December 30—2:20 p.m.]
647. My 633, December 22, 5 p.m.6 Following from American consul
general at Hankow:
“December 28, 2 p.m. My December 18, noon. I have today been
officially informed that ‘the statutes for the collection of the
inland tax on the production and consumption of commodities’
now being collected at Canton will be enforced here and at ‘the
remaining places where there are customs houses and native
customs houses’ from January 1, 1927. With the note from
Commissioner of Foreign Affairs transmitting the notice, is
enclosed statute authorizing imposition of the two and one-half
percent surtax at Canton and since it is assumed that you are fully
informed of the terms of this so-called statute I am not repeating
it by telegram. Article 3 of the statute, however, reads as follows:
‘In order to facilitate the merchants, this temporary inland tax
may be paid to the various customhouses, the native
customhouses or barriers, or the tax collection offices in their
vicinity. The detailed regulations governing the collection of this
tax shall be separately made and promulgated by the Ministry of
Finance.’ Exact plan of collection is not defined.
Statute states that luxuries, which will be separately classified,
shall pay five percent and that tobacco, wine, kerosene, gasoline,
et cetera, shall be exempt from the payment of the tax but will be
subjected to a special tax.
Please telegraph if diplomatic body has come to a decision or if
you have any separate instructions apropos these taxes.”

 
I have replied as follows:
“December 30, 5 p.m. Your December 28, 2 p.m.
1. The Department has instructed me to give complete
support in diplomatic body meetings to British program
as expressed in British declaration recently make
[made] public. (Telegraph if you have not an authorized
copy thereof.) Department is now willing to put
Washington surtaxes into effect unconditionally.
2. Thus far no unanimity has been arrived at in
diplomatic 
body 
conference 
regarding 
British
declaration, since the Japanese Government is opposed
thereto, and several diplomatic representatives are as
yet without instructions. I construe the Department’s
instructions to mean that it would not wish to make
known its agreement with the British program pending
complete agreement by the powers concerned or some
decision if unanimity is not achieved.
3. In this circumstance you should refrain from
protesting against or in any way objecting to the
imposition of the new taxes subject to further
instructions. Replies to queries by American citizens as
to payment of taxes should be of this tenor.”
MACMURRAY
6 Not printed.

893.512/491: Telegram
[Document 720]
The Chinese Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs at Hankow
(Chen) to the Secretary of State
HANKOW, December 31, 1926.
[Received December 31—8:15 p.m.]
My Government learn that [it] is the intention United States Government to
agree to British proposal regarding immediate enforcement so-called
Washington surtaxes and payment proceeds to local authorities at ports
collection.
In spite elaborately worded sentiments in British declaration, real meaning
this proposal is that two-thirds new revenues will go to our political
enemies who, with war chests replenished, will be able continue civil war
that bleeds nation, delays liberation China from present international
control known as foreign imperialism.
Specifically, British proposal means: (a) not only that Chang Tso-lin will
receive new and substantial revenues but gilt-edge security will be created
enabling him float loan, save his inflated currency from collapse,
inseparable from reckless prosecution wars of revenge and feudal ambition;
(b) not alone Peking (whose receipt of customs surpluses has made it
hitherto object of loot) but every treaty port will become fresh object
militarist plunder and added incentive to perpetuation feudalism civil war in
China; and (c) Shanghai, which has been passing to Nationalist control
without much fighting, must now become theatre bloody struggle
(involving maybe permanent injury foreign trade), since the millions to be
collected there is [sic] 40 percent of the surtaxes—are to San Chuanfang8
and Chang Tsung-eh’ang9 raw meat to beasts of prey.
If views, sentiments expressed in British declaration leave Nationalist mind
unmoved it’s because they cloak policy objectively a menace, danger

speedy advancement cause Chinese nationalism. But those who support that
cause are strong enough to meet this danger.
CHEN YU-YEN
8 Military overlord of the Provinces of Kiangsu, Kiangsi, Chekiang, Fukien,
and Anhwei.
9 Military Governor of Shantung.

893.512/504
[Document 721]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
[WASHINGTON,] December 31, 1926.
The Japanese Ambassador came to see me at 3:45 this afternoon. He stated
that his Government was somewhat surprised at the action taken by the
British in their memorandum which was left with the Diplomatic Body at
Peking on December 18 and published on December 25.10 He stated that
the Japanese Government felt that the surtaxes of the Washington
Conference should not be implemented without condition as stipulated by
the Washington Treaty; that his Government had made a proposal to the
Diplomatic Body at Peking suggesting that an informal resumption of the
Special Tariff Conference be called at Peking to sit with representatives of
North and South China for the purpose of completing the program of that
Conference. I told him that we had no information with regard to this new
plan of the Japanese.
He stated that the method which the British Government has used in this
matter made it very difficult for cooperation among the Japanese, British
and American Governments on these matters, a thing which the Japanese
Government had hoped very much could be brought about; his Government
felt that the British memorandum had precipitated a very difficult situation
in the Far East as regards China, and that it was almost impossible to know
how to deal with it. He said that the Japanese Government desired very
much to prevent any separation of China into several parts, a thing which he
felt the British memorandum rather encouraged than discouraged.
I told the Ambassador that the British memorandum was still receiving
consideration by the Secretary and that it was our expectation that when a
reply was prepared a copy would be given to the diplomatic missions at
Washington of the Powers party to the Washington Conference.

N[ELSON] T. J[OHNSON]
10 See note No. 816, Dec. 23, from the British Ambassador and its
enclosure, p. 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 715].

893.512/492: Telegram
[Document 722]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, January 3, 1927—6 p.m.
1. Your telegram number 1, January 2, 9 a.m.11 The British memorandum
which was handed to me is the same as the one telegraphed by you. Please
feel free to take what time is necessary to make your suggestions and to
reframe the draft reply given in my 311, December 29, to cover your views.
In our statement I wished not to completely disregard and scrap either the
treaties of Washington or the work of the Conference at Washington. But I
wish to show that we are willing to make ample concessions to China and
that we are willing to have discussions about them with any Chinese
Government. In my opinion it seemed inadvisable to recognize at this time
the different Chinese factions, but instead to use at least our moral influence
for a united China. However, I shall be glad to consider your suggestions
most carefully.
KELLOGG
11 Not printed.

893.512/501: Telegram
[Document 723]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, January 5, 1926 [1927]—9 a.m.
[Received 11:18 a.m.12 ]
10. Your number 311 of December 29, 1926.
1. Viewing the draft reply to the British memorandum from the standpoints
of our concern over the necessity to cooperate in matters of mutual interest
in China with other powers and the more important factor of the effect
which may be anticipated with regard to the Chinese people and the
political elements of China, my feeling is frankly that the draft seems
inadvisable for the reason that a misconstruction of your purposes would
certainly be conveyed by it to both the foreigners in China and the Chinese.
2. As my telegram 632 of December 22 indicated, I do not wholly like the
substance of the British memorandum nor the time and manner of its
presentation. But I feel nevertheless that we perforce must go as far as they;
on the other hand, it would be dangerous for us to appear to try to outbid
them, and if we ourselves were to present a program which was less
adapted to the circumstances of the situation as they actually exist, it would
react upon us unfavorably. Frankly, the impression is made upon my mind
by a reading of the draft reply that it does not constitute a reply at all.
Instead it is a declaration of which the interpretation would be made that it
was a competitive protestation of American sympathy for China and that it
offers actually less than the proposal of the British offers; everything in it,
beyond granting the Washington surtaxes, is linked to the conditioning fact
that we are awaiting the establishment in China of an effective government.
Therefore, it would appear to the Chinese that the proposals embodied in
the draft reply were completely illusory, if, indeed, they did not appear to
the Chinese to be, particularly in the last paragraph, unscrupulous.

Apparently the intention of the draft reply is, by offering a program of
negotiations that would be acceptable, to conciliate Chinese nationalistic
feeling. My conviction is that any question whether one or another program
is acceptable to the Chinese must be discounted. No considerable element
of the Chinese will accept any one of them. … It is my hope that wide
publicity will be given by the Department to the protest from Eugene Chen,
in accord with the lines of a later telegram which will give a suggested
reply, which reduces to absurdity the claims his faction and other Chinese
factions have advanced and which also have been put forward by certain
Americans who have been propagating the idea that by a wholesale
renunciation of our rights we would win over the Chinese.
4. It seems to me, assuming as granted that we are sincere in our
declarations of sympathy in regard to what is genuine in the aspirations of
the Chinese people internationally, that it is not our immediately essential
problem to declare in the face of Chinese importunities how much we will
or must concede of our rights; it is to decide how we can arrange as a
practical matter to grant what is necessary to the fulfillment of our own
obligations and to avoid appearing to fail in carrying out the promises we
made at the Washington and the Tariff Conferences. …
5. I assume your intention is to make the proposed draft reply public. If this
were done, it would be considered by those few officials who read it as an
academic recital of details not in themselves of any interest. It would seem
to the very primitive native press, and to Chinese opinion in the large,
merely to indicate that our Government felt lukewarm toward the proposals
made by the British; that our Government was unable or unwilling to
suggest of its own accord any alternative except generalities which are
rendered meaningless by the “joker” they contain; and that our
Government, in disavowing imperialist motives and avowing readiness to
accept for its nationals the same treatment which is acceptable to the other
nations, is abandoning the leadership accruing to it out of the Conference at
Washington and is reverting to the policy by which other nationalities are
allowed to do the fighting for the United States. I admit regretfully that
among the Chinese there is rather generally a disposition to believe that we
may be expected always to make concessions up to the utmost limit and

then to calculate upon profiting from what may be obtained by other powers
through individual action.
6. Most respectfully I say that I cannot but counsel you that without any
question the publication of the draft reply would leave on Chinese minds
the fundamental impression that in the new situation created by the fact that
a central government in China has disappeared virtually completely and
irretrievably, we have failed to confront the situation and adapt ourselves to
it. Political thought in China is quite incapable of understanding the
difficulties we find in meeting the problems which their own lack of
national organization have created. If we Americans are to avoid giving the
Chinese reason to be disappointed and disillusioned with our sincerity and
ability we must find some way by which we can deal with the realities of
China’s condition of not having a real government and not likely to have
one during an uncertain number of years in the future, except in the event,
which is rather improbable, that the Kuomintang succeeds in extending its
effective control over the whole country. In regard to this practical problem,
which the political disorganization of China presents, my own thinking has
considerably advanced over that which I discussed earlier, in my number
325, August 14, 1926.13 I anticipate now the opportunity of conferring on
this subject with you within about five weeks.
7. Meanwhile, in my opinion, it seems that the very best service which
could be rendered to our own people by our Government as the trustee of
the interests of America in China would be to acquiesce as a matter of
course in the British proposal, without demur or more than a minimum of
publicity. As to the general tenor of our reply, I venture the suggestion
which follows:14
The American Government is happy to find on perusal of the
British memorandum that the British Government continues to be
actuated by the purposes which governed the Washington
Conference, and that it desires to cooperate with the other
interested powers in evolving a policy based upon those purposes
as adapted to the wholly altered situation which has since come to
prevail in China. As the British Government is already aware, the
American Government is no less anxious than it to acquit itself of

the obligations assumed at Washington with respect to the two
and one-half and five percent surtaxes, and with that in view to
join forthwith in a declaration by which the interested powers
would consent that these surtaxes should at the earliest practicable
moment be made applicable by the Maritime Customs
Administration to the trade of their respective nationals. The
American Government is also elaborating such legislative and
administrative proposals as are necessary to enable it to put into
effect as early as possible with respect to its nationals those
recommendations of the report of the Extraterritoriality
Commission which deal with matters that are within the
individual competency of the several participating Governments;
and it shares the hope that the other interested nations may
similarly find it feasible to take such steps as they find suitable
with a view to bringing about a general adoption of those
recommendations upon which it is now possible to take action.
The American Government is hopeful that taking of these steps
will assist in bringing about a situation in which a renewed sense
of confidence may make it possible for China and the treaty
powers to undertake a reconsideration of their relationships, with
a view [to] such modification of the treaty status as may meet the
aspirations of Chinese national feeling to the fullest extent that,
under actual conditions, is compatible with the just rights and
interests of the several nations concerned. The American
Government would be happy to cooperate to that end with the
other interested Governments and welcomes the British proposals
as containing suggestions which under the actual conditions of the
present may well prove helpful towards the object in view.
8. Referring to third sentence of the reply suggested above, I venture to
point out that it is very necessary that there be drawn up an explanatory
memorandum and drafts of the required legislation for enabling us to carry
out the recommendations of the Extraterritoriality Commission. In the event
that the Department has itself not yet met this need, I recommend most
urgently that telegraphic instructions be given to Jacobs15 to communicate
to you through the Legation by telegraph a summary of his suggestions and

opinions, and to prepare the drafts for what documents he considers to be
necessary so that our Government can comply with the Commission’s
recommendations.
MACMURRAY
12 Telegram in two sections.
13 Ante, p. 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538].
14 Suggested reply not paraphrased.
15 Joseph E. Jacobs, on duty at Peking as technical adviser to the American
member of the Commission on Extraterritoriality in China.

Protests by the United States and other
powers 
against 
Chinese 
financial
measures diverting revenues from
payment of foreign loans in default
[724] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 11, 1926. [Received April 23.]
893.51/4907
[725] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 18, 1926. [Received April 23.]
893.51/4909
[726] The American, British, French, and Japanese Ministers to the
Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs
[Peking, March 18, 1926.]
893.51/4908
[727] The American, British, and French Ministers to the Chinese
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
[Peking, April 19, 1926.]
893.51/4945

[728] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, June 4, 1926—8 p.m.
893.51/4923: Telegram
[729] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 8, 1926—9 a.m. [Received June 8—9:25 a.m.]
893.51/4925: Telegram
[730] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 13, 1926—9 a.m. [Received June 14—3:46 a.m.]
893.51/4932: Telegram
[731] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, June 15, 1926—4 p.m.
893.51/4932: Telegram
[732] The American Group to the Secretary of State
New York, June 22, 1926. [Received June 23.]
893.51/4937
[733] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 27, 1926. [Received September 1.]
893.51/4955

[734] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 30, 1926. [Received September 1.]
893.51/4954
[735] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 24, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 9:10 p.m.]
893.51/4951: Telegram
[736] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 9, 1926—9 a.m. [Received 1:25 p.m.]
893.51/4957: Telegram
[737] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 3, 1926. [Received October 20.]
893.51/4970
[738] The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the American
Legation
Peking , October 13, 1926.
893.51/4987
[739] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, October 30, 1926—11 p.m.
893.51/4974: Telegram

[740] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 4, 1926—10 a.m. [Received November 4—1:10 a.m.]
893.51/4976: Telegram
[741] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 21, 1926. [Received February 5, 1927.]
893.51/5010

893.51/4907
[Document 724]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 11, 1926.
[Received April 23.]
No. 508
SIR: With reference to my telegram No. 523 of December 11, 1925, 12
noon,16 in which I reported that the Hukuang bond payment was again in
default, I have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed, for the
Department’s information, a copy of a joint note dated December 12, 1925,
signed by the British and French Ministers, as well as by myself, to the Wai
Chiao Pu, protesting against the default. There is also transmitted herewith
enclosed a copy, in translation, of note No. 120, dated December 31, 1925,
from the Foreign Office in reply.
The Department’s attention is invited to the quotations therein from the
Ministry of Communications to the effect that “this debt has already been
placed in the category of those to be consolidated by the new Customs
surtax,” and “we have also already written the Ministry of Finance,
requesting that an appropriation be made to meet the principal and interest
due this time.”
In view of this unsatisfactory reply the interested Ministers, after agreement
with their respective Group representatives, transmitted, on February 10,
1926, an identic memorandum to the Wai Chiao Pu in which inquiry was
made as to the nature of the means which were being contrived by the
Ministry of Finance for the payment of the loan service, and requesting that,
failing the provision of funds from other sources, the necessary funds
should immediately be furnished from Customs revenues.
I am now in receipt of a memorandum from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
dated March 5th, in reply. This memorandum quotes a statement from the

Ministry of Communications to the effect that the Hukuang Loan has
already been placed by the Ministry of Communications before the
Commission for the Readjustment of Finance, with a request that, together
with others, the loan be placed upon the list for consolidation.
Copies of the enclosures accompanying this despatch have been transmitted
to the American Group Representative for his information. The Department
will be informed of any further action in this case.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[Enclosure 1]
The American, French, and British Ministers to the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The Undersigned, the British, French and American Representatives,
present their compliments to His Excellency the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, and have the honour to state that they have been informed by the
Agents of the Banks concerned that the amount of £261,046. 5s. 5d.,
including the unpaid service of the German issued portion due in June last,
namely £73,245: 8s. 10d., payable on December 3rd on account of the
Hukuang Railways Loan is in default, and that the Banks have been
informed by the Ministries concerned that the Chinese Government is
unable to meet payment.
 
The Undersigned have the honour to point out that payment to the
bondholders is due on December 15th and that there are still some days in
which it is possible by prompt measures to avoid the grave consequences of
public default. They would in this connection, referring to their Joint
Memorandum of October 12th, 1923,18 remind His Excellency that
according to Article 8 of the Loan Agreement19 the Chinese Government
undertook if payment of the Loan Service could not be made from the funds
originally designated for the purpose:—

“to make arrangements to ensure that the amount of deficiency be
met from other sources and handed over to the Banks on the dates
upon which funds were required to complete full payment of
interest and repayment of principal.”
From this provision it is clear that the Hukuang Loan Service is entitled to
an automatic priority of charge on the available revenues of the Chinese
Government over loans contracted at a later date, such as the internal loans,
the services of which are now being met out of Customs revenues, and the
Undersigned have therefore the honour to request that the necessary funds
shall immediately be furnished from the Maritime Customs revenues.
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
D. DEMARTEL
RONALD MACLEAY
PEKING, 12 December, 1925.
[Enclosure 2]
The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the American Minister (MacMurray)
[PEKING,] December 31, 1925.
No. 120
SIR: We have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of a joint memorandum
from you, the British, and the French Ministers, stating:
(The Undersigned … Representatives) “… have the honour to
state that they have been informed by the Agents of the Banks
concerned that the amount of £261,046–5s–5d, including the
unpaid service of the German issued portion due in June last,
namely £73,245–8s–10d, payable on December 3rd on account of
the Hukuang Railways Loan is in default, and that the Banks have

been informed by the Ministries concerned that the Chinese
Government is unable to make payment.
“… According to Article 8 of the Loan Agreement … the
Hukuang Loan service is entitled to … priority … over loans
contracted at a later date ….”
This Ministry at once communicated a request for consideration and action
to the Ministries of Finance and Communications, respectively. We have
now received a note in reply from the Ministry of Communications, stating:
“Because the supplementary loan of this railway could not be
floated, work on the road was suspended and the receipts have
thus been small, and the railway has been unable to pay the
principal and interest of the Hukuang Railway Loan when due, so
that the Government has had the heavy expense of meeting the
payment each time. Further, recent conditions have been much
upset, and the Government has found it difficult to prepare the
funds, and this debt has already been placed in the category of
those to be consolidated by the new Customs surtax.
On the other hand, we have also already written the Ministry of
Finance, requesting that an appropriation be made to meet the
principal and interest due this time.”
This Ministry having received the foregoing communication, we have the
honor, Mr. Minister, to indite this note for your information.
With compliments.
SEAL OF THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
[Enclosure 3]
The American, French, and British Ministers to the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs
[PEKING, February 10, 1926.]

The Undersigned, the British, French, and American Representatives, have
the honour to acknowledge the receipt of the letter from the Wai Chiao Pu
of the 31st ultimo20 on the subject of the default in the Hukuang loan
coupon, and they note that the Ministry of Finance have been requested to
contrive means for the payment of the instalment of the loan service now
overdue. More than a month has, however, since elapsed without the default
in this important railway loan having been made good, and they have
therefore the honour to enquire the nature of the means which are being
contrived by the Ministry of Finance for the payment of the loan service,
and to renew their request that, failing the provision of funds from other
sources, the necessary funds shall immediately be furnished from Customs
revenues.
[File copy not signed]
 
[Enclosure 4]
The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the American Minister (MacMurray)
MEMORANDUM
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
the American Minister’s memorandum of February 10th, regarding the
sums which should be paid on principal and interest of the Hukuang Loan,
which was at once communicated for consideration and action to the
Ministry of Communications.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has now received a reply from the Ministry
of Communications, stating:
“We have the honor to recall that the Hukuang Loan, principal
and interest, has already been placed by this Ministry before the
Commission for the Readjustment of Finance, with a request that
the loan be consolidated with others and handled from the new
Customs surtax. As to the payment of principal and interest now
due, as conditions are now much disturbed, no payment can be
made.

“Aside from addressing despatches to the Ministry of Finance and
to the Commission for the Readjustment of Finance, we have the
honor to indite this note for the information of your Ministry and
to request that you will in turn inform those concerned.”
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has the honor to make this reply to the
American Minister.
[PEKING,] March 5, 1926.
16 Not printed.
18 Not printed; see telegram No. 350, Oct. 15, 1923, from the Minister in
China, Foreign Relations, 1923, vol. I, p. 550.
19 Of May 20, 1911; MacMurray, Treaties, 1894–1911, vol. I, p. 866.
20 Dec. 31, 1925; supra.

893.51/4909
[Document 725]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 18, 1926.
[Received April 23.]
No. 512
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my telegram No. 97, of February 27, 4
p.m.,21 with reference to the fact that the Chinese banks had advanced funds
to the Chinese Government for New Year’s settlement. I reported therein
that the Ministry of Finance had issued Treasury Bills for $8,000,000. I now
beg leave to transmit, herewith enclosed, a statement giving the details of
the loan.21 These Treasury Notes, to the amount of $8,000,000, are secured
upon that portion of the Customs surplus which is now being used to serve
the Ninth Year Currency Loan, the financial redemption of which loan is
scheduled for 1927. There is also transmitted, for the Department’s
information, a copy, dated February 15, 1926, of the Regulations governing
the issuance of the Treasury Notes referred to.21a
I beg leave to invite the Department’s attention to the fact that the actual
amount received from the proceeds of the $8,000,000 amounts to
$3,880,000 only. Approximately half this amount has been turned over to
the militarists for the prosecution of their respective campaigns. The other
half has been used in the payment of arrears in salary of employees in the
various government ministries.
A glance at the statement of the details of the loan will convince the
Department of the ruinous terms upon which it was made.
On February 6th, after consultation with my British, French and Japanese
colleagues, I transmitted an identic note to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
protesting against this issue. A copy of this note is transmitted herewith
enclosed. There is also transmitted a note in translation, dated February

11th, from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in reply to my protest stating that
“the Customs surplus which is being set aside as security for this issue of
Treasury Notes by the Chinese Government has, from the beginning, been
used as security for the service of internal loans and does not concern or
hinder foreign creditors.”
This attitude on the part of the Chinese Government appears not only to
constitute a breach of faith to its creditors, but it would seem amounts to a
public dishonoring of the unpaid foreign and domestic debts.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[Enclosure 1]
The American Minister (MacMurray) to the Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs (Wang)
PEKING, February 6, 1926.
No. 162
EXCELLENCY: Reports have recently appeared in the press to the effect that Your
Excellency’s Government are negotiating with Chinese banks for the
flotation of an issue of Treasury Notes to the amount of $8,000,000, to be
secured upon that portion of the surplus Customs revenues which is now
being used for the service of the Ninth Year Currency Loan, due for final
redemption in 1927.
In previous communications I have pointed out that foreign loans, the
service of which the Chinese Government had engaged, in the event of
default or of the specific security pledged proving insufficient, to meet from
other sources, are entitled to an automatic priority over later internal loans. I
have accordingly on several occasions protested against the action of the
Chinese Government in hypothecating surplus Customs revenues for the
service of internal loans while foreign debts and obligations, anterior in date
to the internal loans in question, remained in default or in danger of default.

The situation regarding foreign loans bearing the general guarantee of the
Chinese Government has since become aggravated, several such loans
having recently fallen definitely into default.
By continuing to monopolise all available security to cover fresh domestic
obligations the Chinese Government are ignoring their guarantee given in
respect of previous foreign obligations, and it is evident that were this
process to continue the fulfilment of that guarantee would be indefinitely
postponed, and the guarantee would eventually come to be regarded as a
dead letter.
I have accordingly the honor to protest against the proposed utilization of
surplus Customs revenues as security for an issue of Treasury notes, while
no concrete steps have been taken to provide for meeting long outstanding
foreign obligations bearing the Chinese Government’s guarantee of
payment from general sources of revenue, and I trust that the proposal will
be abandoned as an earnest of the Chinese Government’s regard for justice
and for its own reputation for fairness and good faith.
I avail myself [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[Enclosure 2]
The Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs (Wang) to the American Minister (MacMurray)
[PEKING,] February 11, 1926.
No. 152
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your formal note (No.
162, of February 6, 1926), stating that it is rumored that the Chinese
Government is planning to use the Customs surplus for 1928 and
subsequent years to secure an issue of Treasury Notes to the amount of
$8,000,000, the flotation of which is now under negotiation with Chinese
banks, and that you desire to protest against this action.

I have the honor to observe that the Customs surplus which is being set
aside as security for this issue of Treasury Notes by the Chinese
Government has been from the beginning used as security for the service of
internal loans, and does not concern or hinder foreign creditors.
I have the honor, Mr. Minister, to make this formal reply for your
information.
SEAL OF THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
21 Not printed.
21 Not printed.
21a Not printed.

893.51/4908
[Document 726]
The American, British, French, and Japanese Ministers to the
Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs22
[PEKING, March 18, 1926.]
From statements which have appeared in the press, confirmed by
information from other sources, it appears that the Chinese Government are
contemplating the issue of a further internal loan secured upon that portion
of the Customs revenues formerly required for the service of the German
Indemnity and of recent years earmarked for the service of one of the earlier
internal loan issues.
As lately as February 6 last the Undersigned Representatives of France,
Great Britain, Japan and the United States had occasion to address His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs in regard to the similar flotation
of an issue of Treasury Notes and to protest against the continued
monopolising of all available security for fresh domestic loans in disregard
of the guarantees attached to prior foreign obligations now in default. The
reply returned to these communications, to the effect that the interests of
foreign creditors were not adversely affected, cannot be accepted as
satisfactory, since it is self-evident that when there is only one source of
revenue from which the creditors as a whole can hope for payment, every
new lien created thereon for the benefit of new internal loan issues
postpones pro tanto the expectation of such payment.
The undersigned Representatives are obliged once again to lodge the
strongest possible protest against the issue of any new loan on the security
of Customs revenues in the manner now alleged to be in contemplation, and
they feel impelled to point out that the action of the Chinese Government in
denying payment of any funds on their foreign obligations now in default
while at the same time raising new loans for other purposes not only
constitutes a breach of faith to their creditors but falls little short of a public

dishonouring of the unpaid foreign and domestic debts of the nation, and is
the more indefensible at the very moment when the consolidation of the
unsecured and inadequately secured debt upon the Customs revenues is
under discussion in connection with the proceedings of the Tariff
Conference. The Undersigned Representatives cannot believe that the
Government of the Chinese Republic are willing to appear in such a light,
and they therefore request that they may receive immediate assurances that
the loan issue in question will not be proceeded with.
[File copy not signed]
22 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Minister in China as an
enclosure to his despatch No. 509, Mar. 25; received Apr. 23.

893.51/4945
[Document 727]
The American, British, and French Ministers to the Chinese
Ministry of Foreign Affairs23
[PEKING, April 19, 1926.]
The Undersigned, the British, French and American Representatives, have
the honour to acknowledge receipt of the memorandum from the Wai Chiao
Pu of March 5th on the subject of the default in the Hukuang Loan service,
and to point out that this matter appears to be insufficiently dealt with by a
mere repetition of the statement by the Ministry of Communications that
they are unable to provide the necessary funds and have referred the matter
to the Financial Readjustment Commission in connection with the
utilisation of the increased Customs revenues resulting from the raising of
the import tariff. While the undersigned Representatives trust that security
for the loan service will in due course become available in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Loan Agreement from the Customs revenues
after the raising of the import tariff, they do not consider that the prospect
of this eventual solution warrants any abatement of effort on the part of the
Chinese Government, in the interests of their credit and good faith towards
the bondholders, to meet the service of this important international railway
loan contracted fifteen years ago from existing sources of revenue. The
Undersigned Representatives therefore request that, failing the provision of
funds from other sources including those specifically indicated in the Loan
Agreement, and failing the enforcement of the provision in the Loan
Agreement for the administration by the Maritime Customs in the interests
of the bondholders of the provincial revenues charged with the service of
the loan, the Ministry of Finance will immediately make the necessary
funds available from the existing Customs revenues.
[File copy not signed]

23 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Minister in China as an
enclosure to his despatch No. 633, June 11; received July 14.

893.51/4923: Telegram
[Document 728]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, June 4, 1926—8 p.m.
114. American Group inform Department that they have received telegram
from their representative in Peking as follows:
“Foreign Office recently requested Diplomatic Body release to
them customs funds to meet various pressing needs as the result
of civil war. The Diplomatic Body replied as follows under date
May 12th:
‘The interested heads of Legation have the honor to
inform the Ministry that so long as they are assured a
sufficient sum has been set aside from the revenue
collected 
by 
the 
Chinese 
Maritime 
Customs
Administration and lodged in the custodian banks to
safeguard the service of the foreign loan concluded
before 1900, and of the indemnity of 1901, and the
Reorganization Loan of 1913, secured on the customs
revenue, they are not concerned with the use to which
the surplus of these customs revenues may be put after
the aforesaid loan and indemnity service have been
fully met and, further, that, apart from the expectation
which they naturally entertain that the Chinese
Government will in equity meet their other outstanding
foreign obligations no less than their domestic
obligations out of any available assets, they do not
desire to interfere with any arrangements arrived at
between the Chinese Government and the Inspector
General of Customs with regard to the disposal of this
surplus revenue.’”

American Group refer to recent protests of Legations to Chinese
Government, including your note No. 162 of February 6 to Chinese
Minister of Foreign Affairs, regarding use of customs funds in meeting
internal obligations at a time when previously outstanding foreign
obligations are in default. They consider attitude of Ministers as evinced in
despatch above quoted to be a radical reversal of position taken in
connection with protests above referred to. They recall that prior to 1921 no
customs funds were available to Chinese Government except with consent
of Diplomatic Body pursuant to 1912 agreement. They refer in that
connection to Chinese Secretary’s memorandum of December 2, 1921, copy
of which was forwarded by Bennett.24 They suggest that Ministers should
have taken opportunity afforded by request of Foreign Office to protect
interests of nationals holding foreign loans which have been made subject
of protests above referred to.
Please telegraph brief comment in regard to above for communication to
Group.
KELLOGG
24 Memorandum not printed.

893.51/4925: Telegram
[Document 729]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 8, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received June 8—9:25 a.m.]
242. Your telegram 114, June 4, 8 p.m.
1. Although it be conceded that holders of foreign obligations
antedating consolidation of internal loans in 1921 are morally
entitled to priority of payment out of customs revenues, and
although legations of nationalities so concerned have been fully
warranted in continuously urging upon Chinese Government
equities of such claims, it is nevertheless the fact that the
obligation is one of good faith rather than of law and that
creditors in question have in fact no lien whatsoever upon
customs funds. An appreciation this situation seems implicit in
personal letters which Lamont and Cochran have addressed to
Strawn in connection with their interests and which he had felt at
liberty to show me.
2. The principle laid down in the Department’s telegram number
3, January 5, 5 p.m., 192125 (see also enclosures 1 and 3,
Legation’s despatch 832, February 15, 192126 ) is that 1912
agreement merely enables diplomatic body (now the interested
Ministers) to assure service of specified loans and indemnities
and (since the cancelation of clause 6 on April 7, 1913; see
MacMurray’s Treaties, page 947) rests in them no discretion to
withhold or otherwise to deal with any balance of customs funds
accruing to the Chinese Government; the agreement does not
even require the Chinese Government to make application to
diplomatic body for releases of such balances, although that
practice has doubtless properly been followed with a view to
enabling a [the] diplomatic body to verify the existence of funds

adequate to meet the specified services while certain nationalities
have till recently taken a contrary view and caused the diplomatic
body to withhold assent to various requests for releases. The
contention of our Government has been that it was solely with a
view to meeting this limited purpose that the diplomatic body is
entrusted with a degree of supervision over the funds which is
obviously of a purely fiduciary character and on the principle
originally laid down by the Department’s instruction above
quoted and now accepted by all other nationalities. Neither my
colleagues nor I consider that the recent request of the Chinese
Government for a release of customs funds could have been
declined or made conditional upon the satisfaction of unrelated
claims without abuse of their fiduciary relationship to these funds.
MACMURRAY
25 Foreign Relations, 1921, vol. I, p. 494.
26 Not printed.

893.51/4932: Telegram
[Document 730]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 13, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received June 14—3:46 a.m.]
245. 1. British Minister has informed me of recent developments in a
serious situation involving practical disappearance of salt revenues of
Central Government. In the various salt-production areas the local
militarists have insisted on subsidies in return for permitting Salt
Administration to continue its operations, with the practical result that
Government’s revenues were cut off from all salt areas except Changlu
district, near Tientsin, which until recently continued to pay approximately
$13,000,000 per annum which sufficed to serve foreign loans charged upon
the salt. Quite recently General Ch’u, who had been put into office as
Military Governor of Chihli by associates of General Chang Tso-lin,
without reference to the Peking Government, demanded half of the salt
revenues from this area. Salt Administration endeavored to compromise
with him by a payment of some $450,000 and a monthly subsidy of
$120,000, which was the utmost that could be spared without endangering
foreign loan services. Ch’u refused and has established his own collecting
agency on whose order salt is being removed from Administration’s yards.
2. British, French and Japanese Ministers, representing nationalities
interested in reorganization loan, conferred June 11th and agreed to
recommend to their respective Governments that for protection of the Salt
Administration and the loans secured upon its revenues, they should be
authorized to inform Ch’u that if within a week he had not accepted
Administration’s offer of subsidy that offer would be withdrawn and the
interested powers would assemble at salt fields near Tangku sufficient
military and naval forces to prevent further interference with functioning of
the Salt Administration.

3. British Minister asked me to inform you of this and to inquire whether
our Government would be disposed to join in such action even though
American interests are concerned with the salt revenues only to the extent
of partial security for their share of Hukuang loan. I consented to do so,
although informing him that I did not anticipate my Government would be
prepared to use its forces at Tientsin for any purposes other than those
incidental to its mission of keeping open the railroad or in case of
emergency for the protection of life and property.
MACMURRAY

893.51/4932: Telegram
[Document 731]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, June 15, 1926—4 p.m.
120. Your 245, June 13, 9 a.m. You should inform British Minister that this
Government cannot participate in suggested joint military action for
purpose of protection of salt revenues. You should be guided in this matter
by Department’s telegram No. 61, March 13, 1922, 7 p.m., and
Department’s written instruction No. 708, dated July 31, 1924.27
KELLOGG
27 Neither printed.

893.51/4937
[Document 732]
The American Group to the Secretary of State
NEW YORK, June 22, 1926.
[Received June 23.]
HUKUANG RAILWAYS LOAN
SIR: Referring to our letter of June 15th28 transmitting texts of various cables
relating to the receipt of funds from China to apply on the service of this
loan, we hand you herewith for the information of the Department copy of a
further cablegram (No. 4759) received by us on June 18th from London.28
In accordance therewith we have announced that beginning Thursday, June
24th, we will pay coupons from bonds of the German issue of this loan
which matured June 15, 1920 and June 15, 1925. We also enclose copy of a
letter dated June 2nd from Messrs. Morgan Grenfell & Co., London,
transmitting to us text of a legal opinion obtained by the Hongkong &
Shanghai Banking Corporation regarding the liability of the Chinese
Government to pay interest on drawn bonds until such bonds are finally
redeemed.28 We deem this opinion of considerable importance.
Respectfully,
J. P. MORGAN & Co.,
For the American Group
28 Not printed.
28 Not printed.
28 Not printed.

893.51/4955
[Document 733]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 27, 1926.
[Received September 1.]
No. 681
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my telegram No. 245, of June 13, 1926, 9
a.m., in regard to the seizure of the salt revenues from the Changlu salt
production district, near Tientsin, by the Military Governor of Chihli,
General Chu Yü-p’u. In this telegram I stated that the British, French and
Japanese Ministers, representing the nationalities interested in the
Reorganization Loan, had agreed to recommend to their respective
governments that, for the protection of the salt administration and the loans
secured upon its revenue, if this interference did not cease, the interested
nations would assemble at the salt field near Tangku sufficient military and
naval forces to prevent further interference with the functioning of the salt
administration. I further stated that the British Minister had inquired
whether the American Government would be disposed to join in such
action. The Department replied on June 15th (telegram No. 120, June 15,
1926, 4 p.m.) to the effect that the American Government could not
participate in the suggested joint military action.
I now have the honor to state that the suggested military action did not take
place, and I have been informed by the Acting Associate Chief Inspector of
the Salt Gabelle, a British subject, that an agreement has been practically
concluded between General Chu Yü-p’u, on the one hand, and the Ministry
of Finance and Salt Administration, on the other, whereby the former
obtains a subsidy of $300,000 per month, local currency, from the Changlu
salt revenue. This agreement has not yet been formally ratified by the
Ministry of Finance and by General Chu himself, but the Acting Chief
Inspector was confident that it would be so ratified. In return for this
subsidy, General Chu guarantees not to interfere with the collection of

revenue by the salt administration in the Changlu district. The Central
Government will thus obtain about $9,000,000 per annum, local currency,
instead of $13,000,000, which is the normal total revenue collected in this
district.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY

893.51/4954
[Document 734]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 30, 1926.
[Received September 1.]
No. 686
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s
instruction No. 232, of May 28, 1926,29 transmitting a copy of a letter dated
May 21, 1926, from the American Group of the Chinese Consortium in
regard to the use of revenues of the Chinese Maritime Customs.29 The
Department requested that I submit my comments by telegraph. Although
the Department in its telegraphic instruction No. 132, of July 1, 5 p.m.,29
indicated that no comments were desired by telegraph in addition to those
contained in my telegram No. 242, of June 8, 1926, sent before the receipt
of the present despatch, I think it advisable to submit these additional
observations by mail.
Referring to the memorandum of December 2, 1921, compiled by the
Chinese Secretary of the Legation,29 on the subject of the practice followed
in effecting releases of surplus customs revenue, I desire to state that Mr.
Peck regrets that in this memorandum he neglected to state that Article 6 of
the Bankers Arrangement of 1912 was cancelled by action taken at the
Diplomatic Body meeting of April 7, 1913. In writing the memorandum he
consulted only the correspondence files of the Legation, which curiously
enough, contain no reference to this action. My own compilation of treaties
was not available to him and he neglected to search the files of Dean’s
circulars, which in the year 1913, were not routed through the Chinese
Secretariat.
The memorandum was correct in stating that the Chinese Government and
the interested Powers all have appeared at least to act on the assumption

that the Chinese Government was not privileged to utilize surplus customs
revenues until “released” by the Powers. Requests from the Government for
such releases have been made repeatedly, the last one as recently as July 14,
1926. (See Diplomatic Circular No. 174, of July 20, 1926, a copy of which
is attached hereto.30 ) On occasion these requests have been refused, and
sometimes on grounds not connected with the service of the specified
obligations secured on the customs revenue—e. g., the identic note to the
Chinese Foreign Office of November 5, 1918, in which the reason given for
refusing the release was the continuance of civil war. (See the Legation’s
despatch D. No. 2318, November 6 [8], 1918.30 It was this irregularity of
procedure, of course, which caused the Department to observe in its
telegraphic instruction No. 3, January 5, 1921,31 that it welcomed “the
opportunity to revert to a more regular procedure”.
I do not understand that the Chinese Government itself has interposed any
sustained or strong objection to the manner in which, in practice, the
Powers have thus extended their quasi-control of the customs revenue under
the 1912 arrangement. This control, or trusteeship, has necessarily been
exercised through Sir Francis Aglen, Inspector-General of Customs, since in
the 1912 arrangement the Powers secured the consent of the Chinese
Government that all Maritime Customs revenues should be deposited to his
credit. This arrangement has given the Inspector-General an almost despotic
power over this revenue—a power which he wields solely by virtue of the
support he receives from the interested foreign Legations. The Chinese
Government feels itself powerless to dispense with Sir Francis so long as
the British Legation and the other Legations support him. As a general
thing, I am convinced, the Government appreciates to the full the
unimpeachable integrity and devotion to Chinese interests of the present
Inspector-General, but there have been times when a harassed Minister of
Finance has been highly incensed at the point blank refusal of the foreign
Inspector-General to release funds to his order.
 
Until 1921 Sir Francis always met demands from the Government for
customs funds with the statement that the Government must first secure the
consent of the interested Legations. After the mandates of March, 1921,

establishing the consolidated internal loan service (devised by Sir Francis in
consultation with the late Mr. Chow Tzu-chi) he recognized the authority of
those mandates, although, in doing so, he did not consult the foreign
Legations. In devoting to the consolidated internal loan service the millions
of customs revenue required therefor, Sir Francis not only did not ask the
consent of the Powers, but he flatly denied any weight to their arguments as
to the superior rights of senior foreign loans. Yet, when it has been a
question, since 1921, of petty allocations for the support of plague
prevention work, etc., the Chinese Government, apparently at his insistence,
has still asked the consent of the Powers, just as it did before 1921. In this
connection the Department’s attention is invited to the Note of the Chinese
Foreign Office dated July 14th, enclosed herewith,32 which states quite
frankly that the officiating Inspector-General replied to the request for funds
that “the consent must be obtained of the Foreign Ministers concerned.”
Sir Francis Aglen has undoubtedly met with great difficulty in conserving
the Customs revenue for the purpose of meeting the legal obligations of the
Chinese Government and for uses calculated to promote the Government’s
own real welfare. On a number of occasions the Chinese Government has
attempted to secure immediate use of funds allocated to the service of
internal loans under the terms of the Mandates of 1921. In these
circumstances Sir Francis has insisted that those terms be carried out and
that the Government keep faith with the bondholders. I understand that in
defence of the internal loan service he is guided by the belief that popular
support of the Government will be increased by widespread investment in
Government bonds. There can be no doubt that his announced support of
these bonds has been the essential factor inducing the Chinese public to
purchase them, and that he feels keenly his moral duty toward the
purchasers. In furtherance of his policy, he wishes to add more issues to the
bonds thus secured. This leads him to reject the claims of previously
concluded foreign loans, as presented by the Legations. He is thus brought
into conflict with the very Governments upon whose support he is entirely
dependent for his control over Customs funds, as given to him by the 1912
Bankers’ Agreement. (MacMurray’s China Treaties, page 946.) Adverting
once more to the Foreign Office Note of July 14, 1926, I have the honor to
state that I pointed out to my colleagues in an observation placed on the
circular what appeared to me to be an important principle involved in the

continuing nature of the allocation to which assent was requested. The same
principle is raised in the hypothecation of the customs revenues for the
service of bonds. I venture to quote below the observation to which I have
referred:
“The note of July 14 from the Wai Chiao Pu introduces an
innovation which appears to me to be fundamental, in that it
requests not merely the release of an ascertainable balance but a
commitment to assent to releases33 month by month for an
indefinite period, without the possibility of foreseeing whether the
balance requested will be available in any given month in the
future. In my understanding of the matter, so long as the 1912
agreement remains in effect, the body of interested Ministers have
a fiduciary obligation to assure that the indemnities and specified
loan services are duly met; and although they have no discretion
as to the uses to which the Chinese Government may put any
balances in excess of the funds necessary for the indemnity and
loan services, it is their function to assure that no releases are
made until satisfied of the existence of such surplus at the time. I
cannot escape a feeling that by consenting to the present request
they would vitiate this principle and forego what is both a right
and a duty to protect the security of the indemnities and foreign
loans specifically charged upon the customs revenue.”
It is an unlooked for situation that has now arisen out of the international
action taken in 1912. The Powers acquired, and still exercise, a trusteeship
over the whole customs revenue, but in respect to obligations that require
only a portion of the whole. In regard to the disposition of the remainder,
they have informed the Chinese Government most emphatically that they
exercise no control whatsoever. They have, in fact, latterly refused even to
express an opinion as to the way that it should be used. But at the same time
they continue to insist upon an arrangement that places the control of this
surplus in the hands of a particular officer of the Government of foreign
nationality.
The Department will have noted in the Senior Minister’s memorandum to
the Chinese Foreign Office of May 12, 192634 (see Diplomatic Circular No.

118, of the same date35 ) a statement that the interested Heads of Legation
“do not desire to interfere with any arrangement arrived at between the
Chinese Government and the Inspector-General of Customs with regard to
the disposal of this surplus revenue”. The original draft of this
communication was presented by the British Minister in accordance with
suggestions given him, as I understand, by Sir Francis Aglen. At any rate
my British Colleague observed at the meeting of the interested Ministers
that he thought it would strengthen the hands of the Inspector-General. In
deference to the unanimous judgment of my colleagues, I concurred in the
draft; but when the Senior Minister proposed inserting the same
phraseology in a similar memorandum to the Foreign Office in the
following month, I suggested that its inclusion was unnecessary, and my
suggestion was adopted. (See Diplomatic Circular No. 142, of June 11th,
and copies of observations placed thereon.35a ) It may be questioned
whether, if the Protocol Powers were to follow to its logical conclusion
their present announced policy of leaving the Chinese Government free to
dispose of the surplus customs revenue at its will, they should not announce
to the Government their willingness to limit the applicability of the 1912
Bankers’ Agreement to that portion of the customs revenue required for the
service of foreign obligations specifically secured thereon. That done, there
would remain no means of foreign pressure to prevent the Chinese
Government from restoring, to a large extent, if it so desired, the conditions
existing before 1911, when the Inspector-General of Customs had no
control over customs revenue, but was merely the head of the collecting
agency. I do not suggest that it would be advisable to withdraw international
support from the Inspector-General in this way; on the other hand, in view
of arrangements now in contemplation for debt consolidation and purposes
similarly requiring definite security upon customs revenues, I am definitely
of the opinion that it would be preferable to insist that the control of those
revenues should remain in the hands of such a foreign official. I have
invited the Department’s attention to this point principally because it seems
to supply the only discernible basis for the impression that prevails with
many Chinese, and some foreigners, that the foreign Legations control the
Maritime Customs revenue.
Incidentally I may remark that some inconsistency is to be found in the fact
that in China it is the British Minister who wishes to “strengthen the hands

of the Inspector-General” (British), while among the foreign governments it
is the British Government that has expressed most anxiety not to overload
the customs revenue with foreign obligations, and not to appear to increase
foreign control over that revenue.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
29 Not printed.
29 Not printed.
29 Not printed.
29 Not printed.
30 Not printed.
30 Not printed.
31 Foreign Relations, 1921, vol. I, p. 494.
32 Not printed.
33 $50,000 monthly, beginning from July 1926.
34 See telegram No. 114, June 4, to the Minister in China, p. 948 [Pg. 948
includes portions of Doc. 727 and Doc. 728].
35 Not printed.
35a Not printed.

893.51/4951: Telegram
[Document 735]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 24, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received 9:10 p.m.]
346. My 324, August 12, 11 a.m., paragraph number 4.36
1. Following note has been transmitted to the Ministry for Foreign
Affairitem:
“The American Legation presents its compliments to the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and has the honor to state that it has received
information indicating an intention on the part of the Chinese
authorities concerned to issue now [new?] domestic loan bonds to
a par value of silver dollars 25,000,000 for the purpose of meeting
administrative expenses and for the redemption of certain short-
term domestic debts. It is understood that the security for this loan
is to be approximately silver dollars 11,000,000 per year at
present paid from the Maritime Customs revenues for the service
of the 9th-year domestic loan which, allowing for the
postponement of amortization dates, is due to become
extinguished in 1927.
In these circumstances the Legation finds it necessary to remind
the Chinese authorities once again of the unfulfilled liabilities in
respect of the arrears of service of the Chinese governmental
obligations due to American citizens and companies. The list is
long and should be well known. It includes the American share in
the Hukuang Railway loan; also loans made by the Continental
and Commercial Trust and Savings Bank, the Pacific
Development Corporation, the Riggs National Bank and the
Munsey Trust Company. Other accounts which are entirely in
arrears are also due to the following American creditors:

American International Corporation; American Locomotive
Company; American Metals Company; American Trading
Company; Anderson, Mayer and Company, Limited; Ault and
Wiborg China Company; Baldwin Locomotive Works; China
American Trading Company; China Electric Company; Fearon
Daniel and Company; Fowler and Company, W. W.; Frazer and
Company, E. W.; General American Car Company; Robert Dollar
Company; United States Steel Products Company; Wilkinson and
Company, T. M. These creditors whose claims are long past due
have all either supplied materials to various departments of the
Chinese Government or made advances to them. In addition to the
above list there are also a large number of American firms and
individuals to whom are owed various sums in compensation for
looting outrages committed by military and bandits for damages
to property and for loss of life.
The Legation would also remind the Chinese authorities that
under the terms of the agreements for many of the American
obligations the Chinese Government engaged, in the event of a
default or of the specific security pledged becoming ineffective,
to provide from other sources the sums necessary for payment of
principal and interest. The Legation must therefore point out to
the Chinese authorities that these debts to American citizens and
organizations are thus entitled to an automatic priority over debts
subsequently contracted respecting the use of any customs surplus
funds which may become available as a result of the retirement of
loans hitherto secured on customs revenues. The Chinese
authorities, having failed to make effective the guarantees
provided in various loan agreements and contracts for the
purchase of materials, now rest under the manifest duty to make
provision for the defaulted payments from any available excess of
customs surplus resulting from the extinction of a consolidated
loan charge such as the 9th-year domestic loan.
The Legation specifically denies the justice of the position
adopted by the Chinese Government to the effect that the
consolidated domestic loans enjoy a preferential right to the use

of customs surplus funds after services of the pre-Boxer loans, the
Boxer indemnities and the reorganization loan of 1913 have been
met.
The American Legation therefore insists that the Chinese
authorities concerned have no right to utilize as the security for
new domestic financing the amount of approximately eleven
million dollars per annum to become available upon the
extinction of the 9th-year domestic loan and could only regard
any such action taken by the Chinese authorities as a further
failure to observe good faith towards the American creditors of
China. The American Legation therefore emphatically protests
against the issuance of the reported $25,000,000 domestic loan
bonds.”
2. Copies of note have been sent to British, French and Japanese Legations
for identic action if they feel so inclined. Copies will be given to press
tomorrow.
3. Repeated by telegraph to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY
36 Ante, p. 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537].

893.51/4957: Telegram
[Document 736]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, September 9, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received 1:25 p.m.]
382. A personal letter written by the Commissioner of Customs at Shanghai,
shown to me by the Acting Inspector of Customs, states that a demand is
being made by Sun Ch’uan-fang that the Commissioner pay over some
$900,000 from Customs revenues to the Chinese General Chamber of
Commerce to be used to repay to the native guilds a forced loan for military
purposes made by Sun at the time the Shanghai area was being occupied.
This threat is considered by the Commissioner to be so serious as to warrant
the Inspector General’s attempting to make an arrangement with the Peking
authorities providing authorization of the payment. However, the Acting
Inspector General of Customs doubts whether Sun may not be bluffing. He
is trying to temporize and is taking as his position that the matter has too
much importance to be decided by him in the absence of the Inspector
General. He thinks, and I entirely concur, that the enforcement of Sun’s
demand would mean putting an end to the Maritime Customs
Administration and producing among local leaders a scramble to control the
revenues of the various customhouses.
MACMURRAY

893.51/4970
[Document 737]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 3, 1926.
[Received October 20.]
No. 743
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my despatch No. 508, of March 11, 1926,
and to previous correspondence, regarding the default on the Hukuang bond
payment, and to my telegram No. 346, of August 24th, 4 p.m., in which I
quoted my note to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs protesting against the
issuance of the reported Silver $25,000,000 domestic loan bonds. In this
connection, I have the honor to transmit herewith enclosed, for the
Department’s information, a copy of a joint note, dated September 1, 1926,
signed by the Counselors of the French and British Legations, in the
absence of their respective ministers, as well as by myself, to the Wai Chiao
Pu, formally demanding that after meeting the foreign and domestic charges
now being served by the Customs, that the just claims of the bondholders of
the Hukuang Railway Loan shall be met out of such Customs revenue,
before any new capital charge is placed upon that revenue.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[Enclosure]
The American, British, and French Representatives to the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs
The Undersigned Representatives of France, Great Britain and United
States have the honour to remind the Wai Chiao Pu of the frequent
communications they have had occasion to address to the Ministry on the
subject of the default in the payment of the Hukuang Railway Loan, and in

view of reports that have been received to the effect that the Ministry of
Finance have been endeavouring to raise a new internal loan secured on a
certain portion of the Customs revenue now being utilised for the service of
one of the existing internal loans due for final redemption by the end of the
year 1927, formally to demand that, if and when Customs revenue becomes
available after meeting the foreign and domestic charges now being served
thereby, the just claims of the bondholders of the Hukuang Railway loan
shall be met out of such Customs revenue before any new capital charge is
placed upon that revenue.
 
A request in the same sense has already been addressed to the Ministry of
Communications direct by the Banking interests concerned in a joint letter
dated August 19.
En l’absence de M. le Ministre de France,
TRIPIER
30 août 1926
(in the absence of H. M. Minister)
OWEN O’MALLEY,
Aug. 30, 1926
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[PEKING,] September 1, 1926.

893.51/4987
[Document 738]
The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the American
Legation37
[Translation]
MEMORANDUM
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs presents its compliments to the Legation,
and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Legation’s
memorandum (No. 285, of August 24, 1926),38 stating that it has been
rumored that the Chinese Government will float a new domestic loan to be
secured by Customs surplus funds, and filing a protest.
The matter was referred by this Ministry to the Ministry of Finance, from
whom a reply has been received, stating:
“We have the honor to recall that the various friendly Powers at
the Washington Conference in 1921, observing that our Central
Government was in financial straits, drew up the Customs Treaty,
providing for an increase in the Customs Receipts to afford relief.
However, more than four years passed before the Special
Customs Conference could finally be convoked; moreover, up to
the present time we have not obtained any actual benefit from the
Customs increase allowed us by the Washington Conference.
Hence, we were without resource.
“With a view to getting together several months’ administrative
expenses for the Central Government it was proposed to float a
loan, using the security for the consolidated domestic loans. This
plan designated as security the funds hitherto set aside from the
Customs surplus as security for internal obligations, and did not
contemplate making additional appropriations from the Customs

funds. The matter fundamentally does not affect creditors of the
various nationalities.
“As to the consolidation of China’s various foreign obligations
which are without security or whose security is inadequate, the
Government earlier stated with sincerity that it is only necessary
for the Customs Conference speedily to resume its sessions and
conclude its deliberations, when there will naturally be means of
meeting this category of foreign obligations. The various Powers
should not be over-anxious.”
PEKING , October 13, 1926.
37 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Chargé in China as an
enclosure in his despatch No. 790, Oct. 20; received Nov. 26.
38 See telegram No. 346, Aug. 24, from the Minister in China, p. 957 [Pg. 957
includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735].

893.51/4974: Telegram
[Document 739]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, October 30, 1926—11 p.m.
254. John Jay Abbott39 telegraphs Department that Chinese Minister for
Finance plans new domestic loan 30,000,000 Mex. secured on Customs to
be released from service 9th year internal loan 1927. If this report is correct
you are authorized to make protest similar to that reported in your 346,
August 24, 4 p.m.
KELLOGG
39 Vice President, Continental & Commercial Trust & Savings Bank of
Chicago.

893.51/4976: Telegram
[Document 740]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 4, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received November 4—1:10 a.m.]
528. Your 254, October 30, 11 p.m. There would appear to be good ground
for believing that such plans are under way with probability that P’an Fu40
has gained support of Chang Tso-lin41 and Chang Tsung-chang42 by
promise of 3,000,000 to each. I am keeping close watch on the matter and
shall avail myself of Department’s authorization to protest if the occasion
warrants.
MAYER
40 Ex-Minister of Finance.
41 Military ruler of Manchuria.
42 Military Governor of Shantung.

893.51/5010
[Document 741]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 21, 1926.
[Received February 5, 1927.]
No. 870
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my despatch No. 509 of March 25, 1926,43
with which I transmitted copy of a joint memorandum dated March 18th
signed by the representatives of France, Great Britain, Japan and the United
States, protesting against the issue of a $20,000,000 bond issue, to be
known as the “Fifteenth Year Public Loan Bonds”, to be secured on that
portion of the Customs revenues formerly required for the service of the
German indemnity; also to my telegram No. 346, of August 24, 4 p.m., in
which I quoted a note I addressed to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the
same date protesting against the report that the Chinese authorities were
about to issue new Domestic Loan Bonds to a par value of silver
$25,000,000; as well as to my despatch No. 790, of October 20, 1926,44
with which I transmitted a translation of the reply from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs to my note of August 24th in which I protested against the
issuance of the $25,000,000 bond issue.
In connection with the foregoing I have the honor to transmit herewith
enclosed, for the Department’s information, copy of a joint memorandum
dated November 20th, signed by the French, British, and Japanese
Ministers, and myself, in which opposition is reaffirmed to any further
hypothecation of the Customs revenues for the purpose of floating new
internal loans as long as no steps have been taken by the Chinese
Government to make good the existing unsecured and inadequately secured
foreign obligations of the Chinese Government.
I have [etc.]

J. V. A. MACMURRAY
[Enclosure]
The American, British, French, and Japanese Ministers to the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs
MEMORANDUM
The Undersigned Representatives of France, Great Britain, Japan and the
United States have the honour to acknowledge receipt of a memorandum
from the Wai Chiao Pu dated 13th October, in reply to their joint
memorandum of 18th March protesting against the issue of any new
internal loan on the security of surplus Customs revenue while longstanding
foreign obligations remain in default.
The Undersigned note that the Ministry of Finance maintain that the
interests of China’s foreign creditors are in no way affected by the
assignment, as security for a new loan, of surplus Customs revenues
hitherto set aside for the service of the consolidated internal loans. Such a
contention is obviously untenable, and has already been answered in the
memorandum of 10th [18th] March in which it was pointed out that, when
there is only one source of revenue from which China’s creditors can hope
for payment, every new lien created thereon must necessarily postpone pro
tanto the expectation of such payment. And it is, indeed, self-evident that
the interests of China’s foreign creditors must suffer by every fresh
hypothecation of that revenue.
At the present time the Chinese Government are reserving the surplus
Customs revenue for the service of the internal loans consolidated in
accordance with the Presidential Mandates of 1921, thereby disregarding
the claims of their foreign creditors. Their protestations of good faith
towards the latter clearly require that surplus Customs revenue should be
utilized for meeting prior foreign claims before any new charges are placed
thereon.
The Undersigned Representatives are, therefore, under the necessity of
reaffirming their opposition to any further hypothecation of the Customs
revenue for the purpose of floating new internal loans as long as no steps

have been taken to make good the defaults in the existing unsecured and
inadequately secured foreign obligations of the Chinese Government.
[File copy not signed]
PEKING, November 20, 1926.
43 Not printed; for joint memorandum which it transmitted, see p. 947 [Pg.
947 is part of Doc. 726].
44 Not printed; for reply from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs which it
transmitted, see p. 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 737 and Doc. 738].

Disinclination of the United States to
intervene to prevent paralyzing of
Chinese customs service at Hankow by
strike
[742] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 27, 1926—9 a.m. [Received 2:04 p.m.]
893.51/4989: Telegram
[743] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, November 29, 1926—1 p.m.
893.51/4989: Telegram

893.51/4989: Telegram
[Document 742]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 27, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received 2:04 p.m.]
579. 1. Following is text of urgent telegram from Commissioner of Customs
at Hankow to Inspector General of Customs at Peking: . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Following is text of telegram sent November 23rd by senior consul,
Hankow, to Senior Minister:
“Union of lower-grade Customs employees formed November
21st at a meeting at which superintendent was present and said he
looked to union to assist in China’s recovering control of
Customs. Commissioner of Customs regards the pronouncement
as very serious and fears presentation of impossible demands
followed by picketing, leading to complete cessation of business.
He desires to know in this event what support he may look for
from the Powers and whether they would go so far as to take
forcible steps to ensure free access to customhouse, which is
outside Concession. Speedy reply desirable.”
3. These telegrams were considered November 25th at a meeting of the
interested Ministers, with the Inspector General present, who explained that
those forming union, in spite of recent considerable increase in pay and in
defiance of standing orders of Customs service, number approximately 130
out of some 350 Chinese employees at Hankow. He considers it is likely
that in spite of such recent utterances against the Customs by Chiang Kai-
shek as were reported in Associated Press interview, referred to in my
telegram number 575, November 23, 5 p.m.,45 this movement has not
approval and will not be supported by higher Cantonese authorities in view
of their thus far having refrained from taking similar action against customs

in Canton. He expects that strike will be brought on by presentation of
impossible demands immediately following monthly pay day.
4. As a result of meeting, Senior Minister telegraphed as follows to the
senior consul, Hankow:
“Customs will try to maintain service even in case of strike.
Inspector General hopes that strike alone without picketing will
not succeed.
As entrance of customhouse abuts on British concession can
concession police keep this entrance free?
If not, police authorities should consult with those of the other
concessions for united action.
As to the greater question of protecting customhouse by naval
landing parties, the Ministers concerned are asking for home
instructions.”
5. Protection of customhouse involves two aspects: First, keeping open
access to it from the British Concession, which is primarily function of the
concession authorities but which might prove impossible without assistance
and, second, eventual necessity of protecting in the customhouse itself 30-
odd foreigners and such Chinese employees as might remain faithful. If, as
I assume, we continue to strongly urge regular functioning of the Customs
as an indispensable condition to the carrying on of normal commercial
relations with China, I consider that this attempt of destructive elements to
paralyze its workings should be averted by the landing, if necessary, of
naval forces sufficient to forestall acts of violence by the strikers against
those seeking to do business with the Customs and against loyal members
of staff. French Minister intimated at the meeting willingness to participate
in such measures. British Chargé d’Affaires has privately said to me he is
inclined to believe his Government would be glad to participate but would
almost surely be unwilling even for so important a purpose as the
preservation of the Customs system to assume risks and responsibilities not
shared by the other powers principally interested.

6. I beg to request instructions with a view to authorization of our
cooperation on even terms with other principally interested powers in
landing party, in the event that such action should become necessary for the
purpose indicated.
MACMURRAY
45 Not printed.

893.51/4989: Telegram
[Document 743]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, November 29, 1926—1 p.m.
286. Your number 579 of November 27th, 9 a.m. The Chinese Maritime
Customs was brought into existence by the Government of China. It is a
Chinese national service; it functions under the orders and protection of the
Government of China, and the foreigners employed in it are servants of that
Government. If that Government should desire the destruction of the
Customs Administration, or if the desire of the Chinese people is to destroy
the Government of China and the Customs Administration it has created,
the basis of right upon which this Government may intervene in order to
prevent either purpose from being accomplished is difficult to see. In
consequence I am unable to see my way clear, in regard to preventing the
operation of the customhouse at Hankow from being paralyzed, to authorize
landing an armed naval force in cooperation with other powers.
If for any reason the customhouse at Hankow should cease functioning, the
proposition that the requirements of existing treaties with China be met by
American merchants by temporarily depositing tariff duties with American
banks and held for the Chinese Government in trust until functioning of the
Customs Administration is resumed, might be considered.
KELLOGG

The Commission on Extraterritoriality
in China, provided for by Resolution V
of the Washington Conference46
46 For previous correspondence regarding the convening of the
Commission, see Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 886 ff. The countries
participating in the work of the Commission were the United States,
Belgium, the British Empire, China, Denmark, France, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden. The American
Commissioner was Silas H. Strawn; the American technical advisers were
Joseph E. Jacobs and Mahlon F. Perkins.
[744] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, January 5, 1926—9 p.m.
793.003 C 73/239: Telegram
[745] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 11, 1926—6 p.m. [Received January 11—10:38 a.m.]
793.003 C 73/241: Telegram
[746] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 27, 1926—2 p.m. [Received February 27—9:52 a.m.]
793.003 C 73/261: Telegram

[747] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, March 2, 1926—6 p.m.
793.003 C 73/261: Telegram
[748] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 4, 1926—1 p.m. [Received March 4—10:28 a.m.]
793.003 C 73/263: Telegram
[749] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 25, 1926—4 p.m. [Received March 25—7:57 a.m.]
793.003 C 73/277: Telegram
[750] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, March 25, 1926—3 p.m.
793.003 C 73/277: Telegram
[751] The American Commissioner on Extraterritorial Jurisdiction in
China (Strawn) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 16, 1926. [Received May 29.]
793.003 C 73/297
[752] The American Commissioner on Extraterritorial Jurisdiction in
China (Strawn) to the Secretary of State
Peking, April 30, 1926. [Received May 29.]

793.003 C 73/298
[753] The American Commissioner on Extraterritorial Jurisdiction in
China (Strawn) to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 11, 1926. [Received June 9.]
793.003 C 73/301
[754] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, June 11, 1926—7 p.m.
793.003 C 73/297: Telegram
[755] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 17, 1926—10 a.m. [Received September 18—9:50 a.m.]
793.003 C 73/314: Telegram
[756] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, November 22, 1926—3 p.m.
793.00 C 73/332: Telegram
[757] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 27, 1926—10 a.m. [Received November 27—6:56 a.m.]
793.003 C 73/351: Telegram
[758] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)

Washington, November; 27, 1926_g p.m.
793.003 C 73/351: Telegram

793.003 C 73/239: Telegram
[Document 744]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, January 5, 1926—9 p.m.
6. Department’s No. 299, October 20, 4 p.m.47 Chinese Minister informed
Department orally that he had been instructed by his Government to obtain
text of invitation sent by this Government to the Powers to attend
Commission on Extraterritoriality. Minister was informed that no invitation
to attend Commission on Extraterritoriality was sent by this Government;
that after the delivery of the identic notes at Peking on September 448 this
Government circularized the Powers party to Washington Conference or
who had adhered to Resolution V49 inviting their attention to the terms of
Resolution V and to the statement made in the identic notes of September 4.
This Government stated that it desired to have the report of that
Commission before it and had named Mr. Strawn as its Commissioner and
suggested that December 18, 1925, be accepted by the interested Powers as
the date upon which the Commission would commence its functions at
Peking. As regards the manner in which the Commission was to perform its
work the Government of the United States stated that it believed this should
be left to the Commission which should be guided as [to?] its duties and the
intentions of the several Governments by the letter and spirit of Resolution
V and the Powers’ notes to China of September 4. It is suggested that you
take occasion to present this information informally to the Chinese Foreign
Office.
KELLOGG
47 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 888.
48 Ibid ., p. 831.
49 Ibid., 1922, vol. I, p. 289.

793.003 C 73/241: Telegram
[Document 745]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 11, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received January 11—10:38 a.m.]
16. Your telegram number 13, January 9, 11 p.m.50
1. Commission meets tomorrow. Delay has been caused by the
insistence of the Chinese upon at least nominal chairmanship and
by disturbed political conditions which have made them not
actually eager to begin.
2. All Commissioners have now agreed upon program by which
Wang Chung-hui will act as chairman of the first meeting.
Chinese Minister of Justice will give an address of welcome;
Hioki51 will reply; French Commission will nominate Minister of
Justice as Honorary President with no powers; Hioki will
nominate Strawn as chairman; and Portuguese Commissioner will
propose a Chinese and a member of the British Legation as
secretaries.
3. In view of the full discussions which have already taken place,
Strawn and I have not considered it necessary to present to the
Foreign Office the information contained in your number 6,
January 5, 9 p.m.
MACMURRAY
50 Not printed.
51 Eki Hioki, Japanese Commissioner
793.003 C 73/261: Telegram

[Document 746]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, February 27, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received February 27—9:52 a.m.]
96. 1. The representative of the Government of China on the
Extraterritoriality Commission, Wang Chung-hui, yesterday declared to me
that, while he was aware that in the Washington resolution which
established the Commission provision is made only for it to make reports
and offer recommendations, the decision had been made in a consultation
among the Ministers of Justice and for Foreign Affairs and himself that
before the Commission’s labors were terminated it was highly desirable for
the Commission to make some definite agreement about the procedure
which should be followed regarding abolition of extraterritoriality. In
addition he stated that instructions had been given to the Chinese Minister
at Washington to approach you in regard to the subject. He inquired as to
the attitude I took respecting the suggestion. I replied that I could not
comment until I knew what was actually proposed. I asked whether a
formulation of any concrete proposals had been made by him. His answer
was that he had not as yet had the time to do so.
2. Strawn and I recommend strongly that the powers of the Commission be
not enlarged without any opinion formally expressed by the Commissioners
now sitting. It is our belief that there is unanimous sentiment against
modification of treaties at present, in view of the revolutionary conditions
obtaining here and the absence here of a Government which is capable of
enforcing law. The Chinese demand is preposterous. The Commission’s
report will present facts for Governments to consider seriously before they
should take any action.
MACMURRAY

793.003 C 73/261: Telegram
[Document 747]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, March 2, 1926—6 p.m.
52. Your telegram No. 96 of February 27, 2:00 P.M. On February 27th the
Chinese Minister left with the Department the following paraphrase of a
telegram dated February 26, which he had received from the Chinese
Foreign Office:
“Referring to the subject of full powers for the Delegates to the
Extraterritoriality Commission, the Chinese Government and
people deeply appreciate the sympathetic and friendly attitude of
the United States, and eagerly desire that definite arrangements
should be concluded before the termination of the Commission’s
work. For this purpose plenipotentiary powers might be conferred
on members of the Commission or Delegates Plenipotentiary
might be appointed. The Chinese Government understands that
under the terms of the Washington Resolution, consular
jurisdiction is only one phase of the extraterritoriality question.
Other matters, for example, which present extraterritoriality
practices, abuse of extraterritoriality privileges and special status
of foreigners apart from consular jurisdiction, fall within the
scope of the Commission.”
In reply to the request of the Chinese Government contained in that
telegram, the Secretary informed the Chinese Minister by a third person
note dated March 1, as follows:
“The Secretary of State has given careful consideration to the
request of the Chinese Government and has the honor to state that
when he takes up for consideration the question of empowering
someone on behalf of the Government of the United States to
negotiate with a duly authorized representative of the Chinese

Government for a change in the provisions of existing treaties
between the United States and China under which citizens of the
United States reside and carry on their enterprises in China, he
desires to have before him the report and recommendations of the
Commission now sitting at Peking for the purpose of making an
investigation into extraterritorial practices. Therefore he deems it
necessary that that Commission be allowed to complete its
investigations in accordance with the provisions of Resolution V
of the Washington Conference and the identic notes of the Powers
to the Chinese Foreign Office of September 4, 1925.”
I am at a loss to understand statements made in last two sentences of
Chinese Government’s telegram to Chinese Minister and therefore desire
Strawn’s comments thereon. I have expected that Commission would cover
all phases of extraterritorial practices in the course of its investigations and
that it would find it possible to make recommendations of a constructive
nature upon which some definite policy regarding this Government’s future
attitude on the subject of the extraterritorial provisions of its treaties with
China might be laid.
KELLOGG

793.003 C 73/263: Telegram
[Document 748]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 4, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received March 4—10:28 a.m.]
110. Your telegram number 51 [52], March 2, 6 p.m. Strawn and I are in
entire accord with your note to the Chinese Minister dated March 1st.
Strongly recommend position there taken be adhered to until report of
Commission is received and considered by you. Our policy is that inquiry
should be conducted under broadest aspects of Washington Resolution
Number 5 and the Chinese Government be given every opportunity to
present any evidence it may have respecting extraterritorial practices or
abuse of extraterritorial privileges. Some of the other Commissioners may
insist that the investigation be limited to strict construction of Washington
resolution and that the authority of that resolution is not so broad as to
cover the subjects mentioned in the last paragraph of the Chinese Minister’s
note to you, especially the suggestion that the inquiry embrace “the special
status of foreigners apart from consular jurisdiction.” Thus far the
Commission has dealt only with Chinese laws and no question has arisen
with regard to the scope of the Commission’s work. It is suggested that it
would be advisable to refrain from any commitment on the phases of
extraterritoriality apart from consular jurisdiction (such as the question of
the liability of foreigners to taxation, which private conversations indicate
they have in mind) until we know what matters the Chinese Commissioner
proposes to include under this heading, feeling that a decision as to exact
scope of Commission’s work is one that must be arrived at in conjunction
with all Commissioners concerned.
MACMURRAY

793.003 C 73/277: Telegram
[Document 749]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 25, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received March 25—7:57 a.m.]
150. My telegram number 110, March 4, 1 p.m. Following from Strawn:
Chinese Commissioner on Extraterritoriality has submitted the
following matters for the consideration of the Commission: (1)
Consular jurisdiction; (2) trial of mixed cases between Chinese
and foreigners having extraterritorial rights; (3) trial of cases
between foreigners having extraterritorial rights and (a)
foreigners having no extraterritorial rights, (b) foreigners of
countries having treaty relations with China; (4) mixed courts; (5)
quasi right of asylum in premises occupied by foreigners and on
foreign ships; (6) issue of foreign nationality certificates to
Chinese citizens; (7) claim of foreigners to exemption from
taxation; and (8) special areas (a) foreign settlements, (b) leased
territory, (c) Legation Quarter, Peking, (d) railway zones.
At 
conference 
this 
morning 
French 
and 
Netherlands
Commissioners objected to (7) and (8). Consensus of opinion was
that items listed under (8) are not properly within the scope of
resolution, although British Commissioner took the position that
(8) 
(a) 
foreign 
settlements, 
closely 
associated 
with
extraterritoriality and should be included in investigation.”
MACMURRAY

793.003 C 73/277: Telegram
[Document 750]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, March 25, 1926—3 p.m.
74. For Strawn: Although you should refrain from committing yourself in
regard to the attitude which this Government might possibly take toward
any of the matters which the Chinese Commissioner brought up, it is
desired that no obstacle be placed by you in the way of the Chinese
Commissioner in submitting any views or data to the Commission which
there may be a desire on the part of the Chinese Government to submit for
consideration.
KELLOGG

793.003 C 73/297
[Document 751]
The American Commissioner on Extraterritorial Jurisdiction in
China (Strawn) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 16, 1926.
[Received May 29.]
No. 10
SIR: I have the honor to report the activities of the Commission on
Extraterritoriality in China during the period April 5, 1926 to April 16,
1926.
Since my report of April 5, No. 9,52 the Commission has been waiting for
the Chinese Government to provide means of communication for the
proposed tour of investigation. As reported in my letter (No. 7) of March
12,52 the trips to Taiyuanfu and Kalgan, planned for the last two weeks of
March, were abandoned because of inability to reach those points.
It was then planned to leave Peking on April 9, conduct an investigation at
Tientsin and sail for Shanghai, via Chefoo, on April 13. At Shanghai the
party was to be divided into two groups, one going up the Yangtze as far as
Hankow, visiting Soochow, Wushih, Nanking, Anking, Nanchang, Kiukiang
and Changsha. The other party was to go from Shanghai to Canton,
returning via Swatow, Amoy and Foochow. There has been no train service
between Peking and Tientsin for the last three weeks. A part of the time
motors have been employed but those are not now permitted to run.
Therefore, the trip by sea was abandoned. Later Dr. Wang (the Chinese
member of the Commission) suggested he might arrange for a train trip
from Peking to Hankow. However, by reason of military activities this has
become impossible. I have called a meeting of the Commission for this
morning to consider whether we should not give up all idea of traveling and
proceed to the preparation of our report. It would seem that the patience of
the Commissioners is exhausted in waiting for the Chinese Commissioner

to arrange transportation, which in the present circumstances, cannot be
done.
Speaking for myself, I believe that the very full reports we have from our
Consuls in all parts of China give as accurate information about conditions
as we would have were we to visit the several places, and that we can
proceed just as understandingly to the preparation of our report. Of course,
if before the report is completed it is possible to make any trips that will be
a subject for consideration by the Commission.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Notwithstanding the disaffection of the Canton Provinces and the fact that
there is now no Government in China and conditions are generally chaotic,
I can see nothing else for us to do but proceed with the preparation of the
report as directed by the Washington Resolution. Some of the
Commissioners have taken the position that the action of the Canton
Government, above referred to, constitutes a violation by China of the letter
and spirit of the Washington Resolution. You will recall that in the
“Additional Resolution” adopted at Washington54 it was stated that China
was prepared to co-operate in the work of the Commission and to afford it
every possible facility for the successful accomplishment of its tasks. This
she has not done by failing to afford transportation and also in the positive
action taken by the Canton Government.
However, I do not believe that the majority of the Commission will refuse
to go on with the report.
The contents of the report have not yet been discussed, but nevertheless,
from such informal conferences as I have had with some of the
Commissioners, I shall attempt to make the following forecast of the
general purport of the report:
The following admitted facts preclude the possibility of the surrender by the
several Powers of their extraterritorial rights guaranteed them by their
several treaties with China:

1. The absence of a Central Government in China, recognized as
such by the several Provinces;
2. Complete and arbitrary control of every department of
governmental activity by the militarists who are constantly
warring among themselves;
3. Absence of laws enacted by a duly constituted authority subject
to repeal only by that authority;
4. Absence of competent and trained judges, free from all outside
influences, political and military;
5. Chaotic condition of the finances of China, with no provision
for the payment of adequate compensation to the judiciary.
In view of these fundamental facts, the surrender by the several Powers of
their extraterritorial rights at this time not only would put in jeopardy the
lives and property of their nationals residing in China, but also would be
prejudicial to the Chinese themselves and would postpone the time when
the Chinese people may realize their ambition to have complete autonomy
in juridical matters.
Some of the Powers have repeatedly expressed a desire to surrender their
extraterritorial rights in China when the state of Chinese laws, the
arrangements for their administration and other considerations warrant them
in so doing. Therefore, as an evidence of good faith, and as an expression
by the Powers of sympathy with the ambition of the Chinese people to
enjoy complete autonomy in the administration of justice, the Powers might
make the following recommendations looking toward the eventual abolition
of their extraterritorial rights. These recommendations are divided into two
sections, the first section should be put into effect as soon as possible and
the second, as soon as the conditions named therein have been fulfilled.
FIRST SECTION OF RECOMMENDATIONS
I. That the Powers take all necessary steps to make applicable to their
nationals in China, and cause to be administered in their extraterritorial

and/or consular courts, such drafts of laws and ordinances as have been
exhibited to and approved by the Commission (Enumerating laws that have
been so approved)
provided, however, that the provisions of such laws and ordinances as have
been adversely criticized by the Commission shall not be applied in the
extraterritorial or consular courts. And further provided that where the laws
and ordinances fail to provide for questions of law that may arise, then in
such cases the law of the nationality of the defendant shall be applicable.
 
II. That each of the extraterritorial Powers immediately (if such condition
does not now exist in its judicial system in China) establish a court of final
appeal in China in order that there may be no appeal beyond the territorial
limits of China.
III. That after the Chinese Government has established model prisons or
detention houses, managed and supervised in accordance with the rules and
regulations concerning prisons and prisoners, in the following places—
Shanghai, Canton, Hankow, Tientsin, Harbin and Peking, or other treaty
ports, all foreigners sentenced to terms of imprisonment by the
extraterritorial or consular courts, either in accordance with Chinese or
foreign law, shall serve their sentences in these prisons or detention houses,
provided, however, that persons sentenced to terms of imprisonment of one
year or more shall be sent, at the expense of the Chinese Government, to the
First Model Prison at Peking, to serve such sentence, and provided further,
that the Consular or Diplomatic Officers of the nationals concerned shall at
all times be free to visit such prison, upon due notice being given the
Commissioner for Foreign Affairs where the prison or detention house is
situated, or to the Wai Chiao Pu in Peking. The Chinese authorities shall at
all times permit such visitation.
IV. That foreigners sentenced to death by the extraterritorial or consular
courts be executed by strangulation, in accordance with the Chinese law, or
by hanging, in the presence of a representative of the Power concerned.

V. That the extraterritorial Powers refuse protection of every nature to
persons of Chinese race who by reason of birth or naturalization are citizens
or subjects of such Powers and who return to China to live, unless such
person, after a residence of six months in China, have obtained from the
Chinese Ministry of the Interior, a denaturalization certificate in accordance
with the provisions of the Law of Nationality (Chinese). Article XII,
paragraph 1, number 4, and paragraph 3 and Articles XIV, XV and XVI.
VI. That the practice of granting asylum to political or other offenders, in
the foreign concessions or settlements and on foreignowned property,
except the general right of asylum which is recognized under International
Law, be abandoned, and that such persons who seek asylum in the foreign
concessions and settlements, or on foreign-owned properties, be
surrendered upon a warrant of the proper Chinese authorities, countersigned
by the local Commissioner of Foreign Affairs.
VII. That all extraterritorial practices which have no basis in the treaties or
special grant of the Chinese Government, be abandoned.
VIII. That in the case of civil claims and criminal complaints of
extraterritorial nationals against Chinese and non-extraterritorial nationals,
it is recommended that all such cases be tried in the so-called New courts of
China, viz., District Courts, High Courts and the Supreme Court, and their
corresponding procuratorates, instead of being tried in the Magistrates’
Court, in the presence of, or jointly with consular representatives as is now
the practice, provided, however, that a foreign consular representative of the
Power concerned may be present in the court room as a visitor.
 
SECOND SECTION OF RECOMMENDATIONS
I. That the conditions created in the First Section of
Recommendations continue in force until the extraterritorial
Powers, jointly or severally, decide the conditions precedent to
the institution of the system outlined in the Second Section of
Recommendations have been fulfilled.

II. That China, during the period the conditions created by the
First Section of Recommendations are in force, undertake to
remedy the defects enumerated at the outset under the heading
“Admitted Facts”.
III. That China, during the period the conditions created by the
First Section of Recommendations are in force, undertake to
establish a system of special sections of the District Courts and
High Courts, together with special sections of the procuratorates
attached to those Courts, at the places and in the manner
described in a detailed description to be attached to the report as
Appendix A.
IV. That China agree to extend the special system of courts
mentioned in No. Ill above to all foreigners in China, provided the
foreign non-extraterritorial Powers consent.
V. That China secure, at an early date, the services of the
necessary number of foreign counsellors required under the
special system of courts mentioned in No. Ill above, to assist in
the institution of that system.
VI. That China establish at Peking a National Law School for the
training of men for judicial service, especially for the trial of
foreigners.
VII. That China, in respect to matters of taxation, control of
corporations, military service, military levies, and requisitions,
land holdings, and a few other special matters, undertake to carry
out the recommendations contained in Appendix B to be attached
to the report.
VIII. That when China has put into effect the recommendations
aforesaid, she will so inform the extraterritorial Powers who shall,
jointly or severally, proceed to abolish their extraterritorial and
consular courts so that all foreigners in China may be made
amenable to the jurisdiction of the Chinese law.

Of course, the recommendations will be preluded by a succinct statement of
facts justifying the conclusion at which the Commission arrives.
The foregoing is a brief outline of what seems to us might be the basis of a
report. We have not submitted our suggestions to any of the other
Commissioners. They may not agree with us. You will, therefore, regard
what I have attempted to outline as purely tentative. If you have any
criticism to offer I shall be pleased to hear from you at your early
convenience.
At a meeting of the Commissioners held this morning it was decided to
abandon efforts to travel because the Chinese can afford us no facilities. We
are to meet again on April 28th, at which time the evidence is to be
concluded and we are then to proceed immediately with the preparation of
the report in the expectation that we can conclude it on or before May 15th.
Meanwhile, if there is a possibility of travel the final draft of the report may
be correspondingly deferred.
I enclose herewith copies of the Minutes of the meetings held on April 1,
1926 and April 10, 1926, together with correction sheets for previous
meetings.56
I have [etc.]
SILAS H. STRAWN
52 Not printed.
52 Not printed.
54 Second additional resolution, Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 291.
56 None printed.

793.003 C 73/298
[Document 752]
The American Commissioner on Extraterritorial Jurisdiction in
China (Strawn) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, April 30, 1926.
[Received May 29.]
No. 11
SIR: I have the honor to report the activities of the Commission on
Extraterritoriality in China during the period from April 16 to April 30,
1926.
As stated in my report No. 10 of April 16, 1926, there was a meeting in my
office on that date to discuss the matter of travel. At this meeting it was
decided to postpone indefinitely the matter of travel on account of the
impossibility of leaving Peking due to military activities in north and
central China.
On April 22, 1926 another meeting was called in my office to discuss
arrangements which the Chinese Commissioner had made for the
Commission to leave Peking via the Peking-Hankow Railway on the
evening of the following day, April 23, 1926. Due, however, to the short
notice and also to the unsettled conditions existing in Peking itself and
along the line of that Railway, it was decided to further postpone the matter
of travel. On this subject the Commission is divided into two groups: One
group is of the opinion that no travel should be undertaken until there is
some Central Government in Peking recognized by the Powers which can
make the necessary arrangements with the provincial authorities for the
investigation which the Commission desires to make; the other group is of
the opinion that travel should be undertaken as soon as the means of
communication are available, regardless of the political situation in Peking.
The matter again came up for discussion at a meeting on April 28, 1926, but
was again postponed indefinitely because of the fact that no satisfactory or

comfortable means of communication for travel are available. The views of
the individual Commissioners may be ascertained by reference to the
Minutes enclosed.56
 
At the meeting on April 28, 1926, the Chinese Commissioner presented
another memorandum on the subject of extraterritorial practices in China,
supplementary to the memorandum which he presented on March 23,
1926.57 There was considerable argument as to the relevancy of the subjects
mentioned in this supplementary memorandum as regards the general
question of extraterritorial jurisdiction in China. It was unanimously
decided, however, to receive the memorandum and transmit it to the various
Governments concerned. A number of the Commissioners, including
myself, are prepared to hear what the Chinese have to say with regard to
any of the subjects mentioned therein, although I feel that the matter of
railway zones, leased territories, and the Legation Quarter at Peking, are not
within the scope of the work of the Commission.
While the matter of travel is in abeyance, the Commission is proceeding
with a discussion of the draft report, and a meeting for this purpose will be
held on May 5, 1926.
I inclose herewith copies of the Minutes of the meetings held on April 16,
April 22 and April 28, together with a copy of the memorandum of the
Chinese Commissioner mentioned above, which is attached to the Minutes
of the meeting of April 28, 1926.58
I have [etc.]
SILAS H. STRAWN
56 None printed.
57 For list of subjects presented for the consideration of the Commission by
the Chinese Commissioner in his memorandum of Mar. 23, see telegram
No. 150, Mar. 25, from the Minister in China, p. 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of
Doc. 748 and Doc. 749].

28 None printed.

793.003 C 73/301
[Document 753]
The American Commissioner on Extraterritorial Jurisdiction in
China (Strawn) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 11, 1926.
[Received June 9.]
No. 12
SIR: I have the honor to report the activities of the Commission on
Extraterritoriality in China during the period from May 1, 1926 to May 11,
1926.
On May 5, 1926 a meeting of the Commission was held at the Chü Jen
T’ang,59 a copy of the Minutes of which is enclosed herewith.60 At this
meeting there was a discussion of the outline of the report and the
recommendations of the Commission. In the main there was a concurrence
of opinion among the Commissioners as to what the outline should be. After
the return of the Commission from its tour of inspection, a drafting
committee will be appointed to prepare a draft report. In the interim the
various Commissioners are to prepare a statement of their views for this
committee, which will use these statements as a basis for its draft report. I
have already prepared my draft report and recommendations subject to such
amendments as may be necessary as a result of the findings of the
Commission on its tour of investigation.
At this meeting the Chinese Commissioner presented a memorandum on
taxation, a copy of which is enclosed herewith,61 but it was not discussed
because the Commissioners had no time to study its contents.
Travel conditions having ameliorated, it was decided at the meeting on May
5 that the Commission would begin its tour of inspection leaving Peking on
May 10, 1926 for Hankow via the Peking-Hankow Railway, thence
proceeding to Changsha, if possible, then to Nanking, Shanghai, Tsingtao,

Dairen, Mukden, Harbin, Tientsin, and back to Peking. South China has
been eliminated from the itinerary because of the hostile attitude of the
Canton Government. The Commission accordingly left Peking last night for
Hankow and is expected to return by June 10. I was unable to go on account
of the Tariff Conference and sent Mr. Jacobs in my place.
I do not anticipate that there will be any great delay in the preparation of the
report and recommendations and believe that the Commission will complete
its labors and adjourn before July 1.
I have [etc.]
SILAS H. STRAWN
59 At the Winter Palace in Peking.
60 Not printed.
61 Not printed.

793.003 C 73/297: Telegram
[Document 754]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, June 11, 1926—7 p.m.
117. Personal for Strawn: Your number 10 sent April 16, delayed in
transmission, and your communication May 12, received June 9,62 have
been read and considered with care.
1. It is realized that your return home is necessary and that you
are unable to go back to China. I appreciate deeply all that has
been done by you.
2. Regarding the tentative recommendations you have made, my
feeling is that you ought to be permitted to use your personal
judgment unhampered with respect to details by instructions from
the Department, the reason being that the Department should
remain free as to the making of any treaty regarding
extraterritoriality after your report is received. Since I am
unfamiliar with the local conditions in China, I can give you on
this subject only the most general instructions. It has been my
desire to renounce extraterritoriality in regard to China and
everywhere else as soon as such action is compatible with the
requirements of protecting American lives and interests.
Therefore I should wish that you make your report without being
confined by definite instructions on details and make it without
considering the desires of other countries except for those of their
suggestions which commend themselves to your judgment. I do
not desire that you should recommend as a prerequisite to
extraterritoriality being relinquished, any requirements from
China which you do not believe are absolutely necessary to
protect 
American 
interests 
before 
extraterritoriality 
is

relinquished. Ideal conditions are not expected by us, but we must
have assurance of course that American citizens will be fairly
protected by the Government. It has been my hope that we could
give up extraterritoriality in China within a reasonable time.
Possibly we may be forced into such a position that we will feel
compelled to do that without delay, but I wish first to have your
honest judgment on the situation.
KELLOGG
62 Not found in Department files.

793.003 C 73/314: Telegram
[Document 755]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 17, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received September 18—9:50 a.m.]
412. With reference to 411, September 16, 3 p.m.63 Following from Strawn:
“The following is a summary of the report of the Commission on
Extraterritoriality in China, signed September 16 by all of the
Commissioners of the participating powers, China included.
The report consists of the following sections: Introductory
remarks; part 1, present practice of extraterritoriality; part 2, laws
and judicial and prison system of China; part 3, administration of
justice in China; part 4, recommendations.
Part 1 is an historical outline of the system of extraterritoriality
followed by a detailed exposition of the working of that system in
the foreign courts, then a description of the procedure in mixed
cases in Chinese courts. Reference is made to the multiplicity of
courts and diversity of laws, to the inaccessibility of consular
courts, to the inadequate training of the personnel of consular
courts, to the difficulties connected with appeals, to the immunity
of foreigners from Chinese municipal regulations, to the conflict
of laws relating to the nationality of persons of Chinese origin, to
the irregular protection sometimes extended to Chinese persons
and interests, to the absence of extradition arrangements, to the
difficulties arising from asylum for Chinese on foreign premises
and also to the restrictions upon foreign travel, trade and
residence in the interior. Part 1 also contains 12 memoranda
prepared by the foreign Commissioners individually, giving full
details of their respective judicial systems in China.

Part 2 consists of a detailed exposition of the subject with the
comments of the Commission with respect to what it considers
are the shortcomings in the laws and in the judicial and prison
systems. The laws are dealt with under the following main
headings: those relating to (1) criminal matters; (2) civil matters;
(3) commercial matters; (4) miscellaneous laws. The description
of the judicial system comprises an exposition of the outline of
the courts, administrative jurisdiction in juridical matters, the
mixed courts, the transition courts, magistrate courts, special
courts, military courts, the administrative court, police tribunals,
appointment of Judicial officials, rank and salaries of judicial
officials, disciplinary punishment of judicial officials, lawyers,
costs and general observations. The prison system is discussed
under the headings of: (1) administration and officials; (2)
regulations concerning prisons; (3) general observations.
Part 3 deals with the general administration of the laws and
judicial system as distinguished from the theoretic treatment of
their content in part 2. This section opens with certain general
remarks on the Government in which it is pointed out that in the
past decade there has been increasing disorder in China with a
corresponding decrease in the authority of the Central
Government, that there has been continual civil warfare for the
past 3 years, that since the Commission has been sitting Peking
has been assailed and the Commission’s tour of investigation
delayed 6 weeks, that the Legislative branch of the Government
has also suffered disorganization, that the parliaments and other
representative bodies have been ephemeral and contributed little
to the legislation of China, that therefore the making of laws has
necessarily largely fallen into the hands of executive officials who
have been more or less under the influence of the military. As a
result of this disorganization, the lines between the executive,
legislative, and judicial branches tend to become obliterated. The
Government treasury has been depleted so that funds are at times
lacking to pay police and judicial officials. The uniformity of the
legal and judicial systems is being impaired because of the
independent laws and courts established in areas not recognizing

the Central Government and the extension and perfection of the
new legal and judicial systems are being retarded. Attention is
then drawn to the interference by the military authorities with the
administration of justice.
Several cases of military interference are then cited, among them
being the following: The execution of the Chief Justice of the
High Court of Shantung, the execution of “Little” Hsü,64 the
execution of the Chinese editor Shao Piao-ping in April, the
issuance of orders in June for the beheading of the speculators in
military notes, the execution in August of the Chinese editor, Lin
Pai-shui, the execution at Mukden of the speculators in the
Fengtien paper notes, the Ostroumoff65 case and certain other
cases. This section then deals with such matters as interference by
the civil authorities, lack of universal application of the laws of
China, illegality in the granting of bail, torture of prisoners and
illegal methods of execution, the insufficient number of modern
courts and trained judicial officials, lack of financial support of
the judiciary, unsatisfactory condition in magistrate courts, police
tribunals and miscellaneous complaints.
Part 4 is as follows:
“The 
committee, 
having 
completed 
their
investigation[s] and having made their findings of fact
as set forth in parts 1, 2, and 3 of this report, now make
the following recommendations:
The Committee are of the opinion that, when these
recommendations 
[shall] 
have 
been 
reasonably
complied with, the several powers would be warranted
in 
relinquishing 
their 
respective 
rights 
of
extraterritoriality.
It is understood that, upon the relinquishment of
extraterritoriality, the nationals of the powers concerned
will enjoy freedom of residence and trade and civil

rights in all parts of China in accordance with the
general practice in intercourse among nations and upon
a fair and equitable basis.
RECOMMENDATIONS
I. The administration of justice with respect to
the civilian population in China must be
entrusted to a judiciary which shall be
effectively protected against any unwarranted
interference by the executive or other
branches of the Government, whether civil or
military.
II. The Chinese Government should adopt the
following program for the development of the
existing legal, judicial and prison systems of
China:
1. It should comply with the
provisions of parts 2 and 3 of the
whole report relating to the laws
and to the judicial police and prison
systems, with a view to making
such amendments and taking such
action as may be necessary to meet
the observations there made.
2. It should complete and put into
force the following laws: (1) Civil
code; 
(2) 
commercial 
code,
including negotiable instruments
law, maritime law and insurance
law; (3) revised criminal code; (4)
banking law; (5) bankruptcy law;
(6) 
patent 
law; 
(7) 
land
expropriation 
law; 
(8) 
law
concerning notaries public.

3. It should establish and maintain a
uniformity 
for 
the 
regular
enactment, 
promulgation 
and
rescission of laws, so that there may
be no uncertainty as to the laws of
China.
4. It should extend the system of
modern courts, modern prison[s]
and modern detention houses with a
view to the elimination of the
magistrate courts and of the old-
style prisons and detention houses.
5. It should make adequate financial
provisions for the maintenance
courts, detention houses and prisons
and their personnel.
III. It is suggested that, prior to the reasonable
compliance with all the recommendations
above mentioned but after the principal items
thereof have been carried out, the powers
concerned, if so desired by the Chinese
Government, might consider the abolition of
extraterritoriality 
[according 
to 
such
progressive scheme] (whether geographical,
partial or otherwise) as may be agreed upon.
IV. Pending the abolition of extraterritoriality,
the Governments of the powers concerned
should consider part 1 of this report with a
view to meeting the observations there made
and, with the cooperation of the Chinese
Government wherever necessary, should
make certain modifications in the existing
systems and practice of extraterritoriality as
follows:

1. Application of Chinese laws. The
powers 
concerned 
should
administer, so far as practicable, in
their extraterritorial or consular
courts such laws and regulations of
China as they may deem proper to
adopt.
2. Mixed cases and mixed courts.
As a general proposition mixed
cases between nationals of the
powers concerned as plaintiffs and
persons under Chinese jurisdiction
as defendants should be tried before
the modern Chinese courts (Shen
P’an T’ing) without the presence of
a foreign assessor to watch the
proceedings 
or 
otherwise
participate. With regard to the
existing special mixed courts, their
organization and procedure should,
as far as [the special conditions in]
the settlements and concessions
warrant, be brought more into
accord with the organization and
procedure of the modern Chinese
judicial system. Lawyers who are
nationals of extraterritorial powers
and who are qualified to appear
before other [the] extraterritorial or
consular courts should be permitted,
subject to the laws and regulations
governing Chinese lawyers, to
represent 
clients, 
foreign 
or
Chinese, in all mixed, cases. No
examination would [should] be

required as a qualification for
practice in such cases.
3. 
Nationals 
of 
extraterritorial
powers, (a) The extraterritorial
powers 
should 
correct 
certain
abuses which have arisen through
the extension of foreign protection
to Chinese as well as to business
and shipping interests, the actual
ownership of which is [wholly] or
mainly 
Chinese. 
(b) 
The
extraterritorial powers which do not
now 
require 
compulsory
[periodical] registration of their
nationals in China should make
provision 
for 
compulsory
registration at definite intervals.
4. Judicial assistance. Necessary
arrangements should be made in
regard 
to 
judicial 
assistance
(including commissions rogatoires)
between the Chinese authorities and
the authorities of the extraterritorial
powers themselves, e. g.: (a) All
agreements between the foreigners
and 
persons 
under 
Chinese
jurisdiction which provide for the
settlement of civil matters by
arbitration should be recognized,
and [the] awards made in pursuance
thereof should be enforced by the
extraterritorial or consular districts
[courts] in the control [case] of
persons under their jurisdiction and
by the Chinese courts [in the case

of] persons under their jurisdiction,
except when in the opinion of the
competent court the decision is
contrary to public order or good
morals. 
(b) 
Satisfactory
arrangements 
should 
be 
made
between the Chinese Government
and the powers concerned for the
prompt execution of judgments,
summonses, and warrants of arrest
or search, concerning persons under
Chinese jurisdiction, duly issued by
the Chinese courts and certified by
the competent Chinese authorities
and vice versa.
5. Taxation. Pending the abolition
of extraterritoriality, the nationals of
the powers concerned should be
required to pay such taxes as may
be 
prescribed 
in 
laws 
and
regulations duly promulgated by the
competent 
authorities 
of 
the
Chinese 
Government 
and
recognized 
by 
the 
powers
concerned as applicable to their
nationals.’
The Chinese Commissioner affixed his signature to the whole
report under the following statement: ‘By signing this report my
approval of all the statements contained in parts 1, 2 and 3 is not
to be implied.’ It is to be noted that the Chinese Commissioner
made no reservation with respect to part 4 containing the
recommendations.
With regard to the question of the privity of the report, the
majority of the Commissioners are of the opinion that the report is

for the official information of their respective Governments and
that the Commissioners have no authority to make the report
public. Therefore no information concerning the contents of the
report has been given out in Peking.”
MAYER
63 Not printed.
64 Hsü Shu-cheng, a prominent military leader.
65 Boris G. Ostroumoff, Russian general manager of the Chinese Eastern
Railway.

793.00 C 73/332: Telegram
[Document 756]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, November 22, 1926—3 p.m.
276. Your telegram 525, November 1, 5 p.m.66 Inform Ministry of Foreign
Affairs that press here this morning publishes article obviously based on
knowledge of report of Extraterritoriality Commission. State that in view of
pressure here and in order to avoid speculative comment as to contents of
report this Government proposes to give report to press for publication on
Monday, November 29. You will doubtless desire to furnish correspondents
of American papers at Peking with the report at the same time. Other
governments are being informed.
KELLOGG
66 Not printed.

793.003 C 73/351: Telegram
[Document 757]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 27, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received November 27—6:56 a.m.]
580. 1. The substance of your telegram number 276, November 22, 3 p.m.,
was conveyed to the Foreign Office. By a memorandum actually sent
yesterday morning in a note 26th and received yesterday evening and
purporting to be a reply to ours of October 28th,67 in pursuance of your
circular telegram October 25, 6 p.m.67 the Foreign Office states as follows:
“It will not [sic] be recalled that the question of publicity of the
report has been reserved for discussion and arrangement among
the Governments concerned.
In view of the importance of the conclusions of the Commission,
the work of translating the recommendations contained in part 4
into the Chinese language was first undertaken and is now
completed. It is therefore suggested to have this part published
first together with the declaration made by Dr. Wang Chung-hui,
Chinese commissioner, before signing the report.68
As for parts 1, 2, and 3, of the report, the Chinese Government, in
view of the general reservation made by the Chinese
Commissioner relative thereto, are of the opinion that publication
of these parts may give rise to misapprehensions, and it is
therefore desirable to withhold it.”
2. I assume that the Department intends to follow out its purpose of making
public the full text of the report without regard to the Chinese suggestion
that recommendations be published without the findings upon which they
are based.

MACMURRAY
67 Not printed.
67 Not printed.
68 The Chinese Foreign Office on Nov. 28 released part 4 of the report and
Dr. Wang’s declaration, for publication on Nov. 29.

793.003 C 73/351: Telegram
[Document 758]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, November 27, 1926—8 p.m.
285. Department is publishing report of Extraterritorial[ity] Commission on
November 29.69 This date has been notified to other governments
concerned and it is understood that publication will be made in other
capitals on same date except in London where there has been delay due to
lateness of receiving report and getting it printed.
GREW
69 Department of State, Report of the Commission on Extraterritoriality in
China, Peking, September 16, 1926 (Washington, Government Printing
Office, 1926).

Abrogation by China of the Sino-
Belgian Treaty of November 2, 186570
70 For text of treaty, see China, Imperial Maritime Customs, Treaties,
Conventions, etc., Between China and Foreign States (Shanghai, 1908), vol.
II, p. 758.
[759] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Washington, August 17, 1926—2 p.m.
755.93/2a: Telegram
[760] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
Brussels, August 18, 1926—2 p.m. [Received 2:55 p.m.]
755.93/2: Telegram
[761] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 19, 1926—7 p.m. [Received August 19—11:55 a.m.]
755.93/4: Telegram
[762] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 24, 1926—10 a.m. [Received August 24—9:25 a.m.]
755.93/6: Telegram

[763] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
Brussels, August 25, 1926. [Received September 8.]
755.93/12
[764] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 27, 1926—noon. [Received August 27—9:37 a.m.]
755.93/7: Telegram
[765] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
Brussels, September 7, 1926—11 a.m. [Received September 7—10:28 a.m.]
755.93/11: Telegram
[766] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
Washington, September 8, 1926—2 p.m.
755.93/8: Telegram
[767] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
Brussels, November 6, 1926—1 p.m. [Received November 6—10:12 a.m.]
755.93/25: Telegram
[768] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 9, 1926—noon. [Received November 9—10:12 a.m.]
755.93/26: Telegram

[769] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 9, 1926—1 p.m. [Received 6:15 p.m.]
755.93/28: Telegram
[770] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 12, 1926—5 p.m. [Received November 12—3:15 p.m.]
755.98/30: Telegram
[771] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, November 15, 1926—6 p.m.
755.93/30: Telegram
[772] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, November 19, 1926—4 p.m. [Received November 19—1:54 p.m.]
793.00/188: Telegram
[773] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
Brussels, November 23, 1926—2 p.m. [Received November 23—1:53
p.m.]
755.93/33: Telegram

755.93/2a: Telegram
[Document 759]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, August 17, 1926—2 p.m.
164. News item published in New York World today from Geneva dated
August 16 states that China has officially notified Belgium that abrogation
of her commercial treaties and extraterritorial rights will be effective
October 29. Report states that Spanish and Portuguese will be the next to go
and that British, French, Dutch, Italian and American treaties will follow as
the dates for extension will arrive. Please telegraph confirmation if such
action has been taken by Chinese Government.
HARRISON

755.93/2: Telegram
[Document 760]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
BRUSSELS, August 18, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received 2:55 p.m.]
58. Department’s 40, August 17, 1 p.m.71 See my weekly political
despatches numbers 539, 64 [564] and 76 [576] of July 1st, 29th, and
August 11th.71
Foreign Minister confirms the fact that China has officially notified
Belgium that China abrogates her treaty to take effect October 29 [27?].
Although Belgium alone has the right of abrogation, the Government has
agreed to negotiate for new treaty, but counsels delay pending outcome of
work of international commissions on extraterritoriality and customs. Both
Peking and Brussels have therefore consented to a modus vivendi, but the
Belgian Government has information to the effect that China is not really
going to carry out her expressed willingness to proceed with a modus
vivendi. Foreign Minister has informed Peking that if the modus vivendi is
not signed before the end of present treaty the whole matter will be
submitted to International Court of Justice at The Hague. In the
circumstances, the Government already decided to elicit the help of the
American, British and possibly French Governments in an effort to induce
China to put into effect the desired modus vivendi and a note to this effect
will be sent to me shortly.
PHILLIPS
71 Not printed.
71 Not printed.

755.93/4: Telegram
[Document 761]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 19, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received August 19—11:55 a.m.]
337. Your telegram number 164, August 17, 2 p.m.
1. By a palpable perversion of the meaning of article 46, the
Chinese Foreign Office, April 16th, assumed the right to give
notice of its intention to terminate, October 27th next, the Belgian
treaty of 1865. Instead of maintaining its clear rights while
offering to incorporate a revision of unsatisfactory provisions, the
Belgian Government allowed itself to be drawn into a discussion
of a modus vivendi to cover the period from October 27th until
the negotiation and coming into force of a new treaty.
Emboldened by this apparent weakness, the Chinese have made
no concrete proposals but simply insist that Belgian treaty rights
come to an end on the date specified. Belgian Legation informed
the Foreign Office, August 4th, that, unless satisfactory proposals
for a modus vivendi had been offered within a month, the Belgian
Government would take respectful measures such as an appeal to
the Washington Conference powers or resort to the Permanent
Court on the question of China’s right to terminate the treaty. A
report on the subject was mailed July 29th.72
2. The Foreign Office had in March last assumed similar right to
terminate the French Tientsin treaty of 1866 [1886],73 additional
commercial convention of 188774 and the supplementary
convention of 1895 relating to trade with Indo-China75 and a
customs notification was recently issued to the effect that special
frontier customs reductions would cease August 8th. The French
appear to have accepted this action with no demur beyond an

unheeded request that these treaties be kept in force for another
year to allow time for negotiating new arrangements.
3. By the terms of its article 26, the Japanese treaty of 189676 will
be subject to revision of its commercial provisions after October
20th next. Officials of the Foreign Office have remarked in
discussion with the Belgian Minister that it is intended at that
time to give notice terminating the treaty entirely.77
4. There is considerable obviously artificial agitation among
Chamber of Commerce and such public bodies in support of the
Government’s policy of exercising in the case of each treaty their
right to demand its termination at the earliest date allowed. Our
1903 commercial treaty78 would apparently become subject to
revision and possibly termination January 13, 1934 (article 17).
MACMURRAY
72 Not printed.
73 China, Imperial Maritime Customs, Treaties, vol. I, p. 701.
74 Ibid., p. 721.
75 MacMurray, Treaties, 1894–1911, vol. I, p. 28.
76 China, Imperial Maritime Customs, Treaties, vol. II, p. 1332.
77 The Chinese Foreign Office in a note to the Japanese Minister in Peking,
Oct. 20, 1926, expressed the desire of the Chinese Government that the
treaty referred to, together with notes, protocol and the supplementary
treaty and annexes of 1903, be revised within a six months’ period. The
reply of the Japanese Legation, Nov. 10, 1926, in the form of a
memorandum, consented to “consider sympathetically the wishes of the
Chinese Government.” (File No. 793.942/5.) 78 Foreign Relations , 1903, p.
91.

755.93/6: Telegram
[Document 762]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 24, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received August 24—9:25 a.m.]
344. 1. Through an oversight my telegram number 337, August 19, 7 p.m.,
erred in stating (penultimate sentence of first paragraph) that Belgian
Minister had specified as alternative protective measures either appeal to
the Washington Conference powers or resort to the Permanent Court.
Although originally instructed to specify both of these alternatives, he
obtained the permission of his Government to refer only to resort to the
International Court of Justice.
2. He now confidentially advises me that his Government is approaching
the other participants in the Washington Conference with a view to their
making collective representations to the Chinese Government. He is
informing the Belgian Government that in his opinion such representations
would actually weaken the position taken by it on the clear-cut issue as to
the interpretation of article number 46 of the treaty, besides irritation
[irritating] Chinese nationalistic feeling which is especially impatient of
collective action by the powers. I fully share the Belgian Minister’s opinion
and suggest that, if approached, you might see fit to reply that collective
action would appear advisable only in the event that the Chinese should
offer unsatisfactory terms for the proposed modus vivendi.
MACMURRAY

755.93/12
[Document 763]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
BRUSSELS, August 25, 1926.
[Received September 8.]
No. 585
SIR:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
As I have already reported in my telegram No. 58, of August 18, 2 p.m.,
Belgium has decided to elicit the help of the American, British and,
possibly, French governments in an effort to induce China to put into effect
the desired modus vivendi, and a Note Verbale to this effect, dated August
21, has been communicated to me, a copy and translation of which is
enclosed. …
I have [etc.]
WILLIAM PHILLIPS
[Enclosure 1—Translation]
The Belgian Foreign Office to the American Embassy
BRUSSELS, August 21, 1926.
NOTE VERBALE
In the month of April last, the Chinese Government, basing itself upon an
erroneous interpretation of article 46 of the Chinese-Belgian treaty of 1865*

, advised the Belgian Government that it denounced this treaty and that it
considered it as ceasing to take effect as from October 27 next. In making
this announcement, the Chinese Government claimed to make use of the
faculty of denunciation which, by the terms of this article, is reserved solely
for the Belgian Government.
The latter immediately informed the Chinese Government that it was
impossible for it to admit of such an interpretation of article 46 of the treaty
of 1865, but that it was disposed to consider the revision of this instrument
as soon as China was provided with a stable Government and the
conclusions of the work of the Tariff Conference and the Commission on
Extraterritoriality,79 which are being held in China by virtue of the accords
concluded at Washington on February 6, 1922, were known.
In spite of the strong remonstrances of the Belgian Minister in Peking, the
Chinese Government refuses to abandon its standpoint; at best it declared
that if a new treaty was not concluded by October 27 next, it would
endeavor to examine the possibility of finding a provisional modus vivendi
which, while not disregarding the interests of Belgium, would not in any
way injure the legitimate rights of China.
The Minister of Belgium in Peking was then directed to confirm to the
Chinese Government that the Belgian Government did not admit of its
interpretation of article 46 of the treaty and that it was unable to consider
negotiations before the termination of the Tariff Conference and the
meetings of the Commission on Extraterritoriality. But he was requested to
add at the same time that Belgium would not refuse to examine the
possibility of concluding a provisional modus vivendi with China, on the
condition that this modus vivendi would stipulate that the clauses of the
treaty of 1865—with the exception of article 46 and the provisions which
might be modified by the two Conferences—would remain in force until the
conclusion of a new accord.
In view of the obstinacy of the Chinese Government, the Belgian
Government, being uncertain as to the bases of the modus vivendi which
China will propose, informed the Government of Peking that it regretted to
have to state that there was complete disagreement between China and

Belgium as regards the interpretation of a clause of the Chinese-Belgian
treaty of 1865, that this disagreement constitutes a conflict which, by the
terms of article 38, paragraph 2, of the Statute of the Court of International
Justice,80 falls within the province of the Court for those States which have
accepted the obligatory character of this provision and that, China and
Belgium having on May 13, 1922, and March 10, 1926, respectively,
recognized this character, the Belgian Government was disposed to submit
the case to the Court of The Hague.
However, as the Belgian Government strongly desires not to be forced to
have recourse to this procedure, it has directed the Belgian Minister in
Peking to request the Chinese Government to inform him immediately, and
at the latest before September 3 next, of the bases of the modus vivendi
which it stated it was disposed to conclude until circumstances should
enable it to enter upon the negotiation of a new treaty. (See herewith the
despatch addressed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Belgium to His
Excellency the Minister of China in Brussels, under date of August 3,
1926.)
Filled with the broadest spirit of conciliation and the greatest goodwill
toward China, but unable to consider concessions which would sacrifice the
security of its nationals and of their enterprises in that country, Belgium is
firmly resolved, if China maintains its point of view, to bring the conflict
before the Court of Justice of The Hague. Nevertheless, being desirous of
reaching an equitable solution without having recourse to an extreme
solution, it takes the liberty of appealing to the signatory Powers of the
Washington accords of February 6, 1922, and to request the Government of
the United States of America to be so good as to exert its influence upon
(agir auprès de) the Peking Government with a view to obtaining that the
stipulations of the modus vivendi which it is prepared to sign with China be
acceptable: they could only be so on condition that Belgium is not placed
on an inferior footing in regard to the other Powers having treaties.
As the Chinese Government has not concealed its intention of adopting, as
soon as circumstances will permit, an identical attitude toward the other
Powers with treaties, this question does not interest only Belgium. It

appears of a nature to engage the attention also of all the Powers which
have concluded “unequal treaties” with China.
[Subenclosure—Translation]
The Belgian Foreign Minister (Vandervelde) to the Chinese Minister in Belgium (Wang King-ky)
BRUSSELS, August 3, 1926.
MR. MINISTER: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the letter which
Your Excellency was good enough to write me on the 27th of this [last]
month.
The Belgian Government regrets to have to state that there is complete
disagreement between China and Belgium as regards the interpretation of a
clause of the Chinese-Belgian treaty of 1865.
This disagreement constitutes a conflict, which, by the terms of article 38,
paragraph 2, of the statute of the International Court of Justice, falls within
the province of the Court for those States which have accepted the
obligatory character of this provision. China and Belgium having, on May
13, 1922, and March 10, 1926, respectively, recognized this character, the
Belgian Government is disposed to submit the case to the Court of The
Hague.
However, as the Belgian Government strongly desires not to be forced to
have recourse to this procedure, I have directed our Minister in Peking to
request the Chinese Government to inform him immediately, and at the
latest before the expiration of a month’s time, of the bases of the modus
vivendi which it stated it was disposed to conclude until circumstances
enable us to enter upon the negotiation of a new treaty.
I take [etc.]
E. VANDERVELDE
* ARTICLE 46.—If hereafter the Government of His Majesty the King of the
Belgians should consider it advisable to effect modifications in certain of

the clauses of the present treaty, it will be free in this respect to open
negotiations after a period of ten years has passed, as from the day of the
exchange of ratifications, but, six months before the expiration of the ten
years, it must make known officially to the Government of His Majesty the
Emperor of China its intention of effecting modifications, and wherein they
will consist. Failing this official notification, the treaty will remain in force
without alterations for a new term of ten years, and so on from ten years to
ten years. [Footnote in the original.]
79 See pp. 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613] ff., and pp. 966 [Pg.
966 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744] ff.
80 League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. VI, pp. 391, 405.

755.93/7: Telegram
[Document 764]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 27, 1926—noon.
[Received August 27—9:37 a.m.]
356. Your 173, August 24, 6 p.m.81
1. Belgian Minister confidentially informs me his Government
advises him that it contemplates simultaneous action by the
Washington Conference powers “in order to obtain a basis for an
acceptable modus vivendi.” If any such action should be taken at
all (against which I still strongly advise) it seems to me that it
should be in the sense of a protest against China’s violation of
Belgian treaty rights rather than of an attempt to influence the
terms of the proposed modus vivendi which is a matter of friendly
concession by the Belgian Government and does not involve any
question of principle.
2. I beg to request that you advise me of such action as you may
decide to take upon the Belgian note.
MACMURRAY
81 Not printed.

755.93/11: Telegram
[Document 765]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
BRUSSELS, September 7, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received September 7—10:28 a.m.]
66. My despatch number 585, August 25. September 3, Chinese Minister
presented to Foreign Office draft of modus vivendi in five articles
containing China’s terms for 6 months’ period following expiration of
treaty.
Article 2 provides for reciprocal recognition tariff autonomy with most-
favored-nation treatment.
Article 3 is as follows:
“Principle of territorial jurisdiction of each country recognized
and with a view to carrying out effect of above. China agrees for
the time being, to tolerate temporary status quo of consuls’
jurisdiction, with the understanding that Belgium agrees to formal
renunciation of consuls’ jurisdiction in the new treaty to be
formed.”
My informant at the Foreign Office expressed great dissatisfaction with
these terms but said that Belgian Government will await return of Minister
of Foreign Affairs, now at Geneva, before formulating reply.
PHILLIPS

755.93/8: Telegram
[Document 766]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips)
WASHINGTON, September 8, 1926—2 p.m.
44. Your 62, August 23, 6 p.m., 64, September 1, 2 p.m.82 Informally advise
Foreign Office that Department, while viewing with sympathy Belgian
proposal that this Government exert its influence upon Peking Government
with the object of obtaining for Belgium an acceptable modus vivendi,
questions the advisability of such action, since it might tend to weaken the
position taken by the Belgian Government on the clear cut issue as to the
interpretation of Article 46 of the Sino-Belgian Treaty of 1865.
KELLOGG
82 Neither printed.

755.93/25: Telegram
[Document 767]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
BRUSSELS, November 6, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received November 6—10:12 a.m.]
77. My telegram number 66, September 7, 11 a.m. Foreign Office has today
notified the Chinese Government that the Belgian Government will submit
the question surrounding abrogation of the Sino-Belgian treaty to the Court
of International Justice at The Hague.
PHILLIPS

755.93/26: Telegram
[Document 768]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 9, 1926—noon.
[Received November 9—10:12 a.m.]
535. Legation’s mail despatch number 796, October 22.83
1. After weeks of effort by Belgian Legation to meet Chinese
Foreign Office demands relative to revision of Sino [-Belgian
treaty] of 1865, Belgian Legation was compelled to stand on its
treaty rights and to invite the Chinese to join in the terms of a
compromise, placing the matter before the Permanent Court of
International Justice at The Hague for a decision on the
interpretation of article 41 [46] of the treaty. The alternative with
which the Belgian Government was faced was the demand by the
Chinese that it agree to an abrogation of the treaty and a modus
vivendi whereby at the end of the 9 months, if no new treaty were
negotiated, the Belgian Government might find itself without
either treaty or modus vivendi—that is to say, with no rights
whatsoever in China.
2. At this juncture on November 6th by a so-called Presidential
order to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, i. e., from Dr. Koo to
himself, the Sino-Belgian treaty of 1865 was “declared to cease to
be effective” from October 27 last, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs was ordered to negotiate and conclude a new treaty with
the Belgian Government, as soon as possible, on the basis of
equality and mutual respect for territorial sovereignty.
3. On the same day the Chinese Government made a statement of
its case as well as transmitted a note to the Belgian Minister
describing the action taken by the Presidential mandate and the
reasons therefor, being a reply to the Belgian Minister’s aide-

mémoire of November 5th in which the latter informed the
Chinese Foreign Office of his Government’s inability to agree
with the Chinese proposal which would bring about the
impossible situation described in the alternative aforementioned.
4. Full texts of Presidential order and the exchange of
correspondence described above are being sent by radio. My
comment will follow later by telegraph.
MACMURRAY
83 Not printed.

755.93/28: Telegram
[Document 769]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 9, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received 6:15 p.m.]
536. My 535, November 9, noon. Following are, first, Belgian Minister’s
aide-mémoire of November 5th to Chinese Foreign Office in regard to
revision of the Sino-Belgian treaty of 1865:
“Belgian Legation has not failed to bring to the knowledge of its
Government the tenor of the Chinese Government’s aide-mémoire
of the 20th [28th] October. Acting on the instructions of the
Belgian Government, the Legation has the honor to bring to the
notice of the Chinese Government that the Belgian Government
does not find the Chinese proposition acceptable.
The last suggestion for a modus vivendi offered by the Belgian
Government envisaged the fundamental concession to China of
the abrogation, by mutual agreement, of the treaty of 2d
November, 1865, but correlatively with this concession which
divests it (Belgium) of all its rights, Belgium asked that a modus
vivendi should be concluded which would recognize most-
favored-nation treatment and concede to Belgium this treatment
until a new treaty has been concluded.
The Chinese Government has not agreed to these proposals which
constituted a whole and has presumed to reduce the duration of
the modus vivendi to a period of a few months, to which an end
may be put at the sole initiative of China, if at this moment the
Government[s] had not reached an agreement as to the basis of a
new treaty, thus placing Belgium in the position of having neither
treaty nor modus vivendi.

In any case, Government of the Republic cannot fail to notice that
this position at which negotiations have arrived demonstrates
clearly that the Belgian Government do not make a question of
principle or of doctrine out of the fact of their maintaining the
clauses of the former treaty.
The negotiations in question have been carried on by Belgium in
a spirit of great good feeling towards China. Far from insisting on
the rights which belong to them, under article XLVI of the treaty
of November 2d, 1865, the Belgian Government has gone as [so]
far as to take under consideration the abrogation, by mutual
agreement, of the treaty and only asked in exchange the
establishment, by mutual agreement of a transitional regime
whereby Belgian undertakings and interests would not be placed
on different footing from those of other countries. It is for this
reason that, in the course of one of their latest conversations, the
Belgian Minister had the honor to bring to the notice of His
Excellency the Minister of Foreign Affairs that he was ready to
recommend to his Government that there should be no renewal of
the modus vivendi after one of the powers equally interested
economically in China, such as the United States of America,
Great Britain, France and Japan had included [concluded] new
treaties with China, Belgium agreeing that from this time on it
would accept in the matter of jurisdiction that [sic] the same
arrangements as those which exist between China and any one of
these powers.
His Majesty’s Government is therefore obliged to discontinue the
negotiations which have been carried on and to take the question
of law which is raised by the interpretation of article XLVI of the
treaty of November 2d, 1865, before the Permanent Court of
International Justice at The Hague instituted by the Assembly of
the League of Nations on December 13, 1920—in accordance
with article XIV of the Covenant of the League of Nations—and
which was the subject of the protocol signed at Geneva by the
Chinese and Belgian Governments whereby they agreed to

recognize the competence of the Court in all questions which the
signatories might submit to it.
Consequently His Majesty’s Government has the honor to make
the offer to the Government of the Republic to establish by
common consent—in accordance with one of the methods
provided for [in] article XL84 of the said protocol—the terms of a
compromis placing this matter before this International Court.
The recourse to the Permanent Court of International Justice
implies, on the part of His Majesty’s Government, no unfriendly
feeling for China, His Majesty’s Legation has therefore been
instructed to declare to the Government of the Republic that, in
the event of a decision of the Court favorable to the Belgian view,
the Royal Government will be ready to continue seeking for a
conciliatory solution, inspired by the same spirit which has
animated it from the beginning of the negotiations, which is only
a desire to satisfy Chinese aspirations while safeguarding Belgian
interests. Peking, November 5, 1926.”
 
Second. Foreign Office’s reply of November 6th:
“Monsieur le Ministre: In replying to the aide-mémoire which
Your Excellency handed to me yesterday, I [have] the honor to
state that the Chinese Government profoundly regret that, in spite
of the repeated concessions they have made during the course of
the negotiations for a modus vivendi to take the place of the Sino-
Belgian treaty of 1865, the Belgian Government did not see its
way to accept their proposition which I communicated to you on
the 28th of October last embodying an important concession; but,
instead, 
reverting 
to 
its 
original 
position 
before 
the
commencement of the present negotiations, it proposed to raise
the question of interpretation before the Permanent Court of
International Justice. While adhering to their view as regards the
terminability of the treaty of 1865 by notice, the Chinese
Government cannot but express their keen disappointment that

their untiring efforts for an amicable settlement of the question
should have failed to bring about the desired result.
This is all the more regrettable as the progress of negotiations had
already reached a stage when the point at issue only involved the
question [of] whether a definite period should not be set for the
conclusion of a new treaty. The setting of a definite period within
which a new treaty is to be concluded is not an unusual practice in
international negotiations. The Chinese Government deem this to
be the more necessary, not only because of the existence of a
nation-wide sentiment in China against the indefinite continuance
of unilateral treaties and unequal treatment, but also as a proof of
the earnestness of both Governments of [in] their undertaking to
conclude the new treaty within a reasonable period.
While taking note of the declaration of the Belgian Government
that as soon as the United States of America, Great Britain,
France and Japan shall have concluded a new treaty with China,
the Belgian Government engages itself to accept in the matter of
jurisdiction, the same dispositions as may be agreed upon
between China and any of these powers, the Chinese Government
cannot accept it in lieu of a definite period for the conclusion of
the proposed new treaty because it is obvious that if every country
whose treaty comes up for revision were to take the same
position, a vicious circle would be completed and there would be
little hope of bringing into existence new treaties so essential to
the common interest[s] of China and the foreign powers.
In the face of the position now taken by the Belgian Government,
the Chinese Government felt that there was no other course open
to them but to declare that the Sino-Belgian treaty of 1865 was
terminated. Accordingly, a Presidential mandate, an English
translation of which is herewith enclosed, has been issued today
[sic] to that effect with the instruction that negotiations for the
conclusion of a new treaty with Belgium be started as soon as
possible on the basis of equality and mutual respect for territorial
sovereignty. It will be noted, however, that in the meantime the

local authorities are ordered to extend full and due protection to
the Belgian Legation, consulates, nationals, products and ships in
China in accordance with the rules of international law and usage,
and the Ministries concerned are ordered to propose, in
conformity with international practice, arrangements for their
favorable treatment and submit these for consideration, approval
and enforcement.
In conclusion, the Chinese Government wish to emphasize once
more that, in seeking the early conclusion of a new treaty on the
basis of equality and mutual respect for territorial sovereignty,
they are not only carrying out their bounden, duty to the Chinese
people but are prompted by a genuine desire to promote the
friendly relations and mutual interests of China and Belgium. The
Chinese Government, therefore, are ready at any time to negotiate
and conclude a new treaty with the Belgian Government on the
basis of the above-mentioned principles.
I have the honor to request Your Excellency to transmit the
contents of this note to the Belgian Government and I avail
myself of this opportunity to renew to Your Excellency the
assurances of my highest consideration.”
Third. So-called Presidential order of November 6th cancelling the treaty:
“Re memorial, submitted for consideration and for instructions to
be given stating that the treaty of Peking together with the
commercial regulations and tariffs annexed thereto concluded
between China and Belgium [in] the fourth year of the Manchu
Emperor Tung Che, having expired, should be declared to cease
from that date to be effective and that for the promotion of
friendly relations a new treaty should be concluded on the basis of
equality and mutual respect for territorial sovereignty.
Your memorial has been noted. The treaty of Peking in forty-
seven articles together with the commercial regulations and tariffs
annexed thereto concluded between China and Belgium on the
fourteenth day of the ninth moon of the fourth year of the Manchu

Emperor Tung Che, having expired on the 27th of October last, is
hereby declared to cease from that date to be effective. For the
promotion of friendly relations with Belgium, your Ministry is
ordered to negotiate and conclude a new treaty with the Belgian
Government as speedily as possible on the basis of equality and
mutual respect for territorial sovereignty. With regard to the
Belgian Legation, consulates, national[s], products, and ships in
China, the local authorities are hereby ordered to extend full and
due protection to them in accordance with the rules of
international law and usage. At the same time the Ministries
concerned are ordered to propose, in conformity with
international practices, arrangements for their favorable treatment
to be submitted for consideration, approval and enforcement. The
remaining items in the memorial shall be carried out as
suggested.”
MACMURRAY
84 League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. VI, p. 405.

755.98/30: Telegram
[Document 770]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 12, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received November 12—3:15 p.m.]
544. [Paraphrase.] Referring to my telegrams 535 and 536 of November
9th.
 
1. The denunciation of the Belgian treaty constituted a deliberate
attempt to find out to what extent the treaty powers were
complaisant towards a repudiation of treaty obligations by China.
A division of opinion is understood to have existed among the
officials concerned. Victory went to those who made it clear that
the Peking group, in consequence of the inertia shown by the
powers in the making of their dilatory and patently platonic
statement concerning the violation of treaty rights brought about
by the illegal taxes imposed by Canton, might safely go the
Cantonese one better by actually commencing to tear up treaties.
Consult telegram number 449 from the Legation, October 2nd
[3d].85 We are brought by this to the juncture about which we had
warning from Dr. Schurman 18 months ago, and to which I have
referred earlier as in the fifth paragraph of my number 325 of
August 14th.86 Those professing to control China’s foreign affairs
find that espousing the doctrine of repudiation is to their personal
advantage. A state of fact now confronts us: an organization
which actually is only a derelict of a former regime which
received the recognition of foreign powers, though it purports to
represent China internationally, has given notice to all powers, by
its action regarding Belgium, of its disregard for the binding force
of China’s treaties. This action has the more pointed significance
because of its being wholly unnecessary. The Belgian

Government had unreservedly offered to negotiate a new treaty
and to regard the old treaty as meanwhile no longer in force,
provided only that pending the outcome of the negotiations
Belgium be placed on a footing giving her equality with the other
treaty powers. The very liberality of this offer not to insist upon
treaty rights out of deference to the national aspirations of the
Chinese had the effect, I am confident, of giving the Chinese
encouragement to presume upon this indulgence. The significance
of the action taken is emphasized further by the following fact: In
the exceedingly disingenuous statement which the Foreign Office
issued is an assertion that national aspirations are hardly fit
matters to submit to adjudication. If in its context this has any
meaning beyond impertinence or bombast, it constitutes a
warning that the intention of the Peking administration is to take
the position that abrogation of the so-called unequal treaties has
become such a necessity for the nation as to give justification for
treating the obligations of China as scraps of paper. Until 1934
our own treaty of 1903 is not due to be revised. But my belief,
which I confidently venture to express, is that even though in the
meanwhile we should make concessions beyond what the
Washington Conference contemplated, by way of bowing to the
storm, some specious occasion will have been made by the
Chinese before that date to declare our treaty terminated. That is,
unless in the meantime our intention not to tolerate such treatment
of our rights has been made very clear.
2. The feasibility of having the Washington Conference powers
make a protest to China against the denunciation has been
discussed with me by the Belgian Minister. I expressed my own
opinion to him that a protest such as that would not be well-
advised, for it would be a prejudgment of the World Court’s
decision on the question of interpretation which Belgium
proposes to submit, and therefore it would be subjected to violent
nationalistic propaganda along the line that China was being
confronted by the Western powers with a choice between yielding
to what we desire or taking the question before a court willing to
serve our avowed interests.

3. However, considering both our own interests and our genuine
sympathetic attitude toward China’s international development on
a basis of understanding and fair dealing, I feel most strongly that
we should take occasion informally to intimate that the United
States Government does not have any sympathy with the Chinese
in the doctrine of international irresponsibility which has stood in
the way of our recognition of the Russian regime. I beg to suggest
respectfully that if the Secretary were in person to make an
informal intimation to that effect, it would be greatly influential in
acting upon the Chinese as a deterrent from pursuing the course
of action which would, I gravely apprehend, lay the foundation
for a new war in a not very distant future in the Far East. Also I
propose, for my part, unless instructed to the contrary, to take
available opportunities for pressing upon Chinese officials a view
in this matter similar to that which I expressed to the former
Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs last September. [End
paraphrase.]
4. Reuter message from London November 9 stated that
Washington correspondent of the Times, in setting forth what he
considered to be the view of the State Department as to the
continuance of our 1903 treaty until 1934, went on to say that
“the fact that the Sino-Belgian treaty apparently does not confer
on China the right to initiate negotiations for revision, although it
entitles the King of the Belgians to do so, is so radical a variation
from the terms of the American treaty as to permit the American
Government to refrain from participating though remaining an
interested listener of the Sino-Belgian discussion.” I respectfully
request to be informed what, if any, basis there may have been for
this statement.
MACMURRAY
85 Ante, p. 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654].
86 Ante, p. 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538].

755.93/30: Telegram
[Document 771]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, November 15, 1926—6 p.m.
267. Tour 544, November 12, 5 p.m. Action mentioned in Paragraph 2 is
approved by Department. Department does not understand purpose of
suggestion in Paragraph 3 to the effect that the Secretary intimate that this
Government has no sympathy “with the Chinese in the doctrine of
international irresponsibility which has stood in the way of our recognition
of the Russian regime.” There would seem to be danger here of the
possibility of confusing this Government’s policy vis-à-vis China with the
policy which it has pursued vis-à-vis the present Russian regime. The
advisability of making such an intimation at this time to an irresponsible
and uncontrolled regime at Peking, which may in the near future be
superseded by one even more radically inclined, might furnish the very
occasion for discussing with this Government the question of its treaty
relations suggested in the last sentence of Paragraph 1 of your telegram.
Department would prefer that this question be raised by China in its own
way, leaving this Government free to accept or reject the proposal as the
occasion may require. It is the more persuaded that the matter should be left
alone for the time being in view of the reply made by the Japanese
Government to the Chinese Government’s note of October 20, 1926,87
quoted in your 545, November 12, 6 p.m.88
With reference to Reuter message quoted in Paragraph 4 of your telegram,
this would appear to be a speculation of London Times correspondent based
on statement made to press correspondents on Monday, November 8, 1926,
to the effect that the Secretary did not know of any reason why this
Government should support the Belgian Government in any protest against
the denunciation by China of its treaty with Belgium.
KELLOGG

87 Substance of Chinese and Japanese notes given in footnote 77, p. 986 [Pg.
986 includes portions of Doc. 761 and Doc. 762].
88 Not printed.

793.00/188: Telegram
[Document 772]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, November 19, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received November 19—1:54 p.m.]
563. Referring to your telegram 267 of November 16 [15].
1. The reference made to nonrecognition of Russia in relation to
the suggestion in third paragraph of my number 544 of November
12 was by way of illustrating the workings of a policy now being
adopted by the Chinese in emulation of Russia, and was not
intended as an intrusion by me into the field of our relations with
the Soviet regime. Perhaps my suggestion lacked clearness
because of its being phrased on an assumption that by chance my
previous reports had conveyed to the Department a realization of
the struggle here between two rival doctrines of nationalistic
thought upon China’s foreign relations with regard particularly to
the so-called unequal treaties, i. e., the evolutionary and the
revolutionary.
2. So rudimentary is China’s political development that even yet
she is incapable of satisfactorily exercising certain functions of
sovereignty that are essential, as jurisdiction over foreigners and
their interests. And so chaotic are her internal conditions that in
matters such as customs and other forms of taxation, an
unrestricted exercise of sovereign rights would not conduce to the
advantage of anybody except those desiring the funds to carry on
civil warfare against one or another disjointed military leader. I
have held conversations with many Chinese, Chinese of all
classes, among them nationalist agitators and, recently, the
Kuomintang leaders in Canton. All of them would doubtless make

prudent denials if I quoted their remarks, but, without exception,
every one of them who has at any time allowed himself, in
intimate conversation with me on the problems of China, to go
further than meaningless generalities has acknowledged his
realization that today this is the state of affairs. Yet, while in their
hearts recognizing the presence of conditions so deplorable in
their national life, all Chinese who are politically minded desire
that 
the 
treaties 
which 
determine 
their 
relationships
internationally be modified for the purpose mainly of taking away
what, in their view, is a stigma of racial inferiority. (Concerning
this, see my number 293 of July 28, 1925, 9 a.m.89 ) Conservative
leaders and radical Cantonese Red leaders have alike stressed to
me the very significant, although not practical and sometimes not
sincere, view that they would gladly have the nationals of the
treaty powers, as a patently necessary safeguard for foreigners
against the cupidity and the arbitrariness of the greater part of the
leaders in China, continue to enjoy all of their special privileges,
at least for the present, provided only that they save China’s face
by giving their consent to some apparent renunciation of their
special treaty rights.
3. A differentiation appears at this point. The facts are accepted by
the saner, more constructive elements, who propose going ahead
on a basis that while conditions in truth are bad, there has been
appreciable progress made—to which the report of the
Commission on Extraterritoriality bears witness—and that the
making of modifications of our treaty position ought to be carried
through by mutual consent, so that account of the progress really
made will be taken and new progress encouraged and stimulated.
Those who adhere to this theory want the people of China to earn
their own salvation, as was done by the people of Japan and Siam,
first of all by making themselves sovereign in their own domains
and by proving themselves capable of bearing a sovereign
nation’s responsibility, merit recognition as such. It was this
theory that the Washington Conference proceeded upon and
which was the basis of the treaties and resolutions that resulted. It
was also the inspiration of the Special Conference on the Tariff

and of the Commission on Extraterritoriality which were held
under its terms. (In this regard, see my number 270 of July 10,
1925, 11 [10] p.m.90 and the reply from the Department, number
148, July 14, 1925, 5 p.m.91 ) The Washington Conference
resulted in our leadership of a cooperative activity among the
powers most interested in a policy of self-abnegation and of
cooperation with China to enable her by evolutionary processes to
achieve her own political destiny.
4. The failure of China to use her opportunities effectively, in
combination with the powers’ deplorable failure over a period of
more than three years to induce France to take action essential to
putting into effect the Washington treaties, opened the way for the
Soviet’s disruptive influences, aided by enormous propaganda
and subventions, to bring together a very large group of Chinese
adhering to the Third International’s avowed policy of harassing
the imperialist and capitalist powers by the method of arousing an
anti-foreign feeling in the so-called semi-colonial nations of the
East, particularly China, persuading them to see as the way of
gaining freedom from the oppression of foreigners—responsible
for their militarists fighting wars and attempting to grind down
the poor—is to do as Russia: declare a debt to be an injustice
which therefore must not be paid, and declare a treaty obligation
to be a curtailment of sovereignty which must be repudiated by a
self-respecting people.
5. In respect to these two doctrines, China at present is at the
crossroad; she has gone a step upon the road of repudiation.
Before China makes her choice irrevocably, it is my feeling that
we are obliged both to China and ourselves to speak some
friendly words of warning. I stoutly venture again to make my
suggestion. In addition, since I am unable to avoid having
contacts and occasionally intimate conversations with Chinese in
the course of which a refusal on my part to give my opinion
would be taken as inferring an approval of the violation of
Belgian rights by China, I beg, for my own guidance, to be
authorized to cast whatever influence I have in favor of China’s

carrying out the international responsibilities and obligations she
has.
MACMURRAY
89 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 799.
90 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 778.
91 Not printed.

755.93/33: Telegram
[Document 773]
The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State
BRUSSELS, November 23, 1926—2 p.m.
[Received November 23—1:53 p.m.]
80. My 77, November 6, 1 p.m. Chinese Minister here submitted
memorandum to the Foreign Office yesterday refusing to agree to
submission of abrogation of the treaty of 1865 to the Court of International
Justice at The Hague. Foreign Office is preparing to submit it to The Hague
without acquiescence of China.92
PHILLIPS
92 The Belgian Chargé d’Affaires at The Hague, by a note dated Nov. 25,
1926, submitted to the Permanent Court of International Justice the question
of the Chinese abrogation of the Sino-Belgian treaty of 1865. The Belgian
Government on Feb. 14, 1929, requested that this case be struck from the
Court’s list of cases, as the matter had been settled by a preliminary treaty
between Belgium and China, signed Nov. 22, 1928.

Chinese protest against the adherence
of certain powers to the Nine-Power
Treaty 
concerning 
China, 
signed
February 6, 192293
93 For text of treaty, see Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 276. For list of
powers adhering to this treaty, with dates of adherence, see ibid., 1925, vol.
I, p. 762.
[774] The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of
State
Berlin, December 23, 1925. [Received January 9, 1926.]
500.A4d/107
[775] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, January 9, 1926—11 p.m.
500.A4d/107a: Telegram
[776] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany
(Schurman)
Washington, January 16, 1926.
500.A4d/107

[777] The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the American Minister
in China (MacMurray)
Of the Chinese Republic the fifteenth year, the first month, and the
sixteenth day.
500.A4d/128
[778] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, January 20, 1926—7 p.m.
500.A4d/108: Telegram
[779] The Chinese Minister (Sze) to the Secretary of State
Washington, January 22, 1926.
500.A4d/181
[780] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 23, 1926—11 a.m. [Received January 23—8:36 a.m.]
500.A4d/114: Telegram
[781] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, January 25, 1926—4 p.m.
500.A4d/114: Telegram
[782] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 27, 1926—noon. [Received 2:20 p.m.]

500.A4d/117: Telegram
[783] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 3, 1926—5 p.m. [Received 6:15 p.m.]
500.A4d/119: Telegram
[784] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, February 4, 1926—3 p.m.
500.A4d/119: Telegram
[785] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 6, 1926—3 p.m. [Received February 6—7:46 a.m.]
500.A4d/120: Telegram
[786] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
Washington, February 6, 1926.
500.A4d/124
[787] The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of
State
Berlin, February 6, 1926. [Received February 25.]
500.A4d/130
[788] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)

[Washington,] February 9, 1926.
500.A4d/121
[789] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, February 23, 1926—7 p.m.
500.A4d/126: Telegram
[790] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, February 25, 1926—3 p.m. [Received February 25—11:31 a.m.]
500.A4d/129: Telegram
[791] The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister (Sze)
Washington, March 1, 1926.
500.A4d/131
[792] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Washington, March 4, 1926—noon.
500.A4d/131: Telegram
[793] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 8, 1926—6 p.m. [Received March 8—9:30 a.m.]
500.A4d/133: Telegram

500.A4d/107
[Document 774]
The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of
State
BERLIN, December 23, 1925.
[Received January 9, 1926.]
No. 589
SIR: I have the honor to enclose herewith a communication to the Secretary
of State from the Minister of Foreign Affairs, which was handed to me
today by Mr. Trautmann, Head of the Chinese Division of the German
Foreign Office, and which, as will be seen, contains the adherence of
Germany to the Washington Treaty Relating to Principles and Policies
Concerning China.
In this connection, Mr. Trautmann stated that the German Government felt
their policy in China was identical with that of the United States. He added
that Germany, having now adhered to the Washington Treaty, would
naturally take part hereafter with the other Powers in any conferences that
might be held in respect of China.
I have [etc.]
JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN
 
[Enclosure—Translation]
The German Minister of Foreign Affairs (Stresemann) to the Secretary of State
BERLIN, December 17, 1925.

MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the kind
note of October 1, of this year,94 in which Your Excellency invites the
German Government in the name of the Government of the United States of
America acting for all the signatory powers to adhere to the treaty signed in
Washington on February 6, 1922, regarding the principles and policy to be
followed in matters concerning China.
On the strength of a full power given to me by the President of the Reich, I
hereby declare that Germany, subject to ratification, adheres to the said
Treaty.94a
I gladly take [etc.]
STRESEMANN
94 See instruction No. 288, Oct. 1, 1925, to the Ambassador in Spain and
footnote 66, Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 762.
94a Excerpt from telegram No. 3589, Aug. 19, 1940, from the Chargé in
Germany: “ratification of the Nine Power Treaty by Germany did not take
place and hence Germany did not adhere to that treaty.” (File No. 026
Foreign Relations/1491.)
500.A4d/107a: Telegram
[Document 775]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, January 9, 1926—11 p.m.
11. On October 1 this Government pursuant to Article 8 of Nine Power
Treaty relating to principles and policies invited the German Government to
adhere to that Treaty. On January 7 the Chinese Minister called upon me
and discussed with me an instruction which he stated he had received from
his Government to protest against Germany’s adherence to this Treaty. The
Chinese Minister explained that his Government made this protest because
the Powers which attended the Washington Conference and which signed

the treaty were all Powers possessing special treaty rights in China and
inasmuch as Germany no longer occupied such a position, having
renounced such special rights, she no longer enjoyed the right to be invited
to adhere to this Treaty.
I informed the Chinese Minister that Article 8 of the Treaty relating to
principles and policies provided that the Government of the United States
should invite those Powers not signatory to the Treaty “which have
Governments recognized by the signatory Powers and which have treaty
relations with China”, to adhere to the treaty. I pointed out that this Treaty
was solely for the benefit of China and, after reading the several articles
aloud to him, stated that I could see no reason why it would not be to the
interest of China to have every Government having treaty relations with
China adhere to it. The Chinese Minister agreed to this interpretation and
later informed the Department that he had made representation to his
Government substantially along the following lines:
“I explained to Secretary Kellogg today your views accordance
yours 5th. Kellogg says America’s asking Germany adhere Nine
Power Treaty is carrying out her duties accordance Article 8.
America in her relations towards or concerning China has always
been and is still actuated by unselfish motives with a view to
enabling China fulfil her aspirations. The same motives that led to
the conclusion of Nine Power Treaty guide her actions since.
America has never claimed spheres of influence in China nor has
she wished or wishes to do anything to impair sovereign rights of
China. She therefore does not hold the view that being party to
Nine Power Treaty means that she believed in or had spheres of
influence in China nor she desired any impairment of Chinese
sovereignty. In like manner the asking of Germany to adhere is
not understood here as restoring to Germany rights or treaties
which she already renounced. In fact adherence imposes on
Germany the same obligation by which the eight Powers agree to
be guided in their relations with or concerning China. Kellogg
went over the treaty article by article and said that nothing can be
either directly or by implication injurious or derogatory to China
by Germany’s adherence. America did not ask Germany to adhere

to Customs Treaty or to come to Extra[territoria]lity Commission
because Germany is not entitled to participate. America asked
Germany to adhere on October 1st. I can assure you that Kellogg
in his dealings with China has been most friendly and
sympathetic and we can accept his assurances and explanations
without hesitation.”
KELLOGG

500.A4d/107
[Document 776]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Germany
(Schurman)
WASHINGTON, January 16, 1926.
No. 319
SIR: Receipt is acknowledged of your No. 589 of December 23, 1925,
enclosing an original communication from the Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Germany to the Secretary of State of the United States, which you state
contains the adherence of Germany to the Washington Treaty Relating to
Principles and Policies Concerning China, and reporting the statement made
to you by Mr. Trautmann that “Germany, having now adhered to the
Washington Treaty, would naturally take part hereafter with the other
Powers in any Conferences that might be held in respect of China”.
An examination of the communication of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
discloses that the notice of Germany’s adherence is made “subject to
ratifications”; the language of the Minister, in translation, being as follows:
“On the strength of a full power given to me by the President of
the Reich, I hereby declare that Germany, subject to ratification,
adheres to the said Treaty”.
It is presumed that by this is meant that the declaration of adherence must
receive the approval of the German national legislative bodies, in which
case it would seem that the note does not constitute that complete adherence
on the part of Germany which would warrant the Government of the United
States in giving formal notification to the other signatory governments that
Germany had adhered. You will please ascertain from Mr. Trautmann
whether this presumption is correct.
I am [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Roserr E. Ors

500.A4d/128
[Document 777]
The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the American
Minister in China (MacMurray)95
[Translation]
MEMORANDUM
Regarding the question of Germany’s adherence to the Nine-Power Treaty
Relating to Principles and Policies Concerning China, concluded on
February 6, 1922, the Chinese Government believes that there are two
reasons for Germany’s not adhering to the said Treaty:
First. The provisions of the said Treaty are all intended to rectify
the old treaties. The existence of the provisions of Article I and
Article II is due to the fact that the old treaties violate China’s
sovereignty and restrict China’s territorial and administrative
integrity. The existence of the provisions of Article III and Article
IV, providing for the Open Door and for equality of opportunity,
is due to the fact that the old treaties delimit spheres of influence
and special interests. It is clearly evident that in spirit and
meaning the said Treaty has direct reference to the old treaties,
and fundamentally has no concern whatever with such nations as
have concluded equal and reciprocal treaties with China.
Second. According to the explanations set forth in Article VIII of
the Nine-Power Treaty, there are two conditions for adherence to
the Treaty by my country: (a) Recognition already accorded to
such country by each country party to the Treaty, and (b)
Existence of Treaty relations at that time between such country
and China.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs would observe that “treaty relations” as
mentioned in the said Treaty naturally refers to the various subjects
mentioned in the Treaty itself. Evidence of this is found in the conditions
for adherence imposed by Article VIII of the Customs Treaty. Aside from
the requirement of having been recognized by the various Signatory
Powers, there is the requirement of having a direct “Five per centum ad
valorem” treaty.
The Nine-Power Treaty and the Customs Treaty were formulated at the
same time. The spirit and meaning of the conditions for adherence to each
are naturally similar. Reasoning by analogy, since whatever nation adheres
to the Customs Treaty must have a treaty providing for a five per centum ad
valorem Customs duty, then, naturally, such nations as adhere to the Nine-
Power Treaty must have treaties containing stipulations regarding the
subjects referred to in the said Treaty before they can adhere. There can be
no grounds for doubt as to this.
Similarly, there is the International Postal Agreement. Those countries
which have no postal system naturally can not adhere to it.
For the above reasons, in the view of the Chinese Government, Germany
certainly is not, in accordance with the spirit and provisions of the
Washington Treaties, among those nations that may adhere thereto.
Aside from making separate representations to the German Government and
telegraphing the Chinese Minister to the United States to request the United
States Government to inform the German Govermnent of the Chinese
Government’s views on this matter, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has the
honor to prepare this memorandum, with the request that the American
Minister will communicate its contents to his Government for its
information, to the end that the latter may bring them to the attention of the
German Government and may withdraw the invitation that has been issued.
THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Of the Chinese Republic the fifteenth year, the first month, and the
sixteenth day.

95 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Minister in China as an
enclosure to his despatch No. 425, Jan. 22: received about Feb. 25.

500.A4d/108: Telegram
[Document 778]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, January 20, 1926—7 p.m.
21. Your 27, January 15, 9 p.m.96 You will inform Chinese Minister for
Foreign Affairs that pursuant to the obligation imposed upon it by Article 8
of the Treaty of February 6, 1922, relating to Principles and Policies
concerning China, to invite the “Powers not signatory to the present treaty,
which have governments recognized by the signatory Powers and which
have treaty relations with China” to adhere to that treaty, the Government of
the United States on October 1, 1925, made the necessary communications
to the following Powers: Austria, Bolivia, Chile, Denmark, Germany,
Norway, Persia, Peru, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland and on November 21,
1925, to Brazil.97 You will say that I have carefully considered the reasons
given by him for objecting, on behalf of China, to adherence on the part of
Germany to this treaty,98 and that inasmuch as Germany has a Government
recognized by the signatory Powers and has treaty relations with China, I
am unable to share with him the belief that it was not intended by the
framers of the treaty that Germany should be asked to adhere. Nor do I
share his fear that the adherence of any of these Powers is to be interpreted
as affecting their position vis-à-vis China in any other way than to impose
upon them the same obligations which have been assumed by the signatory
Powers, namely “(1) To respect the sovereignty, the independence and the
territorial and administrative integrity of China; (2) To provide the fullest
and most unembarrassed opportunity to China to develop and maintain for
herself an effective and stable government; (3) To use their influence for the
purpose of effectually establishing and maintaining the principle of equal
opportunity for the Commerce and industry of all nations throughout the
territory of China; (4) To refrain from taking advantage of conditions in
China in order to seek special rights or privileges which would abridge the
rights of subjects or citizens of friendly States, and from countenancing
action inimical to the security of such States.” Their adherence will likewise

carry with it the obligation imposed upon the signatory Powers “not to enter
into any treaty, agreement, arrangement, or understanding, either with one
another, or, individually or collectively, with any Power or Powers, which
would infringe or impair” the above enumerated principles, as well as other
obligations contained in that treaty. You should inform the Minister for
Foreign Affairs that this Government cannot withdraw its invitation to these
countries including Germany because of its obligations under Article 8 of
the treaty regarding Principles and Policies and that, aside from the question
of treaty obligation, I feel that it is distinctly to China’s interest that all of
the Powers having treaty relations with China should subscribe themselves
to the principles and policies set forth in a treaty the whole purpose of
which is to ensure to China the fullest and most unembarrassed opportunity
to develop itself and maintain for itself an effective and stable Government.
KELLOGG
96 Not printed.
97 See instruction No. 288, Oct. 1, 1925, to the Ambassador in Spain, and
footnote 66, Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 762.
98 For reasons given by the Chinese Government for objecting to the
adherence of Germany to the treaty, see memorandum from the Chinese
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Jan. 16, p. 1004 [Pg. 1004 includes portions of Doc. 776
and Doc. 777].

500.A4d/181
[Document 779]
The Chinese Minister (Sze) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, January 22, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to inform you that I am instructed by my Government
to communicate to you for your information and consideration a
memorandum, which is herewith enclosed, embodying the views of my
Government with respect to the adherence by non-signatory powers to the
Nine-Power Treaty signed at Washington on February 6, 1922.
Accept [etc.]
SAO-KE ALFRED SZE
[Enclosure]
MEMORANDUM
In connection with the oral exchange of views regarding the adherence to
the Nine-Power Treaty by non-signatory powers upon the invitation of the
American Government, it may be recalled that objection was duly raised by
the Chinese Government against the adherence by Germany on the ground
that Germany’s adherence was not contemplated by the Treaty. Switzerland,
Chile and Persia, besides Germany, which stand[s] on the same footing as
these three countries have concluded treaties of equality and reciprocity
with China. As to Bolivia, it is provided in the treaty of friendship between
China and Bolivia that the treaty shall come into force after the exchange of
ratifications. Now the ratifications were exchanged on December 17, 1924,
and the treaty therefore had not yet come into force at the time of the
Washington Conference. Its provisions can not possibly have anything to do
with the “treaty relations”. Peru is now negotiating a new treaty with China,
and need not be invited to adhere standing as it does on the same footing
with Mexico in this respect.

The Chinese Government suggests that the invitations sent to the five
powers above mentioned, namely, Switzerland, Chile, Persia, Bolivia and
Peru, to adhere to the Nine-Power Treaty be recalled.
[WASHINGTON,] January 22, 1926.

500.A4d/114: Telegram
[Document 780]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 23, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received January 23—8:36 a.m.]
43. Your telegram number 4 [21], January 20, 7 p.m., sets forth the logic of
our position, but, in view of the mood of truculence which animates the
attempts of the Minister for Foreign Affairs99 to undermine the authority of
Washington Conference treaties, I doubt whether a reasonable statement
will terminate the debate. It seems obvious that his desire is to make this the
occasion for manifesting publicly that his school of nationalistic thought is
more patriotic than that of his predecessors and rivals at Washington, and I
fear he may allow the correspondence to leak into the press with his
antagonistic gloss upon American subservience to the imperialistic powers
unless he has an intimation that in doing so he might risk alienation of some
degree of sympathy on our part. I therefore respectfully venture to request
authorization to include in my note conveying the substance of your
telegram, a definite statement of the following general purport.
“Mr. Kellogg further instructs me to advise you that he is at a loss
to understand apparent disposition of the Chinese Foreign Office
to place the American Government on the defensive for having
conveyed to Germany an invitation in literal fulfillment of the
provisions of a treaty signed with full cognizance of its import by
the representatives of Your Excellency’s Government at the
Washington Conference. He ventures the hope that Chinese
Government may reconsider a position which would appear a
repudiation of the conclusions of that conference and of the
principles of friendly cooperation which inspired them. He
therefore trusts that Your Excellency may deem it appropriate to
discontinue a correspondence, which, if pursued, could lead only
to a sharp difference of opinion and to imperilment of that warm

sympathy towards China which the American Government and
American opinion have had particular occasions to manifest.”
MACMURRAY
99 C. T. Wang.

500.A4d/114: Telegram
[Document 781]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, January 25, 1926—4 p.m.
29. Your 43, January 23, 11 a.m.
1. I approve of statement but suggest that you consider whether it
would not be better to omit last sentence which if used I feel
might serve only to lend color to any patriotic appeal that the
foreign minister might make to Chinese nationalist opinion.
2. Chinese Minister has presented note dated 22nd requesting
withdrawal of invitations sent to Switzerland, Chile and Persia on
same ground as Germany, namely, that adherence by these
countries was not contemplated by the treaty as they like
Germany have “concluded treaties of equality and reciprocity
with China.” Objection to adherence of Bolivia is based on
statement that Chinese Bolivian Treaty having become effective
only on exchange of ratification on December 17, 1924, the treaty
had “not come into force at the time of the Conference.” Note
states that Peru need not be invited as it is now negotiating a new
treaty with China and stands on same footing as Mexico. Reply is
being drafted and will be telegraphed.
KELLOGG

500.A4d/117: Telegram
[Document 782]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, January 27, 1926—noon.
[Received 2:20 p.m.]
50. Your telegram 29, January 25, 4 p.m.
1. I apprehend, inasmuch as it appears from your paragraph 2 that
a note has now been addressed to you by the Chinese on matters
corollary to those dealt with in their note already addressed to
me,1 which I reported in my 38, January 21, 11 a.m.,2 that the
Chinese seek to develop points of difference between your
position and mine, with the intention of making it appear that I
colored or distorted your views in my presentation of the matter. I
would urge, in order to avoid any appearance of discrepancy such
as that which in this and in future cases could be exploited to
discredit any representations I might need to make, that you reply
to the Chinese Minister in a single note regarding both the
invitation to Germany—treated by the memorandum from the
Foreign Office which my telegram 27 of January 15, 9 p.m.,2 and
my telegram 38 of January 21, 11 a.m., reported—and the
invitations to other nations—the point treated by the note from
the Chinese Minister to which your telegram 29 of January 25, 4
p.m., referred. If you should adopt this suggestion I will not reply
to the memorandum from the Foreign Office, other than to
acknowledge it and to enclose a copy of your note to the Chinese
Minister. I shall wait for your approval.
2. Concerning the suggestion in paragraph 1 of your telegram 29,
that a statement of the tenor of my concluding sentence in my 43
of January 23, 11 a.m., might well be avoided, it is my carefully

considered judgment that such a statement would tend powerfully
to avert any appeal on this subject to nationalistic sentiment.
While publication of the fact of German adherence has been made
here, it has not led to any public comment whatsoever, and unless
Wang himself makes a popular issue of it, it may be expected not
to cause comment. I feel strongly that Wang fully sees the
sophistry of his position and that by this discussion he is
consciously making a test of how far he can presume upon our
tolerance. He has given me to understand somewhat naively that,
if he is persuaded that we remain firm in our attitude, he will be
prepared to make the best he can of it. Therefore I venture to
express very earnest hope that you will make use of language
such as I suggested in my telegram 43 of January 23, 11 a.m., in
any note to the Chinese Minister on this question.
3. Concerning your 29, penultimate sentence, may I suggest that
the construction is borne out by Chinese reference to the Chinese-
Bolivian treaty that Article 8 of the Nine-Power Treaty
contemplated adherence of the nations having treaty relations
with China when the Treaty on Principles was signed and that at
that time Mexico and Peru were parties to treaties with China?
MACMURRAY
1 Memorandum of Jan. 16, p. 1004 [Pg. 1004 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc.
777].
2 Not printed.
2 Not printed.

500.A4d/119: Telegram
[Document 783]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, February 3, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received 6:15 p.m.]
64. My urgent telegram number 50, January 27, noon.
1. Today the agitation which was foreseen in paragraph 2 has begun with
the publication of a so-called analytical comment purportedly by a famous
Chinese authority on international law, by the Kuo Wen, which is a news
service which has intimate relations with C. T. Wang.
2. The following are paraphrased excerptitem:
The Nine-Power Treaty purposed to restrict the demands of the
signatory powers for special interests and rights in China. It is not
necessary at all for Germany to adhere to the Treaty because
relations between China and Germany have been placed on an
equal footing.
Why the American Government did not this time sound the views
of the Government of China when Germany was invited to give
her adherence to the Nine-Power Treaty is difficult to understand.
Moreover the reference of article 8 of the Nine-Power Treaty to
non-signatory powers could only mean those powers having
unequal treaties with China. It has absolutely nothing to do with
those powers which already have concluded reciprocal
agreements with China. Therefore, the American Government’s
invitation to Germany to give her adherence to the Nine-Power
Treaty runs counter not only to the Sino-German agreement, but
obviously also to spirit of article 8.

Now the invitation extended to Germany by the United States
cannot be construed in any light other than as a confession that
the traditional American policy as to China was merely a pretense
and that the conference at Washington was only a selfish
association for the purpose of division of special interests and
rights. The Nine-Power Treaty contains but a general statement of
principles for China’s liberation, while in the Sino-German
agreement in which these principles are carried out in fact, China
has recovered her complete freedom. Therefore the American
invitation to Germany, which is difficult to understand, is nothing
less than encouragement to Germany to put China into further
bondage and opposition to China’s recovering her absolute
freedom. This step by the American Government is tantamount to
completely reversing their traditional policy for more than ten
years and by it the United States is placed among those powers
which are endeavoring to fetter the free development and
liberation of China. For a power known as the exponent of justice
and right this is surely inadvisable.
If Germany adheres to the Nine-Power Treaty there is no question
that it will amount to a nullification of the Sino-German
agreement and, solely because of this invitation which the United
States extended, the equal and reciprocal agreements between
Germany and China will go overboard. What is to become of the
earlier boasted international right, morality, and justice. The
friendly sentiment of the Chinese people will be surely lost to the
Americans, and, without it, American trade in China is certain to
sustain a serious setback. Therefore, in the interest of Americans
themselves there should be a most careful and serious
reconsideration of the whole matter.
3. Wang has evidently deemed it opportune, in the absence of reply to his
formal representations, to begin his agitation at the moment we are
receiving some adverse criticism because of an altercation Sunday at a
skating carnival when two marines of the Legation Guard not in uniform
exchanged blows with certain Chinese. The incident itself was trivial except
as a basis for agitation. However, there is among students and in certain

other quarters a tendency to make an issue out of it, and the foreign-
language press and the Kuo Wen service have made of it an occasion for
some comment which is very unfriendly.
4. Although the opportunity to forestall the initiation of agitation concerning
the question of adherence by Germany has gone by, it is my belief that even
yet the arrest of its development is possible by conveying a refusal to
reconsider our action in sufficiently blunt terms to impress a man who has a
feeling he has out-bluffed us.
5. Respectfully, but very urgently, I request information as to the tenor of
your proposed note in reply to the Chinese protests.
MACMURRAY

500.A4d/119: Telegram
[Document 784]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 4, 1926—3 p.m.
36. Your telegram 64, February 3, 5 p.m. In paragraphs 3 and 4 you state
that evidently Wang has thought it opportune to commence agitation in the
absence of reply by this Government, and that our opportunity to forestall
the beginning of agitation over the adherence of Germany has been lost. I
call to your attention that my conversation of January 7 was reported by the
Chinese Minister to his Government; see my telegram 11 of January 9, 11
p.m. I then received your conversation from you; see your telegram 27 of
January 15, 9 p.m.3 By my number 21 of January 20, 7 p.m., I instructed
you concerning what to inform the Chinese Minister. By your number 43 of
January 23 you asked in your reply to add a sentence. We gave authority to
you but made suggestions. Had you desired to make use of this or to present
views to the Foreign Office or obtain publicity, I do not see how blame for
the delay rests on the Department. The other day a complete note covering
not only Germany alone but all other cases was prepared to deliver to the
Chinese Minister. He was called and informed of the substance of it. He
asked that we not deliver it inasmuch as he was requesting his Government
again to withdraw its request. We shall proceed now to call the Chinese
Minister in and deliver the note to him, wiring it to you unless a request to
the contrary is received from you.
KELLOGG
3 Not printed.

500.A4d/120: Telegram
[Document 785]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, February 6, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received February 6—7:46 a.m.]
66. Last sentence of your 36. I concur fully in your proposal that you
deliver your intended note to the Chinese Minister without awaiting further
action by him, telegraphing the text of the note to me for use as suggested
in my telegram 50, January 27, noon, first paragraph.
MACMURRAY

500.A4d/124
[Document 786]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
WASHINGTON, February 6, 1926.
The Chinese Minister called upon the Secretary by appointment at noon
today. The Secretary explained to the Chinese Minister that he had been
informed that a Chinese News Agency at Peking, reported to be in close
touch with the Chinese Foreign Office, had circulated certain statements
regarding an invitation which the United States Government had extended
to the several non-signatory Powers to adhere to the Nine-Power Treaty
relating to principles and policies concerning China. The Secretary stated
that the statements circulated by this news agency impugned the motives of
the United States Government in sending out these invitations charging that
the United States Government thus demonstrated that the Washington
Conference, at which that Treaty had been signed, was merely another
effort to encroach on Chinese sovereignty. The Secretary informed the
Chinese Minister that in view of this evident attempt to question the
motives of the Government of the United States in this matter he thought
that he could no longer withhold the note which had been drafted in reply to
the Minister’s note requesting that the Government withdraw the invitations
sent to the non-signatory Powers.
He then read to the Chinese Minister a draft of a note which had been
prepared but not sent, copy of which is attached to this memorandum.4
The Chinese Minister stated that as he had informed the Secretary on a
previous occasion, he was using every effort to persuade his Government to
reconsider its action. He stated that he had telegraphed a friend of his in
Peking who was very close to the Chinese Foreign Minister and had asked
him to take the matter up with the Foreign Minister and said that unless this
step was reconsidered he could expect a very sharp note from the Secretary
of State. The Chinese Minister stated that he had not as yet had any reply to

his messages. He asked the Secretary to give him more time as he believed
that a reply would reach him at least by Monday, February 8. The Secretary
stated that he had no objection to waiting until Monday. He handed the note
to Mr. Johnson and instructed him to hold it until further word was received
from the Chinese Minister.
N[ELSON] T. J[OHNSON]
4 Not attached; the note as sent (p. 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 791]) was
identical with this original draft.

500.A4d/130
[Document 787]
The Ambassador in Germany (Schurman) to the Secretary of
State
BERLIN, February 6, 1926.
[Received February 25.]
No. 760
SIR: With reference to the Department’s instruction No. 319, dated January
16, 1926, relating to the adherence of Germany to the Washington Treaty
Relating to Principles and Policies Concerning China, I have the honor to
report that, in an informal conversation with Mr. Trautmann, Chief of the
Asiatic Division in the Foreign Office, on the third instant, I called his
attention to the fact that the notice of Germany’s adherence, contained in
the communication from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, dated December
17, 1925, read as follows:
“On the strength of a full power given to me by the President of
the Reich, I hereby declare that Germany, subject to ratifications,
adheres to the said Treaty”.
I remarked to him that this did not constitute a complete adherence as
would justify the Government of the United States in giving formal
notification to the other signatory Governments that Germany had adhered.
Mr. Trautmann said at once that he understood our position. He then stated
that the political officers in the Foreign Office had held that the
“Ratifikation” referred to was a mere formality and that, indeed, he himself,
in the case of this Treaty which dealt merely with political subjects, thought
such ratification unnecessary as, in their view, “the Government had already
ratified the Treaty”. The legal advisers of the Foreign Office, however, had
“taken a different view” and it had therefore been decided to send the
Treaty to the Reichstag for formal ratification.

Mr. Trautmann stated that the time for such action was a little uncertain. At
the beginning, and before the German Government had taken any action,
the Chinese Minister in Berlin saw no objection to Germany’s adherence to
the Treaty. Later, however, he changed his position. …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mr. Trautmann promised to let me hear from him when the Government
approaches the Reichstag on the subject.
I have [etc.]
JACOB GOULD SCHURMAN

500.A4d/121
[Document 788]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
[WASHINGTON,] February 9, 1926.
The Chinese Minister called, by appointment, upon the Secretary at twelve
o’clock on February 9, and read to him a telegram, copy of which is
attached to this memorandum, which he had received from the Chinese
Foreign Office to the effect that the Chinese Government will not insist
upon withdrawal by the United States of invitations sent to non-signatory
powers to adhere to the Nine-Power Treaty relating to principles and
policies concerning China. The Secretary informed the Minister that this
position seemed satisfactory. He told the Minister that it only remained now
for the Chinese Government to withdraw the note which the Chinese
Minister had addressed to the Department on this subject and which
remained unanswered and the one which the Chinese Foreign Office had
addressed to the American Minister in Peking. The Minister stated that he
had anticipated this situation and had already drawn up a proposal which he
purposed communicating to his own Government, namely, that he should be
authorized to withdraw the note which he had addressed to the Department
of State and also that the understanding would be that the American
Minister at Peking would return to the Chinese Foreign Office the note
which had been addressed to the American Minister by the Foreign Office.
The Chinese Minister stated that he had taken the liberty of drafting a
telegram to his Government indicating that the Government of the United
States expected this arrangement and restating the views which he knew the
Secretary to hold on this subject, namely, that adherence by non-signatory
Powers to the Treaty in question could not be interpreted as in any way
meaning an infringement upon China’s sovereignty or administrative
integrity. He showed the text of his proposed telegram to the Secretary and
the Secretary informed the Minister that he saw no objection to this
statement of his views. The Chinese Minister asked the Secretary whether

he would give to him a memorandum along these lines and the Secretary
replied that he had no objection to doing that. He instructed Mr. Johnson to
revise the note which had already been drafted as it contained these
statements.
N[ELSON] T. J[OHNSON]
 
[Enclosure 1]
Telegram From the Chinese Foreign Office to the Chinese Minister in Washington (Sze)
PEKING, February 8, 1926.
Please assure Secretary Kellogg China always most appreciative of
American friendship and entertains no doubt of American intention to help
us every way possible even if viewpoints happen to differ. China is
sincerely desirous of accommodating American view as far as possible. She
feels, however, that exclusion of any particular Power from adhering to
Nine Power Treaty on principles and policies can not in any way prejudice
rights and interests of any signatory power as in Article three thereof. China
has undertaken to be guided by principles of open door or equality of
opportunity in dealing with all countries irrespective of whether they are
parties to the treaty or not from which policy she has no intention to deviate
at all. On the other hand and under new conventions based upon principles
of equality and reciprocity more recently concluded with some foreign
powers China’s sovereignty, independence and integrity have been more
fully and effectively vindicated than in Nine Power Treaty so that adherence
by any such power to the treaty which is admittedly a very useful and
effective instrument for protection and recovery of sovereign rights of
China would in particular cases bear [the appearance of a?] retrogressive
step for China. Moreover, it does not enhance prestige of China to have
Powers which have little interests in China like Persia and Switzerland
pledge their respect for China’s sovereignty and independence. She
sincerely believes that her interpretation of article eight is more correct and
more consonant with the spirit of the said treaty. So if out of special
deference to American Government China does not insist upon withdrawal

of invitations already sent out she hopes America will fully appreciate
China’s position and find a satisfactory solution.
[Enclosure 2]
Draft of Telegram Proposed by the Chinese Minister (Sze) for the Government of the United States
To Send to the Government of China
The American Government appreciates highly the friendly and
accommodating communication which has been received from the Chinese
Government with reference to the matter of the invitations which in
pursuance of Article 8 of the Treaty of the Nine-Powers relative to the
principles and policies to be followed in matters concerning China signed in
Washington February 6, 1922 the American Government has sent to the
various Governments requesting their adherence thereto. Understanding
from this communication from the Chinese Government that that
Government, in view of the assurances which have been received from the
American Government, is prepared to acquiesce in the action which the
American Government has taken, the American Government has the honor
to say, by way of re-affirming the assurances previously orally given to the
Minister Plenipotentiary of China at Washington, that, it is its view that, by
adhering to the Treaty aforesaid, no Power will gain any rights privileges or
immunities derogatory to the sovereign rights or dignity of the Chinese
Republic, or obtain a status which will in any wise indicate or imply that
China has, as vis-à-vis such adhering Power, a status other than that of a co-
equal Power. Upon the contrary, it is the opinion of the American
Government that, by the adhering of the other Powers to the Treaty
aforesaid, China obtains a broadened guarantee that her rights of
sovereignty and territorial integrity will be scrupulously respected, and that
advantage will not be taken of such domestic conditions as may exist or
occur in China to take action which will be in derogation of the sovereignty
and territorial rights of China which, under International Law, are conceded
to be possessed by her as a sovereign and independent Power and a co-
equal member of the Family of Nations.

500.A4d/126: Telegram
[Document 789]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 23, 1926—7 p.m.
46. I am temporarily withholding reply of the Department in view of urgent
request of Chinese Minister for delay. He hopes to obtain permission
shortly to withdraw note. I expect to be able, if he succeeds, to authorize
you to return the note from the Foreign Office unanswered.
KELLOGG

500.A4d/129: Telegram
[Document 790]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, February 25, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received February 25—11:31 a.m.]
91. Tour 46, February 23, 4 [7] p.m.
1. I fear the attitude of the Minister for Foreign Affairs scarcely
justifies the hope of the Chinese Minister in this matter. It now
seems material to me in the light of your 46 that Wang
volunteered at dinner with me February 10th a statement of his
position which I did not consider important at the time in view of
my understanding from your telegram February 4, 3 p.m., that the
delivery of your note was about to take place. Wang said he had
concluded that, in deference to the sensibilities of the United
States Government on the question, the proper solution would be
that he would not insist that our invitation to Germany be
withdrawn and that it should be understood that the necessary
ratification of its adherence would be left in abeyance by the
German Government. This was now the intention of the latter
Government, he said; but since then I have been assured by the
German Minister that that is not true, as the intention of his
Government is to proceed as a matter of course with ratification,
although such action is being delayed for a short time, upon his
suggestion, in order to minimize the effects of any propaganda
against Germany which might be undertaken here by Wang or his
Soviet advisers.
2. Yesterday when I called upon Wang concerning other matters
he refrained from referring to this question.

MiacMurray

500.A4d/131
[Document 791]
The Secretary of State to the Chinese Minister (Sze)5
WASHINGTON, March 1, 1926.
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of January 22,
1926, with which you enclosed, under instructions from your Government,
a memorandum embodying the views of your Government in regard to the
adherence by non-signatory Powers to the Nine Power Treaty signed at
Washington on February 6, 1922, relating to principles and policies
concerning China. I enclose a memorandum setting forth the views of the
Government of the United States relating to the questions raised by the
Chinese Government. For the reasons set forth therein the Government of
the United States regrets that it finds itself unable to act in accordance with
the suggestion of the Chinese Government and withdraw the invitations to
adhere to the Treaty which have been extended to Germany, Switzerland,
Chile, Persia, Bolivia and Peru.
The Chinese Government must realize that the Treaty of Washington
relating to the principles and policies to be followed in matters concerning
China was formulated at the Washington Conference on the suggestion of
the Chinese Government for the purpose of putting into treaty form the
general principles which would recognize the sovereignty, independence
and territorial administrative integrity of China and provide for the fullest
and most unembarrassed opportunity to China to develop and maintain for
herself an effective and stable government; that under Article VIII the
United States bound itself to invite adhesion to that Treaty by all non-
Signatory Powers having treaty relations with China and having
governments recognized by the Signatory Powers. It was not, as has been
represented to the United States, only those powers which had special treaty
rights but all powers having treaty relations with China. There is no
agreement whatever in this Treaty by which China in any way limits its
sovereignty, independence, or territorial administrative integrity, in fact,

quite the contrary, and I am unable to understand why it should not be
considered to the advantage of China for all of the powers having treaty
relations with her to subscribe themselves to the principles and policies set
forth in a Treaty, the whole purpose of which is to insure to China the
fullest and most unembarrassed opportunity to develop itself and to obtain
for itself an effective and stable government. I am, therefore, at a loss to
understand the apparent disposition of the Chinese Foreign Office to
question the action of the American Government in conveying to Germany
and other non-Signatory Powers an invitation in literal fulfillment of the
provisions of the Treaty signed with full cognizance of its import by the
representatives of the Chinese Government at the Washington Conference.
It seems to me unnecessary to remind the Chinese Government of the
repeated evidences of friendly disposition and helpful attitude of the United
States Government, an attitude and a disposition which still exists and
which it is my pleasure to evidence on every appropriate occasion. I
venture, therefore, to express the hope that in the light of this explanation
the Chinese Government will recognize that the adoption of its views would
amount to a repudiation of the conclusions of the Washington Conference
and of the principles of friendly cooperation which inspired it.
Accept [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
[Enclosure]
MEMORANDUM
The Chinese Government refers to an oral exchange of views between the
Chinese Minister and the Secretary of State regarding its objection to the
adherence by Germany to the Treaty relating to principles and policies to be
followed in matters concerning China which was signed on February 6,
1922, at the Washington Conference on the Limitation of Armament, by the
United States of America, Belgium, the British Empire, China, France,
Italy, Japan, The Netherlands, and Portugal. Similar objection is now raised
in the memorandum which accompanies the Chinese Minister’s note of
January 22, 1926, to adherence by Switzerland, Chile and Persia, it being
declared that adherence by these countries was not contemplated by the

Treaty. Objection is made in the same memorandum to adherence by
Bolivia on the ground that treaty relations between Bolivia and China did
not become effective until the ratifications of the Treaty of Friendship
between China and Bolivia had been exchanged on December 17, 1924, and
that consequently they did not exist at the time of the Washington
Conference. Finally objection is made to adherence by Peru on the ground
that Peru is now negotiating a new treaty with China, and need not for that
reason be invited to adhere. The Chinese Government suggests in
conclusion that the invitations sent by the United States Government to the
five Powers above mentioned, namely, Switzerland, Chile, Persia, Bolivia
and Peru be recalled.
Article VIII of the Treaty imposes certain duties upon the Government of
the United States. This Article reads as follows:
“Powers not signatory to the present Treaty, which have
Governments recognized by the signatory Powers and which have
treaty relations with China, shall be invited to adhere to the
present Treaty. To this end the Government of the United States
will make the necessary communications to non-signatory Powers
and will inform the contracting Powers of the replies received.
Adherence by any Power shall become effective on receipt of
notice thereof by the Government of the United States”.
Article IX of the Treaty states that the Treaty “shall take effect on the date
of the deposit of all the ratifications which shall take place at Washington as
soon as possible”. All of the ratifications were deposited at Washington on
August 5, 1925, on which date the Treaty became effective. On October 1,
1925, the Government of the United States, pursuant to the obligation
imposed upon it by Article VIII of the Treaty, made the necessary
communications to the following Powers for the purpose of inviting them to
adhere to the Treaty: Austria, Bolivia, Chile, Denmark, Germany, Norway,
Persia, Peru, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland. On November 21, 1925, a similar
communication was sent to Brazil.
Careful consideration was given by this Government to the views of the
Chinese Government as expressed orally by the Chinese Minister to the
Secretary of State on the subject of adherence by Germany and the Chinese

Minister was informed that the Department of State found itself unable to
share the Chinese Government’s opinion that Germany’s adherence was not
contemplated by the framers of the Treaty. Similar consideration has been
given to the corresponding views of the Chinese Government as set forth in
its memorandum on the subject of adherence by Switzerland, Chile and
Persia and in respect to adherence by these countries the Department of
State is also unable to find itself in agreement with the Chinese
Government. Article VIII of the Treaty which is quoted above designates
the Powers that are to be invited by the United States to adhere as those
“which have Governments recognized by the signatory Powers and which
have treaty relations with China”. All of the Powers named have
Governments recognized by the signatory Powers and the Chinese
Government does not deny that they have treaty relations with China.
The statement contained in the Chinese Government’s memorandum that
Bolivia’s treaty relations with China did not commence until December 17,
1924, the date when the ratifications of the Treaty of Friendship between
China and Bolivia were exchanged, may be accepted as a correct
interpretation of the effect of the deposit of ratifications. The weight of
authority on the question is that when a treaty expressly provides that it is to
be effective on ratification, it has no validity or binding force prior to the
date of ratification and that ratification is not retroactive. The same rule of
interpretation applies to the Nine Power Treaty relating to principles and
policies. Article IX of that Treaty, as indicated above, provides that it is to
take effect “on the date of the deposit of all the ratifications” at Washington.
Deposit of ratifications at Washington was not effected until August 5,
1925. Prior to that date the Treaty had no validity or binding force. Bolivia’s
treaty relations with China became effective on December 17 of the
preceding year and therefore Bolivia, like Germany, Switzerland, Chile and
Persia on October 1, 1925, belonged to the category of Powers having
Governments recognized by the signatory Powers and having treaty
relations with China to which the Government of the United States was
obliged by Article VIII to send invitations to adhere.
The memorandum enclosed with the Chinese Minister’s note of January 22
is the first intimation that the Government of the United States has had that
there is any question as to Peru’s treaty relations with China. The records

available to the Department of State, namely, the second edition of Treaties,
Conventions, Et Cetera, between China and Foreign States, published in
1917 by the Maritime Customs of China, indicate that Peru has enjoyed
treaty relations with China since 1874. It was the Treaty of 1874 between
Peru and China6 which placed Peru in the category of Powers “having by
treaty extraterritorial rights in China” and therefore entitled to receive
invitations to adhere to Resolution V of the Washington Conference which
provides for a commission to make an investigation into the present practice
of extraterritorial jurisdiction in China.7 As late as October 31, 1925, or a
month after the invitation to adhere to the Nine Power Treaty relating to
principles and policies had been sent to Peru, the Department of State was
informed by the American Minister at Peking,8 in connection with the
question of adherences by the Powers to Resolution V, that he had been
asked by the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs to ascertain whether Peru
intended to appoint its commissioner under that Resolution. It is therefore
evident that subsequent to October 1, 1925, the Chinese Government
recognized that the Treaty of 1874 between it and Peru was still in effect
and that the Government of the United States was justified in considering
that Peru was to be classed in the category of Powers to which under Article
VIII of the Nine Power Treaty relating to principles and policies, invitations
to adhere were to be addressed.
5 File copy bears the notation: “Copied to Peking, Berne, Stockholm,
Madrid, Lima, Teheran, Oslo, Berlin, Copenhagen, Santiago, Rio de
Janeiro, La Paz, Vienna, Lisbon, The Hague, Tokyo, Rome, Paris, London
and Brussels.”
6 China, Imperial Maritime Customs, Treaties, vol. II, p. 1474.
7 Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 289.
8 Telegram not printed.

500.A4d/131: Telegram
[Document 792]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, March 4, 1926—noon.
53. Department’s No. 46, February 23, 4 [7] P.M. and your No. 91,
February 25, 3 P.M. On February 27, the Chinese Minister called and stated
that he had received a telegram from his Government disapproving his
proposal to withdraw the Chinese Government’s notes on the question of
adherence to the Nine Power Treaty on principles and policies concerning
China. A reply to the Minister’s note of January 22 was delivered on March
1. In order that you may address an identical communication to the Chinese
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in reply to its memorandum of January 16,
which you refer to in your No. 38, January 21, 11 A.M.9 the text of the
Department’s note is quoted as follows: [Here follows the text of the note of
March 1 to the Chinese Minister, printed on page 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions
of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791].]
The memorandum enclosed with this note is summarized as follows: The
Department stated that Germany, Switzerland, Chile, Persia, Bolivia and
Peru all fall within the category of countries to which the United States was
obligated by Article VIII of the Treaty to send invitations to adhere, as each
of these countries had on August 5, 1925, the date on which the Treaty went
into effect, governments recognized by the Signatory Powers and at the
same time had treaty relations with China. To save expense text of
memorandum will not be telegraphed unless you consider it especially
desirable to do so. Text follows by pouch.
GREW
9 Not printed.

500.A4d/133: Telegram
[Document 793]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 8, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received March 8—9:30 a.m.]
117. Your 53, March 4, noon.
1. Note from the Foreign Office dated March 4th10 protests
against adherence of Bolivia to the treaty concerning principles
on the grounds summarized in second paragraph of your telegram
number 29, January 25, 4 p.m.
2. I am today transmitting to the Foreign Office a copy of your
reply to the Chinese Minister on March 1st, stating that it
embodies replies which you would wish me to make in reply to
the Chinese Government’s notes to me of January 16th regarding
Germany, and March 4th regarding Bolivia.
MACMURRAY
10 Not printed.

Rendition of the Shanghai Mixed
Court to the Kiangsu Provincial
Government11
11 For previous correspondence, see Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 524
ff.
[794] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 8, 1925. [Received December 2.]
393.1141 W 58/5
[795] The Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs (Shen Jui-lin) to the
Senior Minister (Oudendijk)
Peking, November 25, 1925.
893.5045/294
[796] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, May 1, 1926.
393.1141 W 58/5
[797] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 22, 1926. [Received June 23.]

893.053 Sh/45
[798] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 29, 1926—7 p.m. [Received May 30—2:20 p.m.]
893.5045/352: Telegram
[799] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 23, 1926—4 p.m. [Received July 23—2:10 p.m.]
893.05/66: Telegram
[800] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, July 26, 1926—3 p.m.
893.05/66: Telegram
[801] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 30, 1926—4 p.m. [Received July 30—10:15 a.m.]
893.05/68: Telegram
[802] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, July 31, 1926—11 a.m.
893.05/68: Telegram
[803] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 14, 1926—4 p.m. [Received August 14—8:40 a.m.]

893.05/72: Telegram
[804] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 1, 1926—5 p.m. [Received September 1—2:15 p.m.]
893.05/73: Telegram
[805] Provisional Agreement for the Rendition of the Shanghai Mixed
Court, Signed at Shanghai, August 31, 1926
Signed at Shanghai, the 31st day of August One thousand nine hundred and
twenty-six being the 31st day of the 8th month of the fifteenth year of the
Chinese Republic, four copies in English and four copies in Chinese which
having been compared are found to agree.
893.05/88
[806] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 27, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 6:45 p.m.]
893.05/82: Telegram
[807] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, December 29, 1926—9 a.m. [Received December 29—6:03 a.m.]
893.05/83: Telegram
[808] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 4, 1927—4 p.m. [Received January 4—10:17 a.m.]
893.05/84: Telegram

393.1141 W 58/5
[Document 794]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 8, 1925.
[Received December 2.]
No. 197
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s
instruction No. 869, of March 24, 192510 relative to the suit of Mr. T. C.
White against the Wah Chang Mining and Smelting Company, Ltd., in the
International Mixed Court at Shanghai. A copy of this instruction, with the
exception of the last sentence, was transmitted to the American Consul at
Shanghai, under date of May 11, 1925.
The Department’s views that the relation of an assessor functioning in the
International Mixed Court at Shanghai towards his own national authorities
is the same as in other parts of China, that is, that he attends court as the
representative of the Consul-General and is amenable to the latter’s
instructions, have been noted with great interest. The general impression in
China seems to be that the International Mixed Court in Shanghai is a
survival of the earlier procedure provided by the treaties for the settlement
of “mixed cases”, as, for instance, in the last sentence of Article XXIV of
the Chinese-American Treaty of 1848 [1844]13 and in Article XXVIII of the
Treaty of 1858,14 which stipulate that such controversies “shall be
examined and decided conformably to justice and equity by the public
officers of the two nations acting in conjunction”. It is true that the same
treaties provide that criminal jurisdiction shall be vested in the courts of the
offender’s nationality, but it was not until Article IV of the Chinese-
American Treaty of 188015 came into effect that the present status of the
“Assessor” as an official who is merely “permitted to attend the trial” was
inaugurated. It may here be observed that the French Government has not
yet acceded to this alteration of the status of the French judicial officer. The

French position in this connection was explained by the French Minister in
a letter transmitted with Diplomatic Circular No. 41, of February 16, 1925,
a copy of which was sent to the Department on March 19, 1925, without
covering despatch.16
Those persons who hold the view that the Mixed Court at Shanghai has
always been conducted on the earlier rather than the later principle are not
without certain arguments to support their contention. They point to the
early formation of the Court (1869) and to the Chinese name it has always
borne (which the Chinese Government now proposes to change) “hui shen
kung t’ang” which may be translated “Court of Joint Adjudication”. They
point, also, to the presence of the Assessor on the bench and the power he
wields, in practice superior to that of the Chinese Magistrate, in the
formulation of the judgment. They contrast these prerogatives and power
with the strictly defined and limited powers of the foreign assessor in the
trial of mixed cases under the procedure prescribed by the Treaty of 1880,
which obtains elsewhere than at Shanghai.
I would respectfully point out, therefore, that while the powers of the
foreign Assessors in the International Mixed Court at Shanghai are
undoubtedly greater than the powers of Assessors elsewhere, those powers
are actually exercised in a judicial capacity and must on that account be
wielded with the strictest impartiality.
Further to illustrate the difference in practice between the functions of the
American Assessor in other ports and at Shanghai I have the honor to recall
that the Treaty of 1880 authorizes the Assessor to “present witnesses”.
Since he appears on behalf of the American plaintiff it follows that he
concerns himself solely with securing the attendance of witnesses who
support the plaintiff’s pleading. He also demands the production of
evidence for a similar purpose. American lawyers are not permitted to
practice in Chinese courts and the Assessor consequently appears as the
plaintiff’s advocate. Were the American Assessor in the Mixed Court at
Shanghai to concern himself solely with witnesses and evidence favorable
to the American plaintiff he would at once afford solid ground for the
complaint now made by Chinese and non-extraterritorial foreigners that the
“interested Assessor” is not an impartial judge, and the result of his one-

sided interest in the case would be highly damaging to American prestige.
In the Shanghai Mixed Court, as contrasted with mixed courts elsewhere,
litigants are represented by lawyers, and the sole ‘duty of the Chinese
Magistrate and the Assessor is to render a just verdict on the pleadings and
the evidence presented.
I would not venture to discuss at such length the special position of the
American and other foreign Assessors in the International Mixed Court at
Shanghai were it not for the fact that negotiations for the rendition of the
Court to the Chinese authorities are now in progress. I have heard of no
proposal, even by the Chinese, that the powers of foreign assessors in
relation to those of the Chinese Magistrate shall be diminished in those
cases jointly tried by them, nor am I of the opinion that such a diminution
would be advisable. However, in view of the Department’s opinion already
referred to that the American Assessor at Shanghai “attends Court as the
representative of the Consul-General and is amenable to the latter’s
instructions”, it is clearly advisable that the point should be brought to the
Department’s attention. It is to be feared that if the Chinese public were to
learn that the American Assessors are controlled in the rendering of their
judgments by the American Consul-General, who does not attend the trials,
nor hear the evidence, a great deal of indignation would be aroused. One of
the aspirations toward which the Chinese have been spurred by foreign
opinion has been the creation of an independent judiciary free from
administrative interference and control.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
10 Not printed.
13 Miller, Treaties, vol. 4, pp. 559, 567.
14 Malloy, Treaties, 1776–1909, vol. I, pp. 211, 220.
15 Ibid., p. 239.
16 Not printed.

893.5045/294
[Document 795]
The Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs (Shen Jui-lin) to the
Senior Minister (Oudendijk)17
[Extract]
PEKING, November 25, 1925.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ANNEXIV.—PROPOSAL CONCERNING THE RENDITION OF THE MIXED COURT AND THE REORGANIZATION OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM
IN THE INTERNATIONAL SETTLEMENT OF SHANGHAI
1. The Shanghai Mixed Court, together with the Registrar’s Office, the
prison and Detention House attached thereto, shall be restored to the
Chinese Government.
2. The Chinese Government will, in place of the said Mixed Court, establish
a Court of Justice of the Shanghai International Settlement, which will be
organized upon the model of a regular court of law of the Republic, to deal
with all civil and criminal cases, as well as cases involving violations of
police regulations arising within the Settlement, in accordance with the laws
and ordinances in force in China.
3. Prior to the abolition of consular jurisdiction provided for in the Treaties,
when a civil case arises within the jurisdiction of the said Court of Justice
of the Shanghai International Settlement in which a citizen or subject of a
nation having consular jurisdiction in China is involved as plaintiff and a
Chinese citizen as defendant, the consular representative in Shanghai of the
said nation may attend the trial to watch the proceedings; provided,
however, that such practice shall not apply to civil cases in which citizens,
or subjects of the Powers having consular jurisdiction are proceeding
against those of Powers having no such right, nor to criminal cases in which
citizens or subjects of the Powers having consular jurisdiction are the

injured party and Chinese or citizens or subjects of the Powers having no
such right are the aggressors.
Cases in which consular representatives in Shanghai may be present to
watch the proceedings shall be heard in the first instance by the Special
Court, and in the second, by the Special Court of Appeal, both of which
shall be attached to the said Court of Justice provided, however, that if the
plaintiff should be unwilling to submit to the jurisdiction of the said Special
Court, but should voluntarily bring the case to an ordinary court or appeal
to a superior court, the trial shall be conducted according to the ordinary
procedure and the practice of watching the proceedings shall not be
applicable.
4. Summons, warrants, orders of detention and search, and of compulsory
execution in civil suits shall be served upon or executed against Chinese or
nationals of the Powers having no consular jurisdiction in China directly by
officers (Huissiers) and judicial policy of the said Court of Justice of the
Shanghai International Settlement. But in case, where the persons to be
summoned are nationals of the Powers having consular jurisdiction, the
Consul of the nation concerned shall be notified beforehand.
5. When a warrant of arrest or an order of detention or search is to be served
or executed upon the premises of a national of a Power having consular
jurisdiction against his employee living thereon, the consul of the nation
concerned shall be notified beforehand.
6. Persons arrested by the Municipal police on charges of having violated
criminal laws or police regulations shall within twenty-four hours of their
arrest be sent to the court of Justice of the Shanghai International
Settlement for trial. The Municipal police shall render full and prompt
assistance in such matters as shall be requested of or entrusted to them by
the Court of Justice of the Shanghai International Settlement.
7. Foreign lawyers are permitted to appear in the Court of Justice of the
Shanghai International Settlement on behalf of foreign nationals in the
litigation, but they shall be provided with certificates of approval issued by
the Ministry of Justice and shall observe all Chinese laws and regulations in
force governing Chinese lawyers.

8. Except as otherwise provided for in the preceding sections all Chinese
laws and ordinances in force shall be applicable in the Court of Justice of
the Shanghai International Settlement.
9. The preceding articles shall constitute an interim measure applicable only
during the period prior to the abolition of consular jurisdiction in China, and
shall come into force when they have been agreed upon by the Chinese
Government and the diplomatic representatives of the nations concerned.
17 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Minister in China in his
despatch No. 352, Dec. 18, 1925, as subenclosure in circular No. 337 from
the Senior Minister, dated Nov. 28, 1925; received Jan. 28, 1926.

393.1141 W 58/5
[Document 796]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, May 1, 1926.
No. 213
SIR: The Department has received your despatch No. 197 of October 8,
1925, in regard to the International Mixed Court at Shanghai. You stated
that it is the general impression in China that the International Mixed Court
in Shanghai is a survival of the earlier procedure provided by the treaties for
the settlement of “mixed cases”, as, for instance, in the last sentence of
Article XXIV of the Chinese-American Treaty of 1844 and in Article
XXVIII of the Treaty of 1858, which stipulates that such controversies
“shall be examined and decided conformably to justice and equity by the
public officers of the two nations acting in conjunction”; that it is true that
the same treaties provide that criminal jurisdiction shall be vested in the
courts of the offender’s nationality; but that it was not until Article IV of the
Chinese-American Treaty of 1880 came into effect that the present status of
the Assessor as an official who is merely “permitted to attend the trial” was
inaugurated.
Your observations on this subject have been read with interest. The
Department is of the opinion, however, that this theory in regard to the
origin of the International Mixed Court is incorrect and that the view that
the Sino-American Treaties of 1844 and 1858 conferred a judicial status on
American Assessors in Chinese courts has never been held by this
Government. For an exhaustive discussion of this subject you are referred
to a report prepared in 1879 by Minister George F. Seward in regard to
extraterritoriality in China (Foreign Relations , 1880, pages 145–167 ) and
also to Minister W. J. Calhoun’s comprehensive instruction No. 571 of June
12, 1911, to the Consul General at Shanghai regarding the case of Ginn and
Company versus The Commercial Press in the International Mixed Court, a
copy of which was enclosed with the Legation’s despatch No. 268 of June

22, 1911.19 On page 6 of Minister Calhoun’s instruction above referred to,
which was based on Minister Seward’s report, he correctly stated that “the
basic principle underlying the foregoing treaties (that is, the Sino-American
Treaties of 1844 and 1858), which has been reaffirmed and continued in all
subsequent treaties, is to the effect that when a foreigner has a civil claim
against a Chinese subject, he must appeal for satisfaction, through his
consul, to the Chinese authorities, who are to settle and adjust the same; in
other words, the jurisdiction over such claims is purely Chinese.” Referring
on pages 7 and 8 of the same instruction to the establishment of the
International Mixed Court Minister Calhoun correctly stated that this court
did not originate directly from the terms of any treaty, but was the result of
an arrangement or agreement between the authorities of China, Great
Britain and the United States, as evidenced by the rules of the court which
were promulgated in 1869.20 For a further expression of the Department’s
views on this subject you are referred to instruction No. 869 of March 24,
1925.19
I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW
19 Not printed.
20 British and Foreign State Papers, vol. XCIV, pp. 793 ff.
19 Not printed.

893.053 Sh/45
[Document 797]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 22, 1926.
[Received June 23.]
No. 595
SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith copies of Diplomatic Circulars
No. 71, of March 24, 1926, and 102, of April 27, 1926, together with certain
observations placed thereon,21 which deal with the rendition of the
International Mixed Court at Shanghai.
As the Department will note from these circulars, Commissions appointed
respectively by the interested Foreign Ministers and the Chinese Ministry of
Foreign Affairs began negotiations) on February 4, 1926, with the object of
drafting an agreement for submission to the Ministers and the Wai Chiao Pu
and acceptance by them. It is a matter of great regret, however, that up to
the present time these two Commissions have been unable to agree upon
terms for the rendition of the court. My Colleagues and I have been
earnestly desirous that this vexed question should be solved before the first
anniversary of the May 30th incidents at Shanghai,22 but I fear this is now
impossible.
The inability of the foreign and Chinese delegates to agree upon terms of
rendition arises from the insistence of the Chinese representatives that the
reconstituted court shall consist partly of a purely Chinese court organized
and conducted practically as would be the case if it were functioning in an
area under Chinese control. The foreign representatives have done their best
to satisfy this desire to the utmost practical limit, but they have, of course,
been obliged to stop short of undertaking to alter the mode of
administration of the International Settlement. They have kept in mind that
the court that functions in the International Settlement must be in such
relations with the Municipal Council and the foreign Consuls concerned

that it shall serve as an efficient instrument in the control of the
International Settlement and in the maintenance of its peace and neutrality.
One means essential to the attainment of this end is the functioning of
foreign Assessors in all police and criminal cases arising in the Settlement,
and to this the Chinese representatives have interposed, up to the present
moment, an absolute veto.
There appears to be now no chance that the rendition of the Mixed Court
will take place before May 30th next, but it is to be hoped that the
Legations will have been able to take some measures before then, to
absolve themselves in the eyes of the public from a portion of the blame for
this delay that should rightfully be placed upon the Chinese authorities.
I have [etc.]
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
21 Not printed.
22 See Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 647 ff.

893.5045/352: Telegram
[Document 798]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 29, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received May 30—2:20 p.m.]
232. My despatch 352 of December 18th.23
1. In spite of the disorganization that has prevailed in the
Government since January 7th, the Ministers concerned and the
Consuls and Municipal Council at Shanghai have been constantly
endeavoring to settle outstanding questions with the especial hope
of ameliorating Sino-foreign tension before May 30th.
2. In January, by agreement between the Ministers and the
Foreign Office, commissions were respectively appointed to hold
informal consultations with the object of drafting for subsequent
approval an agreement for the rendition of the Mixed Court in
meetings held on February 4th and 8th. The Chinese, in spite of
an oral promise to the Senior Minister, refused to recede from the
position taken in the note of November 2524 (see despatch cited
above) in which the Foreign Office had repudiated all previous
bases of negotiation for the rendition of the Mixed Court and put
forth an absolute demand not for its return but for its abolition
and replacement by a new court organized under the Chinese
judicial system, realizing that the progressive attenuation of
governmental authority resulted in increasing timidity on the part
of Chinese officials and consequent obstinacy in maintaining
extreme positions. The Ministers felt that if any agreement was to
be reached they must in several points abandon the position they
had reached in July last, and, on April 9, they met and agreed
upon revised instructions to their commission, conceding some of
the Foreign Office contentions. These instructions were issued on
April 26 and on April 30, May 4 and 11; three more meetings

were held and every effort was made to meet the Foreign Office
desires and agree upon draft terms for rendition but without avail.
The principal points of difference were as to the substantive and
procedural laws to be applied [by] assessor in criminal cases,
search of foreign premises, court control of foreign lawyers, et
cetera.
3. In the meantime V. K. Ting25 representing the Kiangsu Tupan
and the Commissioner for Foreign Affairs at Shanghai had
informally 
suggested 
local 
negotiations 
for 
preliminary
provisional agreement regarding the Mixed Court. On May 20 I
authorized Cunningham26 to meet informally with Ting and
British and Japanese consuls general. When the Senior Minister
circulated the Commission’s report of the deadlock in Peking, I
placed thereon a recommendation that the consuls concerned at
Shanghai be authorized to negotiate an agreement on the
principles of rendition which might be published. The prospects
for agreement were comparatively bright, for Ting consented to
revert to the 1924 basis of discussion. A diplomatic meeting was
held May 27 when a telegram was drafted in the above sense
prescribing scope of the agreement in general terms and directing
its ultimate reference to Peking regarding the crucial question of
assessors in criminal cases. My suggestion was adopted that if
necessary the consuls might offer to substitute municipal
representatives under another name, having merely the right to
attend trials and file appeal, ultimate decision in case of
disagreement to lie with the Chinese Foreign Office and the
Ministers concerned.
4. Two weeks ago the Ministers instructed the consuls in
Shanghai to begin negotiations for a suitable change in the land
regulations to provide for Chinese representation in the Municipal
Council, this method for amendment being provided for in article
28.27
MACMURRAY

23 Not printed.
24 See note from the Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs to the Senior
Minister, Nov. 25, 1925, p. 1026 [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 795].
25 Director of the Shanghai and Woosuns Port Administration.
26 Edwin S. Cunningham, consul general at Shanghai.
27 Sir Edward Hertslet (comp.), Treaties, &c., Between Great Britain and
China; and Between China and Foreign Powers, etc., 3d ed., rev. (London,
1908), vol. II, p. 678.

893.05/66: Telegram
[Document 799]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 23, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received July 23—2:10 p.m.]
297. My telegram 232, May 29, 7 p.m.
1. Shanghai consuls and the provincial authorities including
Commissioner for Foreign Affairs have agreed upon the terms of
rendition which now only require approval of the interested
Legations. Final initialed copies of the draft agreement and
exchange of notes have not been received but the arrangement
will be substantially as follows: (a) In place of the Mixed Court in
the International Settlement, Kiangsu Provincial Government will
establish Shanghai Provisional Court having similar jurisdiction,
(b) Chinese laws and procedure will be applied except as the
latter shall be modified by mutual agreement, (c) Assessors to be
known as consuls’ deputies shall function in all cases required by
treaty and in criminal cases “which directly affect the peace and
order of the International Settlement.” The powers of the
assessors to be in effect those conferred by the treaty of 1880. (d)
Municipal police shall be detailed to functions as judicial police
under orders of the court. (e) Appeals in Mixed Court mixed civil
cases shall be to Commissioner for Foreign Affairs and the consul
concerned. Special appellate court to be organized for criminal
appeals. Death sentences to be subject to confirmation by the
Provincial Government. (f) All judges to be appointed by the
Kiangsu Provincial Government. Registrar to be nominated by the
Senior Chinese Magistrate to and appointed by Provincial
Government, his precise duties to be determined by an
international commission, (g) Article 7 of the agreement states
inter alia “the foregoing six articles forming the provisional
agreement for the rendition of the Mixed Court to the Kiangsu

Provincial Government shall be in force for 3 years dating from
the day on which the Mixed Court is handed over. Within this
period the Chinese Central Government may at any time negotiate
with the foreign Ministers concerned in Peking for a final
settlement which, if agreed upon between the Chinese Central
Government and the said foreign Ministers, shall replace the
present provisional agreement. If at the end of 3 years no final
settlement has been reached in Peking the present provisional
agreement shall continue to be in force for another 3 years.”
2. In informal conversation between Peck28 and Wang
Chunghui29 July 21, 10 p.m., latter made no criticism of the
proposed terms of rendition except as regards confirmation of
death sentences by the Provincial Government. He stated this
violated the criminal code which requires confirmation of the
Supreme Court.
3. I consider proposed agreement very acceptable solution of
Mixed Court problem and anticipate its early approval by the
interested Legations. Rendition of the Court should have very
salutary effect on Chinese public sentiment.
MACMURRAY
28 Willys R. Peck, Chinese Secretary of Legation at Peking.
29 Chinese Minister of Justice and Commissioner on the Commission on
Extraterritoriality in China.

893.05/66: Telegram
[Document 800]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, July 26, 1926—3 p.m.
147. Your 297, July 23, 4 p.m. Department approves proposed agreement
for rendition of Mixed Court.
KELLOGG

893.05/68: Telegram
[Document 801]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 30, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received July 30—10:15 a.m.]
308. My telegram No. 297, July 23, 4 p.m.
1. There are plausible rumors that fearing the effect upon the
Mixed Court in their own concession at Shanghai the French will
obstruct agreement for the rendition of Court in the International
Settlement. In the emergency have I your approval for taking the
position that the French have no locus standi in this matter
inasmuch as by retaining their own concession and standing aloof
from the International Settlement they wholly disinterested
themselves in the latter and disentitled themselves to any voice in
its affairs?
2. It is also rumored that Italy and Norwegians will obstruct
rendition. If so I hope I have your approval for very bluntly
announcing that we have no intention of accepting any share of
opprobrium for such action and will make a frank public
statement of our attitude on the question.
3. As a result of public utterances of certain American lawyers
who seem to have been duped by less reputable colleagues of
other nationalities into taking the initiative in opposing rendition
on the ground that it would deprive foregoing lawyers of a share
of their vested interest in practice before the Mixed Court, there
has been worked up by Chinese lawyers and others somewhat
uncomfortable antagonism towards Americans not yet serious but
potentially dangerous to our interests.

4. It is entirely possible that the Peking authorities will refuse
ratification to the agreement between the consular body and Sun
Ch’uan-fang30 even though interested Ministers approve. In that
case it seems clear to me that we must take the position that the
modus vivendi so satisfactorily regulating this local question
which has been at issue for 15 years cannot be upset by the
intransigence of an unrecognized Central Government which,
having lost all semblance of power or authority, has ceased to feel
any responsibility for consequences of such decisions as it may
presume to make. I trust you approve.
MACMURRAY
30 Commander in chief of the allied armies of Chekiang, Fukien, Kiangsu,
Kiangsi, and Anhui, and concurrently director general of Shanghai and
Woosung Port Administration.

893.05/68: Telegram
[Document 802]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, July 31, 1926—11 a.m.
151. Your 308, July 30, 4 p.m. Proposal in paragraph 1 approved except that
Department prefers that your stand be based on separation of two Mixed
Courts rather than of French and International Settlements. In harmony with
established procedure whereby French Assessors have no standing in
International Mixed Court, and vice versa, it might properly be contended
that consent of French is not necessary to execution of agreement regarding
International Mixed Court which has received the approval of the other
extraterritorial powers and of the Chinese authorities.
Proposals in paragraphs 2 and 4 approved.
KELLOGG

893.05/72: Telegram
[Document 803]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 14, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received August 14—8:40 a.m.]
327. Your telegram 151, July 31, 11 a.m. 1. A meeting of the interested
Ministers on August 13, 11 a.m., disclosed unexpected unanimity. As a
result the diplomatic representatives concerned, subject to instructions
awaited by the Italian Minister, have authorized the Shanghai consular body
to sign the draft agreement outlined in my telegram 297 of July 23, 4 p.m.
Actual rendition is however to await exchange of notes settling court
procedure and other points.
MACMURRAY

893.05/73: Telegram
[Document 804]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 1, 1926—5 p.m.
[Received September 1—2:15 p.m.]
364. My telegram 327 of August 14, 4 p.m.
1. Individual signing of the rendition agreement was agreed upon.
I understand all consuls concerned have signed or promised to do
so. Chinese have signed.
2. The Italians have made eleventh-hour demands which may
delay the exchange of notes that must precede actual rendition.
These demands are: (a) An Italian always to be included among
senior consul’s deputies for criminal cases; (b) an Italian deputy
to function in cases involving Chinese employed by Italians; (c)
extraterritorial lawyers to be permitted to practice in purely
Chinese cases; (d) Italy to be represented on the International
Commission for the Revision of the Rules of Procedure (my
telegram 297, July 23, 4 p.m., paragraph 1 (b).
3. These questions have been referred to the Shanghai consuls for
settlement. I am informed that compromise seems possible on all
points but 2 (c) above to which Cunningham reports the Chinese
are unalterably opposed. If the necessity arises I shall follow
course outlined in my telegram No. 308, July 30, 4 p.m.,
paragraph 2, but even more extreme measures may be necessary
to secure early rendition. The question may arise whether the
other powers concerned could not effect rendition without
concurrence of Italy.
MACMURRAY

893.05/88
[Document 805]
Provisional Agreement for the Rendition of the Shanghai Mixed
Court, Signed at Shanghai, August 31, 192631
1.
(i) The Kiangsu Provincial Government in place of the
Mixed Court in the International Settlement at Shanghai
will establish the Shanghai Provisional Court. With the
exception of cases which in accordance with the treaties
involve the right of Consular jurisdiction, all civil and
criminal cases in the Settlement shall be dealt with by
the said Provisional Court.
(ii) All laws, including laws of procedure, and
ordinances applicable at the present time in other
Chinese Courts as well as those that may be duly
enacted and promulgated in the future shall be
applicable in the Provisional Court, due account being
taken of the terms of the present agreement and of such
established rules of procedure of the Mixed Court as
shall be hereafter agreed upon.
(iii) In criminal cases which directly affect the peace
and order of the International Settlement, including
contraventions of the Land Regulations and Bye Laws
of the International Settlement, and in all criminal cases
in which the accused is in the employ of a foreigner
having extraterritorial rights, the Senior Consul may
appoint a Deputy to sit with the Judge to watch the
proceedings. The concurrence of the Deputy shall not
be necessary for the validity of the judgment, though he
shall have the right to record his objections, he shall

not, however, put any questions to the witnesses or
prisoners without the consent of the Judge.
(iv) All summonses, warrants and orders of the Court
shall be valid after they have been signed by a Judge.
All such summonses, warrants and orders shall be
numbered for record by the Chief Clerk before service.
When the summons, warrant or order is to be executed
on 
premises 
occupied 
by 
a 
foreigner 
having
extraterritorial rights, the Consul or other appropriate
official of the Power concerned shall on presentation
affix his countersignature without delay.
(v) In cases in which a foreigner having extraterritorial
rights or the Shanghai Municipal Council is the plaintiff
in a civil action and in criminal cases in which a
foreigner 
having 
extraterritorial 
rights 
is 
the
complainant, the Consul of the nationality concerned or
the Senior Consul may send an official to sit jointly
with the Judge in accordance with the provisions of the
treaties.
(vi) A Court of appeal shall be established in connection
with the Provisional Court to deal with criminal cases
which directly affect the peace and order of the
Settlement and with mixed criminal cases. The
President of the Provisional Court shall act concurrently
as President of the Court of Appeal. No appeal shall be
allowed in cases in which the penalty is below the
maximum imprisonment of the fifth degree nor in cases
under the Land Regulations and Bye Laws of the
International Settlement.
In all cases in which a Senior Consul’s Deputy sat in the
original hearing a different Deputy shall sit in the
appeal, appointed in the same way and having the same
rights as the original Deputy. In the same way a

different Consular official shall sit in the appeal in
mixed criminal cases.
(vii) The President and Judges of the Provisional Court
as well as the Judges of the Court of Appeal shall be
appointed by the Kiangsu Provincial Government.
2. In cases involving imprisonment for ten years or more and in
cases involving the death penalty, the Provisional Court shall
report the same to the Kiangsu Provincial Government for
approval. In cases in which the Provincial Government refuses its
approval, the Provincial Government shall give its reasons and
order the Provisional Court to rehear the case and again submit
the judgment to the Provincial Government. All criminal cases in
which the infliction of the death penalty has been approved shall
be remitted to the Chinese Authorities outside the Settlement for
the execution of such penalty. Inquests and autopsies (Chien Yen)
in the Settlement shall be held jointly by the Judges of the
Provisional Court and the Deputies appointed by the Senior
Consul.
3. The prisons attached to the Provisional Court, with the
exception of the House of Detention for civil cases and the
Women’s prison which are to be separately provided for, shall be
under the charge of the Municipal Police specially detailed for the
purpose, but they shall be operated as far as practicable in
conformity with the Chinese Prison Regulations and subject to the
supervision of the Court. The President of the Provisional Court
shall appoint a visiting Committee, which shall include a Deputy
of the Senior Consul, to make investigations from time to time
and if it is considered that there are any respects in which the
control over the prisoners is unsatisfactory, the same shall be
reported to the Court, whereupon the Municipal Police shall be
charged by the Court to make the necessary rectification which
the said police shall carry out without delay.
4. All summonses, warrants and orders issued by the Court shall
be executed by the judicial police who shall be detailed for this

duty by the Municipal Police and be directly responsible to the
Court in the execution of their duties as judicial police. The
Municipal Police shall render full and prompt assistance in such
matters as may be requested of or entrusted to them by the Court,
and when the Municipal Police arrest any person, he shall, within
twenty-four hours, exclusive of holidays, be sent to the Court to
be dealt with failing which he shall be released.
5. In all mixed civil cases where there has been a Consular
Official sitting jointly with the judge, the appeal shall be made to
the office of the Commissioner for Foreign Affairs, acting with
the Consul concerned according to the treaties, but such cases
may be turned over to the Provisional Court for retrial by a
different judge, the original Consular official being also changed.
In the event of a disagreement between the Commissioner for
Foreign Affairs and the Consul in respect of the appeal in a case
which has been retried, the judgment given at the retrial shall
stand.
6. The financial affairs and such administrative work of the Court
as shall be determined by a joint commission shall be entrusted to
a Chief Clerk who shall be recommended by the Senior Consul
and appointed by the Provincial Government on the receipt of a
petition from the Court. He shall be subject to the supervision and
orders of the President of the Court and shall have charge of the
staff and exercise proper supervision over the Court finances. If
the Chief Clerk is found to be incompetent or remiss in his duty
the President of the Court may reprimand him, and if necessary
remove him from office with the consent of the Senior Consul.
7. The foregoing six articles, forming the Provisional Agreement
for the rendition of the Mixed Court to the Kiangsu Provincial
Government shall be in force for three years, dating from the day
on which the Mixed Court is handed over. Within this period the
Chinese Central Government may at any time negotiate with the
foreign Ministers concerned in Peking for a final settlement,
which if agreed upon between the Chinese Central Government

and the said Foreign Ministers shall replace the present
Provisional Agreement. If at the end of three years no final
settlement has been reached in Peking, the present Provisional
Agreement shall continue to be in force for another three years.
At the end of the first three years, however, the Kiangsu
Provincial Government may propose any modifications of the
present Agreement provided that notice is given six months
before the expiration of the first period of three years.
8. The present Provisional Agreement shall in no way bind the
Chinese Central Government in any future discussion between it
and the foreign Governments with regard to the abolition of
extraterritoriality.
9. The date on which rendition of the Mixed Court shall take
place under the above Provisional Agreement shall be fixed by an
exchange of notes to take place between the representative of the
Kiangsu Provincial Government and the Senior Consul.
Signed at Shanghai, the 31st day of August One thousand nine hundred and
twenty-six being the 31st day of the 8th month of the fifteenth year of the
Chinese Republic, four copies in English and four copies in Chinese which
having been compared are found to agree.
EDWIN S. CUNNINGHAM
Consul General of the United States
N. AALL
Consul General for Norway
J. VAN HAUTE
Consul General for Belgium
S. BARTON
Consul General for Great Britain
The Consul General of Sweden
J. DE LILLIEHOÖK
S. YADA
Consul General for Japan
A. S. P. BRANDAO

Consul General for Brazil
S. LANGKJAER
Consul General for Denmark
E. NAGGIAR
Consul General for France
GIORGIO PIRAJNO
Acting Consul General for Italy
FRANCISCO DE PAULA BRITO
Consul General for Portugal
F. KAESTLI
Acting Consul General for Switzerland
G. M. BIJVANCK
Acting Consul General for the Netherlands
JULIO PALENCIA
Consul for Spain
NORWOOD F. ALLMAN
Consul for Mexico
31 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general in charge at
Shanghai, as enclosure to his despatch No. 4417, Dec. 20, 1926; received
Jan. 11, 1927.

893.05/82: Telegram
[Document 806]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 27, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received 6:45 p.m.]
641. My telegram No. 364, September 1, 5 p.m.
1. Consular body at Shanghai recently came to satisfactory understanding
with the Chinese local authorities as to the exchange of notes giving effect
to the agreement for the rendition of the Mixed Court. The proposed
exchange of notes was presented for the approval of the interested
Ministers, following whose consideration of the matter I had occasion to
telegraph Shanghai as followitem:
“December 24, 7 p.m. (1) Italian Minister categorically refuses to
accept Mixed Court rendition agreement except upon some
arrangements being made assuring the inclusion of an Italian
assessor among the senior consul’s deputies.
(2) Senior Minister is referring to consuls through the senior
consul the question of modifying the arrangement proposed in the
latter’s letter of December 14th so as to have panel of deputies
include all assessors that may be named by any interested consul.
I myself see no objection to the acceptance of the suggested
modification which would permit of concluding the rendition
arrangement forthwith; but the question whether it is actually
feasible and desirable to have an indefinite number of deputies
must be decided by the consuls.
(3) Should the consul not find it possible to accept the proposed
modification, indications are that each Legation other than the
Italian will authorize its consul to conclude with the Chinese local
authorities separate rendition agreement applicable as among the

nationals of all such powers as may conclude the same
arrangement.”
[2.] Telegram to Shanghai refers to the fact that all present at the meeting
except Italian Minister severally declared themselves willing to take such
action. For my part, while regretting such a breach of solidarity among the
powers, I shall have no hesitation in taking such action rather than let local
Italian interests at Shanghai hold us to ransom. Italian Minister shows some
indications of weakening in the face of united determination of all his
colleagues but may not receive in time for tomorrow’s meeting instructions
he insists will be necessary to authorize change in his stand.
3. Consul general at Shanghai has now reported that a meeting of the
consular body December 26th rejected the proposal outlined in the second
paragraph of my telegram to him but considered and is referring to the
Ministers’ two other possible compromises, both of which however failed to
receive support of the Italian consul general.
MACMURRAY

893.05/83: Telegram
[Document 807]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, December 29, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received December 29—6:03 a.m.]
645. My telegram number 641, December 27, 4 p.m. At a meeting of
interested Ministers yesterday afternoon Italian Minister was persuaded to
make possible the necessary unanimity with regard to rendition of the
Mixed Court by acceding to compromise proposal suggested by the
consular body at Shanghai with respect to the selection of senior consul’s
deputies. It is therefore expected rendition can be effected January 1st.
MACMURRAY

893.05/84: Telegram
[Document 808]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 4, 1927—4 p.m.
[Received January 4—10:17 a.m.]
5. American consul general at Shanghai reported January 3d that rendition
of Mixed Court was effected by exchange of notes dated December 31st31a
and that first session of Provisional Court would be held January 4th.
MACMURRAY
31a For the English text of the exchange of notes on Dec. 31, 1926, see The
Municipal Gazette (official organ of the Council for the Foreign Settlement
of Shanghai), vol. XX, No. 1064 (Feb. 18, 1927), p. 47; cf. The China Year
Book, 1928, p. 468.

Continued support by the United
States 
to 
the 
Federal 
Telegraph
Company in efforts to obtain execution
of its contract with the Chinese
Government32
32 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 890–935 .
[809] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, January 7, 1926—9 p.m.
893.74/646: Telegram
[810] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 13, 1926—9 p.m. [Received January 14—10:10 a.m.]
893.74/651: Telegram
[811] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 14, 1926—10 a.m. [Received January 14—8:45 a.m.]
893.74/652: Telegram
[812] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State

Peking, January 16, 1926—noon. [Received January 16—6:09 a.m.]
893.74/653: Telegram
[813] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 20, 1926—7 p.m. [Received 8:36 p.m.]
893.74/654: Telegram
[814] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, January 23, 1926—4 p.m.
893.74/651: Telegram
[815] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, January 27, 1926—5 p.m.
893.74/655: Telegram
[816] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 30, 1926—4 p.m. [Received January 30—8:37 a.m.]
893.74/656: Telegram
[817] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, February 10, 1926.
893.74/659
[818] Major General James G. Harbord to the Secretary of State

New York, February 11, 1926. [Received February 12.]
893.74/661
[819] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 6, 1926—1 p.m. [Received March 6—9:18 a.m.]
893.74/666: Telegram
[820] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, March 30, 1926.
893.74/671
[821] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh)
Washington, April 7, 1926—4 p.m.
893.74/672: Telegram
[822] The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
Tokyo, April 16, 1926—11 a.m. [Received April 16—10:15 a.m.]
893.74/673: Telegram
[823] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
[Washington,] April 16, 1926.
893.74/674
[824] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)

Washington, May 14, 1926—1 p.m.
893.74/673: Telegram
[825] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, May 14, 1926—2 p.m.
893.74/673: Telegram
[826] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, May 19, 1926—9 a.m. [Received May 19—2:20 a.m.]
893.74/682: Telegram
[827] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 11, 1926—6 p.m. [Received June 12—4:31 p.m.]
893.74/691: Telegram
[828] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, July 15, 1926—5 p.m.
893.74/699: Telegram
[829] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 19, 1926—noon. [Received August 19—9:30 a.m.]
893.74/711: Telegram
[830] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Harrison) of a
Conversation With the British Ambassador (Howard)

[Washington,] August 21, 1926.
893.74/712
[831] The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Assistant Secretary of
State (Wright)
Manchester, Mass., August 27, 1926. [Received August 30.]
893.74/716
[832] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 1, 1926—6 p.m. [Received 8:18 p.m.]
893.74/714: Telegram
[833] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, September 7, 1926—6 p.m.
893.74/714: Telegram
[834] Memorandum by the Secretary of State
[Washington,] September 25, 1926.
893.74/722
[835] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 29, 1926—1 p.m. [Received 8:33 p.m.]
893.74/721: Telegram
[836] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)

Washington, September 30, 1926—6 p.m.
893.74/721: Telegram
[837] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
[Washington,] October 11, 1926.
893.74/722
[838] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 13, 1926—1 p.m. [Received October 13—8:01 a.m.]
893.74/727: Telegram
[839] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 16, 1926—1 p.m.
893.74/727: Telegram
[840] The Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador (Matsudaira)
Washington, October 28, 1926.
893.74/730a
[841] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
Washington, October 28, 1926—noon.
893.74/730b: Telegram
[842] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State

Peking, November 4, 1926—11 a.m. [Received November 4—6:45 a.m.]

893.74/733: Telegram

893.74/646: Telegram
[Document 809]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, January 7, 1926—9 p.m.
9. Your telegram 550 of December 29, 1925, 10 a.m.33 and Department’s
286, October 12, 7 p.m.34 Japanese Ambassador came to see me December
21st, and later spoke with Johnson, chief of Far Eastern Division.
Ambassador stated that he was informed by his Government when he
received his appointment that only two questions between Japan and the
United States were outstanding, immigration and the Federal wireless
contract. His Government recognized, he said, that in regard to settling the
immigration question at the present time there was little hope, but it felt that
something toward the settlement of the Federal wireless contract question
could be accomplished. He placed the responsibility for the situation over
the wireless question upon the Government of China which had granted a
contract to an American company, violating an agreement the Government
had made earlier with the Mitsui Company. He emphasized that if the
American and Japanese Governments continued to maintain their respective
positions, neither of the contracting companies, in the opinion of his
Government, would enjoy any benefit. He said that the Japanese
Government, out of a great desire to settle this most vexatious question, had
made the proposal which was presented in the memorandum from the
Japanese Embassy December 24, 192435 ; and that this involved complete
relinquishment of the claim of the Japanese company to have a monopoly
of communication by radio between China and foreign countries. Chinese
nationalistic aspirations would be satisfied by the Japanese proposal, he
continued, because wireless communication would thereby be placed under
the Chinese Government’s control; the Japanese company would be
satisfied because the Japanese wireless station at Peking would be saved
and made a profitable venture; and American policies would be satisfied

because the Japanese claim to a monopoly would be abandoned.
Furthermore, he pointed out, the consortium proposal would place on an
economically feasible basis the whole wireless situation in China because
the necessity for constructing two large wireless stations, where the region
provided little room for such competition, would be eliminated. He urged
that consideration be given to the Japanese proposal by this Government. I
told him that as yet we had no information as to the attitude the Chinese
Government took toward the Japanese Government’s proposal. He said that
he had doubts whether his Government would hear anything on this
proposition from the Chinese Government. He felt that if the Governments
of Japan and the United States could reach some agreement in regard to the
matter, it would have much influence toward persuading the Chinese
Government to accept the proposal of his Government.
I am very anxious to have this long-standing controversy settled in such a
way as to protect existing legitimate American interests and to be consistent
with our policy of maintaining the open door effectively. The force of the
economic argument impresses me. I should not wish at this time to see
China assume an uneconomic obligation, though the matter is primarily one
to be decided by the Chinese Government. The Japanese originated the
proposal for a wireless consortium and I recognize that before giving to it
our complete consent, it is necessary to wait until the Japanese have
obtained from the Chinese approval of the proposal. But such a proposal, if
the Chinese approve it, involving as it does that those party to it relinquish
any claim to monopolistic rights, would go far to persuade me of its being
acceptable to American interests.
For you to seek official information as to the Chinese attitude toward the
Japanese proposal at Peking would be unwise, I realize. However, I believe
you should frankly discuss the situation with Colonel Manton Davis36 and
you together should canvass the situation that presents itself with reference
particularly to the probabilities of anything ever being done by the Chinese
toward a fulfillment of the Federal wireless contract. I also should be glad if
you will give me your views as to the advisability of our accepting as the
only feasible solution of this question the consortium solution or some
arrangement such as the AEFG37 with all contracts pooled and monopolies
relinquished.

In order that, if it is deemed desirable, the matter may be discussed here
with General Harbord,38 please report your conclusions and suggestions to
me.
KELLOGG
33 Ibid. , p. 935.
34 Not printed.
35 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 890.
36 Representative in China of the Radio Corporation of America.
37 The so-called AEFG Consortium was a holding and managing company
formed for the purpose of developing and controlling radio communication
with and in South America, by the Radio Corporation of America.
Marconi’s Wireless Telegraph Company, Ltd., of England, Companie
Générale de Télégraphie sans Fil of France, and the Telefunken Company
of Germany.
38 President of the Radio Corporation of America.

893.74/651: Telegram
[Document 810]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, January 13, 1926—9 p.m.
[Received January 14—10:10 a.m.39 ]
24. 1. I have fully discussed your number 9, January 7, 9 p.m., with Davis.
He concurs in my opinion that to acquiesce in the proposal of the Japanese
for a radio consortium or even take it under advisement in such a way as
again to enable the Japanese to insist that the Government of China not do
anything concerning the Federal contract pending the result of Japanese-
American negotiations, would be a mistake.
2. While it may be that no public statement regarding a radio consortium
has recently been made by the Chinese, no modification has ever been made
in the emphatic statement of opposition which was presented during the
Washington Conference by the Chinese delegation. I am credibly informed
that interested officials of the Ministry of Communications recently had
occasion to say to the Japanese here that they resent the proposal of any
wireless consortium that would include French and British interests, which
the Chinese do not believe have any rights in regard to this matter, and that
in their opinion it is a means for depriving themselves of control of
wireless. When the Japanese Ambassador said of Japanese Government’s
proposal that unless we were to join in urging it, it could not be expected to
prevail with the Chinese, he was undoubtedly right. If it should prevail then,
it would do so for the reason that the Chinese would feel we had betrayed
the only hope they have of escaping the coercion of the Japanese and other
interested nationalities. But as intimated by the Chinese authorities, the
more likely alternative is that if we acquiesced in the Japanese proposal, the
result would only be, as the Chinese believe it is intended, to destroy our
position under the Federal contract.

3. The statement that Chinese nationalistic aspirations would be satisfied
through the Japanese plan by placing wireless under control of the Chinese
Government would not deceive the Chinese at all. They would know no
commercial enterprise could afford sinking money into wireless stations in
China under conditions obtaining at this time without relying upon profits
of the enterprise for the payment of the debt, for which retention of such a
control would be necessary as would make possible working the stations on
commercial lines without danger that militarists would make such
interference as has bankrupted all railroads in which an effective control has
not been retained by foreigners, and that, therefore, any concession to
Chinese control would be one only of appearance. I asked Baron
Shidehara40 last June during my conversation with him in Tokyo,41 whether
in fact that would not be the case and whether the Mitsui Station for
instance would not under the Japanese plan substantially remain Japanese
as it is now. He acknowledged smilingly that each station would doubtless
remain affected with, the national character of those interests which had
constructed it.
4. Considering the Japanese argument on a basis of economics, it does not
appear to me to be sound for the reason that it presupposes that construction
of two large stations would be required by any alternative plan. The fact is
that establishment of a successful radio system in China, with or without a
consortium, requires one high-powered station in addition to the Mitsui
Station; even apart from its mechanical defects the Mitsui Station is not
fitted for service as a main station, owing to its being remote from the
business center of China. I believe the real point of the whole Japanese
opposition is this: they would prefer China to be served by a station under
their own control though it is inadequate for trans-Pacific work, rather than
have an adequate station built near Shanghai by Americans or any other
nationality.
5. Inasmuch as no one wants to build stations the cost of which it will not
be possible to repay out of the profits of operation, it is also fallacious to
argue that the erection of stations adequate for communications of a world-
wide nature would impose upon the Chinese Treasury an unnecessary and
intolerable burden.

6. With regard to protection of the Japanese investment in the Mitsui Station
by an arrangement doing away with the monopoly claimed at present by the
Japanese, Colonel Manton Davis assures me that if his company were
enabled to proceed with construction of the system which was contemplated
by its contract, it would be in a position to offer arrangements to the Mitsui
Station for cooperation, enabling that station to handle a larger business and
to make a larger revenue than it could possibly anticipate if such a system
were not effected.
7. I was very informally approached on this subject a week ago by Saburi,
now head of the Commercial Department of the Japanese Foreign Office, at
present on duty as a member of the Japanese delegation at the Tariff
Conference. He intimated to me that he was expected by Baron Shidehara
to find occasion, on the basis of our somewhat intimate friendship, to
discuss this matter with me rather more informally and outspokenly than a
purely official relationship would make possible. He conversed upon the
seriousness with which the Japanese Government regards this matter with
what, to me, seemed to be specifically instructed emphasis. I told him that I
never had been able to understand why his Government attached the vital
importance they did to what after all is a commercial venture in regard to
which our people ask merely a right to do business in China. I added that I
could only surmise that in the eyes of his Government the question had
been magnified into having an artificial importance because it invoked
considerations of amour propre or else of suspicion of our motive. His
answer was that he himself felt that both of these elements entered into the
question; that in Japan there were persons who could not be dissuaded from
believing that our naval authorities had developed the Federal project with a
view to possible war with Japan, although he himself was quite prepared to
believe this was not the case and to agree with my surmise that the Japanese
in the event of such a war would be more likely to profit from such a
station. He was less willing to speak definitely upon the element of amour
propre. He confined himself to remarking that there is a tendency in some
quarters to feel that the United States is seeking to override and to humiliate
Japan. I assured him we only have the most friendly intention to live and let
live; and that we would be only too glad to have the matter worked out in
justice to the interests both of the Japanese and the Americans upon some
basis of cooperation. Saburi suggested as such a basis the consortium; but

after I reminded him of its unacceptability to the Government of China, he
suggested a scheme of joint operation such as AEFG. I replied that it was
my understanding that the arrangement referred to had neither worked
efficiently or with satisfaction to any one of the interests involved. When he
asked me what suggestion we might offer I answered that I was advised by
the American company that it was willing to make a working arrangement
between its own stations and the Japanese.
8. Saburi saw Davis a day or two later. Davis outlined such a basis of
cooperation to him. Great interest in this suggestion was professed by
Saburi, who said that with this in view, he would again study the whole
question. He added that the question had been hitherto regarded in Japan
entirely from the political point of view and without reference to the
economic aspects of the matter.
9. In view particularly of the possibility that an unreserved understanding
with the Japanese may be worked out through the intermediation of Saburi,
which will permit the matter to proceed, I venture to make a strong
recommendation that the Department firmly maintain its position on the
rejection of the consortium proposal of the Japanese, which last June under
your instructions I conveyed orally to Baron Shidehara, and that it has been
informed that the consortium proposal is not acceptable to the Chinese and
that unless and until the Government of Japan may be able to offer
assurance that the Chinese have changed their stand in this matter the
Department is not prepared to entertain the proposal.
10. Copy to Tokyo by mail.
MACMURRAY
39 Telegram in two sections.
40 Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs.
41 See telegram No. 117, July 1, 1925, from the Ambassador in Japan,
Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 909.

893.74/652: Telegram
[Document 811]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 14, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received January 14—8:45 a.m.]
25. Supplementing my number 24, January 13, 9 p.m., Davis has given me
his views concerning your telegram, and he asks that if you have occasion
to discuss this matter with General Harbord you communicate his views to
the General. Davis’ views are:
“The Japanese have a contract to build a wireless station for
China at an agreed price, the monopoly grant is merely a
provision to secure payment. When payment has been made all
basis for claim to monopoly fails; the monopoly is contrary to the
open-door principle and violates Japan’s pledges. The Japanese
now propose to surrender their contract, objectionable because
monopolistic, on condition that the Americans surrender their
contracts which are not monopolistic, but the Japanese station has
been built as the American have not been. Should the Japanese
surrender their contract they would still claim payment for their
station. This is the only right they now have save the claim to
monopoly which is only security to enforce the right of payment.
The monopoly claimed is of doubtful value as security. Peking is
no business center; 70 percent of China’s overseas traffic
originates in Shanghai; any traffic handled by the Japanese
station, other than Peking traffic, would be handled originally by
Chinese land lines, incurring thereby additional delay, expense,
and liability to mutilation. The Japanese station is neither modern
nor technically efficient. Because of its quality, its capacity, and
its location the Japanese station is not capable of furnishing
effective competition with the cables. This one isolated station
probably never could pay for itself even with the advantage of a
monopoly. The Japanese would now surrender their claim to

monopoly of uncertain value in securing payment for the absolute
certainty of payment by a consortium. The price at which the
Japanese would sell to a consortium appears not to have been
officially stated, but Japanese press reports name a price about
three times the contract price named in their contract with the
Chinese. Under the consortium proposal the Japanese would be
paid in full and probably more, thus realizing the only right they
now have, while the Americans would surrender every right they
have. One isolated wireless station attempting to work with every
overseas wireless station in the world could not give China
effective wireless service. The two units of the American-
Shanghai station cooperating with the Japanese station, made
modern, and all served by the auxiliary stations contemplated by
the American project would give China effective service. The
American companies) concerned believe such service would pay
for itself. Americans know the state of China’s finances and know
that if their proposed installations could not pay for themselves,
payment would not be made soon, if ever. The American
companies have expressed a willingness to cooperate with the
Japanese station in establishing a wireless system which they
believe will give good service and pay for all the installations.
The consortium principle for wireless in China would probably be
a failure. Joint management by persons of different nationalities,
each of whom is directed from different world centers, would
doubtless be a bad management. Wireless stations so managed
would likely give poor service at great cost; the Chinese are
strongly opposed to a consortium. They state they will never
consent to it. Japan’s consortium proposal has been given careful
consideration by the other Governments and the companies
concerned and has been rejected. It would appear most
inopportune to reconsider it now.”
Copy by mail to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY

893.74/653: Telegram
[Document 812]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 16, 1926—noon.
[Received January 16—6:09 a.m.]
28. My telegram number 25, January 14, 10 a.m. I am reliably informed
that Japanese Minister addressed to the Chinese Government, January 14th,
a note protesting against transaction of commercial business with France by
French wireless station at Yünnanfu, and with Germany by station at
Mukden, reasserting claim to 30-year monopoly.
MACMURRAY

893.74/654: Telegram
[Document 813]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 20, 1926—7 p.m.
[Received 8:36 p.m.]
35. My telegram number 550, December 29, 10 a.m.42
1. At the request of representative of Radio Corporation I asked
the new Minister for Foreign Affairs January 18 to take early
occasion to look into the matter of Federal contract and to have
project carried into execution as contemplated by the
correspondence of October last. He was noncommittal though he
politely professed interest, particularly in the possibility of
developing broadcasting as a means of conveying political views
to the predominant illiterate population.
2. Later in the day I received Saburi who desired to confer with
me before his contemplated visit to Japan. He said that Shidehara
would doubtless want to know where our informal conversations
regarding wireless had led and asked (pro forma as it seemed to
me) my opinion of the Japanese proposal of June last. I told him I
understood that to be substantially identical with the proposals the
Japanese Embassy had conveyed to you in December 192443 and
December 1925,44 and, with entire frankness, I told him what I
conceived to be the objections to that proposal along the lines set
forth in my number 24, January 13, 9 p.m.
3. He did not seriously demur thereto but tactfully brought the
subject around to the suggestion made by Davis for cooperation
on the basis of working arrangements between the American and
Japanese units, clearly indicating that a solution of dilemma on
such a purely commercial basis was to the Japanese a new idea
well worth studying. I emphasized my conviction that the

commercial basis is the only one on which we can hope to arrive
at any fair settlement not importing victory to one side and
humiliation to the other.
4. He gave me the impression (though it was only a matter of
inference from his tone and manner) that he was prepared to
recommend to his Government an attempt to solve the problem
on this basis.
5. He asked whether, if our several Governments and companies
were thus brought into relations of mutual confidence in this
matter, it would not be possible for us to reach understanding
independently of the Chinese. I answered that he knew as well
[as] I that if we were to reach accord with the Japanese interests
and then present it as a fait accompli to this Government the very
Chinese who had asked us to do so would turn and rend us
Americans for having conspired with the Japanese against them
and that while the Japanese might be complacent about it because
they have an actual stake in the wireless here, we cannot afford to
compromise our position which thus far rests on a mere contract
right. We must have a position independent alike of Japanese
opposition and Chinese pusillanimity, otherwise we could enter
into negotiations only under what amounts to duress. He
suggested that if we got such a position the Japanese interests
would think themselves under duress. I said that they could have
no ground for thinking we were doing anything but reduce
handicap upon us that results from their having already a station
in being.
6. Remarking that if there is no mutual confidence between
Japanese and American interests deadlock must persist, he asked
whether we could not arrive at such a degree of understanding as
would permit the matter to proceed. I said that I hoped he could
convey to his people the realization that the American interest in
the matter is not obdurate but anxious to find some just
accommodation of interests; and that if the proposals of Davis are
in principle acceptable to the Japanese, it should be possible for

him to give us when he returns reassurance which would enable
the Americans to dismiss the suspicion that experience has forced
upon them, that every time the Japanese talk to us about this
question they induce the Chinese to withhold action upon our
contract on the ground that the matter [is] being dealt with
between the Japanese and our own Government. If we could be
enabled to have confidence in the good faith of the Japanese in
that respect, I told him, the Japanese might rely upon us to an
extent that the discussion warrant[s] them in telling the Chinese
that they were prepared to withdraw their objections to the
execution of the Federal contract, in the confidence that three-
cornered negotiations for the accommodation of the several
interests involved would be undertaken so soon as the American
contract was in definite process of execution.
7. He asked whether he was to understand that we want in any
case to construct trans-Pacific main station at Shanghai. I
answered in the affirmative. He asked finally whether we propose
business arrangements which would give the Mitsui Station
chance to live and prosper, and I told him I understood Radio
Corporation to be prepared to make such a division of profits as
would enable the Japanese to realize upon their investment here.
Saburi gave me to understand that such an arrangement would at
any rate be carefully considered by his Government and Japanese
interests.
8. Copy by mail to Tokyo.
MACMURRAY
42 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 935.
43 See memorandum of Dec. 24, 1924, from the Japanese Embassy, ibid ., p.
890.
44 See telegram No. 9, Jan. 7, to the Minister in China, p. 1040 [Pg. 1040
includes portions of Doc. 807, Doc. 808, and Doc. 809].

893.74/651: Telegram
[Document 814]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, January 23, 1926—4 p.m.
27. Your No. 24, January 13, 9 p.m., and No. 35, January 20, 7 p.m.
Department awaits with interest results of informal conversations which
you have had with Saburi and in the meantime should Japanese Embassy
here revive question Department will take stand suggested by you in
paragraph 9 of your No. 24.
KELLOGG

893.74/655: Telegram
[Document 815]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, January 27, 1926—5 p.m.
31. Letter from Harbord, dated January 25, received by Department.45 It
states that in a letter December 7, 1925, Colonel Manton Davis
communicated to him memoranda of the conversations Davis and Barnes
Moss had with you and with the Chinese authorities, and also a copy of the
Federal Company’s understanding regarding the modifications of their
contract and the action which the Minister of Communications promised,
based on the exchange of notes October 6 and 8.46 In his observation that
the Chinese have done nothing to fulfill the promises resulting from the
above notes, Harbord adverts to the fact that an agreement that negotiations
will take place with reference to wireless contracts between the Americans,
Japanese, and Chinese has been made by you and the Minister of Foreign
Affairs. He adds that it is not made clear who is to extend an invitation by
way of initiating these discussions. He informs the Department that a
representative of one of the foreign interests which compose the consortium
—which he says he has been told is organized by Japanese, British, and
French to exploit the wireless communications of China—recently stated to
him unofficially and frankly that they are opposing the Federal contract and
that it would never be carried out. Harbord suggests therefore that the
negotiations provided for by the agreement might well take place in the city
of New York. On behalf of the Radio Corporation of America, he expresses
a desire to extend an invitation, through the Department, to the
representatives of Mitsui Company and of the Chinese Ministry of
Communications to meet in New York City for that purpose.
The above would seem to indicate that the more recent developments
reported by you in your telegrams 24, January 13, 9 p.m., and 35, January
20, 7 p.m., have not been communicated to Harbord by Davis, particularly

Davis’ conversations with Saburi which indicate that the contemplated
negotiations of the Radio Corporation with the Japanese have already
commenced. With regard to Harbord’s proposal, please consult Davis and
telegraph your comments. Department proposes to reply to Harbord’s letter,
unless you perceive objection, with the suggestion that he come to
Washington for consultation. I would propose at that time to outline to him
the developments which you reported in the telegrams mentioned above,
and suggest to him that he may not desire, in view of these developments,
to continue along the lines he proposed.
For your information, the Department would prefer, inasmuch as you have
placed Davis already in direct touch with the Japanese, to leave the decision
as to place and mode of purely business negotiations to arrangement
between the interested parties.
KELLOGG
45 Not printed.
46 See telegrams Nos. 426 and 430, Oct. 5 and 8, from the Minister in
China, Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 930 and 932 .

893.74/656: Telegram
[Document 816]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 30, 1926—4 p.m.
[Received January 30—8:37 a.m.]
60. Your telegram number 31, January 27, 5 p.m.
1. Davis and I fully concur in your suggestion that you ask
Harbord to consult with you and be informed of developments
reported in my cipher telegrams 24, January 13, 9 p.m.; 25,
January 14, 10 a.m.; 35, January 20, 7 p.m. He should be asked to
bring Davis’ letter of December 7th concerning invitation to
parties to meet at New York.47
2. [Paraphrase.] You refer to conversations here with Saburi as if
they indicated that negotiations have already begun between
Radio Corporation and the Japanese. Neither Davis nor Saburi
take such a view. They regard them as purely exchanges of views
to pave the way for negotiations ultimately between the interested
companies, after the Government of China has taken that action
which 
constitutes 
a 
condition 
necessarily 
precedent 
to
negotiations being inaugurated, as my telegram number 35
pointed out in paragraphs 5 and 6. There is a danger involved in
treating the matter as though negotiations were already in
progress with the Japanese. [End paraphrase.]
MACMURRAY
47 Copy forwarded to the Department by Maj. Gen. James G. Harbord, Feb.
4, 1926; not printed.

893.74/659
[Document 817]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)48
WASHINGTON, February 10, 1926.
No. 147
SIR: The British Ambassador called on me on February 4th and asked me as
to the status of the negotiations in the matter of the Chinese radio. I
answered that I could not give him the details, but that I had understood that
Japan had made a proposition to China that all governments interested in
radio, including Japan, Great Britain, France and the United States, should
enter into a consortium for a joint operation. He said that this also was his
understanding of the matter. I told the Ambassador further that the Chinese
had objected to such a consortium when it was suggested at the Washington
Conference. He answered that it was his understanding that at the time it
was not proposed that China should itself participate in the consortium,
whereas the later proposal was that it should be a Chinese corporation under
control of the Chinese Government. I informed him that China had never
replied to the Japanese proposal and that we were unable to find out exactly
the attitude of the Chinese Government.
The Ambassador said that his Government had the impression that the
Radio Corporation was using its influence in China in opposition to this
proposal. I answered that I did not so understand it, that the Radio
Corporation was, of course, insisting that China should carry out its contract
of concessions for the construction and operation of a station at Shanghai
and that negotiations along these lines were proceeding with China. I said
further that I understood there had been informal conversations between
Colonel Davis and Mr. Saburi in relation to joint operation, but that I did
not know exactly the status of these conversations. The Ambassador said
that Great Britain had no station of its own but was interested because of
the concession. I told Sir Esme finally that I had been informed that the

Japanese station was not adequate to furnish long distance service and that
in any event there ought to be another radio station.
I am [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
48 The same, on the same date, to the Ambassador in Japan and to the
Chargé in Great Britain.

893.74/661
[Document 818]
Major General James G. Harbord to the Secretary of State
NEW YORK, February 11, 1926.
[Received February 12.]
MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I acknowledge the receipt of your letter of February
9th,49 enclosing the views of Colonel Davis49a regarding the proposal of the
Japanese Government that the present controversy regarding radio matters
in China be settled by adopting the Japanese proposal of the radio
consortium.
Colonel Davis has very clearly stated the arguments against a consortium. It
is unnecessary, possibly ungrateful, to reiterate our hope that the State
Department will push this matter to a conclusion at a very early date. Our
loyalty to its position on the “Open Door” has cost us already half a million
dollars in money paid out, which sum is increasing by a little less than
$9,000 each month. We are quite convinced that a consortium for wireless
communication in China would be very much better for China than no
wireless communication at all. We very much appreciate the earnest support
which our Federal project has in the past had from the State Department,
and respectfully urge that there be no relaxation in such support. We do feel,
however, that the moment the State Department becomes convinced that
there is no likelihood of the Chinese going forward with our contract, no
political objection to a consortium should be allowed to stand in the way of
our making such arrangements as have been open to us for a long time.
I note that you desire Mr. Brown or myself to come to see you when in
Washington, in order to talk these matters over. Thank you for the
invitation, and it will be accepted at the first opportunity.
Very respectfully,
J. G. HARBORD

49 Not printed.
49a See telegram No. 25, Jan. 14, from the Minister in China, p. 1045 [Pg.
1045 includes portions of Doc. 810 and Doc. 811].

893.74/666: Telegram
[Document 819]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 6, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received March 6—9:18 a.m.]
114. Following sent to Tokyo in reference to its telegram informing me of
recent newspaper comment concerning wireless question:
“12. March 5, 3 p.m. 1. Since Saburi’s return to Peking, he has
informed me that by reason of the death of Kato, he did not have
satisfactory opportunity to discuss wireless question as fully as he
had wished during his short visit home. He said Shidehara was
disposed to take conciliatory attitude but insisted upon two points,
first, Chinese control of wireless stations (although from Saburi’s
explanation it appears that he does not regard this as incompatible
with substantial control of technical operation and finances by
representatives of the foreign interests), and second, that any
arrangement must take account of the commitments which Japan
has already assumed towards British and French wireless
interests. I told him that the first of these points made by
Shidehara might prove capable of adjustment, in view of the
qualifications he had stated, but that as to the second I could offer
no suggestion without knowledge of the scope and character of
Japan’s commitments, which he thereupon undertook to furnish
me later. Upon my inquiring whether Shidehara was disposed to
fall in with the suggestion that his Government cease its pressure
upon the Chinese and permit our contract to be put into course
execution 
with 
the 
understanding 
that 
three-cornered
conversations among the Chinese telegraph administration and
the American and Japanese radio interests would follow,
thereupon, he made the disappointing revelation that the Japanese
Foreign Office is unwilling to let our contract proceed until
arrangements have been made between the American and

Japanese companies. I told him that insistence upon this point
meant that the Japanese expected us to yield our whole position
and that it brought to nothing the efforts that he and I had been
making to find a way out of the impasse. He promised to continue
his study of the subject in the hope of finding a solution.
2. On February 24th I wrote the Chinese Foreign Office a further
note urging action on the contract in pursuance of the
Government’s promise of October 6th.50
3. There is, of course, no truth in the statement which you quote
as attributed by Japan Times to an official of the Foreign Office to
the effect that the question is pending between the American and
Japanese Governments; see my despatch 6, February 1, 5 p.m. I
am reliably informed that Japanese Legation is still urging the
Chinese to take no action on our contract for the same reason.”
MACMURRAY
50 See telegrams Nos. 426 and 430, Oct. 5 and 8, from the Minister in
China, Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 930 and 932 .

893.74/671
[Document 820]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)51
WASHINGTON, March 30, 1926.
No. 194
SIR: The British Ambassador called on me on March 25th and told me that,
in relation to the radio concession in China, he now understood that the
Radio Corporation of America had not with China opposed the consortium,
but that he understood there were other American interests which were
opposed to it.
I told him I had not heard of any and asked to whom he referred. He said he
did not have his papers with him and could not remember, but that it was
some telegraph or cable company. I said that the only telegraph or cable
company having any line to the Orient was the Commercial Pacific
Company, in which the British owned an interest and that I had never heard
that they had taken any part in the discussion. The Ambassador said he
thought if the United States would urge China to enter into the consortium,
China would agree; that the difference between the proposed consortium
and the one which had been considered at the Conference was considerable;
that the present consortium, among other things, contemplated Chinese
operation of the station. He said that he was also informed that the Peking
station, belonging to the Japanese, was adequate to communicate with all
parts of the United States. I told him that as to that assertion I was not
informed and made no promise as to what this Government would do.
I am [etc.]
For Mr. Kellogg:
JOSEPH C. GREW

2! The same, on the same date, to the Charge in Great Britain.

893.74/672: Telegram
[Document 821]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, April 7, 1926—4 p.m.
28. Page 4 of your despatch number 73, March 13, 1926.52 Department
prefers, in view of status of Federal wireless contract in Peking at present,
that discussions of the question should not at the present time be initiated at
Tokyo.
KELLOGG
52 Not printed.

893.74/673: Telegram
[Document 822]
The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
TOKYO, April 16, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received April 16—10:15 a.m.]
37. Department’s 28, April 7, 4 p.m. Instructions have been strictly
complied with. I called on Baron Shidehara at his request, April 3rd, and
following a discussion of disarmament, for which see my telegram 36, April
13, 6 p.m.,53 he raised the topic of wireless. I said I could not officially
discuss the matter. With that understanding he said that informally and
unofficially he wished I would ask the Department of State if they could not
reply to the Japanese memorandum dated June 1, 1925.54 His view was that
before any agreement on economic or business lines could be reached by
the two companies concerned, matters of policy should be determined
between the two Governments. He was confident the Chinese Government
would accept any such agreement but the matter could not be brought again
to the attention of our Government by the Japanese Government until they
had received a reply to the memorandum referred to. Apparently, though he
adverted to the interview he had with MacMurray, he did not consider that
the conversation which Embassy’s telegram 117, July 1, 1925, noon,55
referred to was a reply to their memorandum of June 1, inasmuch as the
matter entirely rested with the State Department. The Japanese Ambassador
in Washington might properly be asked by Baron Shidehara to convey this
request to the Department. However, his reply was that though he would
instruct the Japanese Ambassador to communicate on the subject directly
with the Department, he wished me to forward the request. Full account
reported by despatch being sent by pouch April 17th.56 Copy to Peking.
MACVEAGH

53 Ante, p. 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64].
54 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 906.
55 Ibid ., p. 909.
56 Despatch dated April 16; not printed.

893.74/674
[Document 823]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)57
[WASHINGTON,] April 16, 1926.
The Japanese Ambassador came to see me at noon today by appointment.
He stated that he desired to know whether there had been any developments
in the matter of the Federal wireless contract and the Japanese proposal for
wireless consortium since his last conversation with the Secretary of State,
which was early in January. I told him that there were no developments. I
stated that this was due to two facts. First, that political conditions in Peking
had been such recently that no progress had been made toward completing
the Federal wireless contract with the Chinese Government, and second,
that we were still interested in knowing what reply the Chinese Government
had made to the Japanese Government’s memorandum of last October
proposing the consortium to the Chinese Government.58
The Ambassador stated that his Government laid great importance upon the
Japanese proposal for a radio consortium, as they considered that proposal
to be in every sense of the word just to all parties, in accordance with
Chinese national aspirations, and, at the same time, a proposal that would
mean the settlement of radio construction problems in China upon a basis
both economic and business like. In this latter case he stressed the point that
it would save money for China in that their proposal would not force the
Chinese to unnecessarily large expenditures for radio stations at this time.
I stated that it was our impression that the Chinese Government had been
from the beginning opposed to the idea of a radio consortium. I reminded
him that when such a proposal was first advanced during the Washington
Conference the Chinese delegation had indicated their opposition to such a
plan. I stated that this Government had not yet heard that the Chinese
Government had changed its attitude on this subject and that we are still

interested to know what reply the Chinese Government would make to the
Japanese note of last October. The Ambassador stated that the Japanese
Government had received no reply as yet and that it felt that no reply would
be forthcoming unless the powers, and particularly the United States, could
get together and agree on the proposition beforehand as the Japanese
Government felt that the Chinese Government would accept any
arrangement of this matter which the powers might agree upon. He pointed
out that the Japanese proposal for a consortium represented a tremendous
advance in the ideas of the powers hitherto interested in Chinese radio, and
it meant that they definitely abandoned any idea of monopolistic or
exclusive control over radio stations in China. He stressed the point that the
Japanese proposal was that the stations were to be turned over to the control
of the Chinese. I reminded him that I understood that the proposal would
require that the stations be controlled during the existence of the consortium
by engineers of the several countries involved. He stated that this was
doubtless true.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I stated to the Ambassador that the Department was still interested, of
course, in knowing whether this proposal of the Chinese Government was
workable. I reminded him that the Japanese proposal was, in a sense, based
on the old proposal for a financial consortium and I pointed out to him that
the financial consortium had never been recognized by the Chinese
Government, even though the consortium had expressed a willingness to
take a Chinese group into membership.
I asked the Ambassador whether the Mitsui station near Peking was in
operation and he replied that it was not. I asked him why the Mitsui station
was not in operation, stating that I had assumed that it was completed and
had become operative. He stated that he did not know why it was not in
operation but that he and his Government believed (doubtless someone in
Peking had made such a statement to the Japanese) that the Chinese were
refusing to take delivery of the station or issue a permit for its operation in
face of American opposition to the station. I told him that this surprised me
very much because I was certain that there was no opposition on the part of
the United States to the operation of a station by Mitsui and Company or

any other Japanese company in China. I stated that our interest in this
matter was merely in seeing that an American company having a station at
Shanghai might be completed; that we were not interested in frustrating the
efforts of any other nation. The Ambassador stated that doubtless that was
true but that nevertheless they were under the impression that the failure of
the Chinese to issue a permit to the Mitsui station was due to American
opposition. I stated that I was satisfied that there was no American
opposition to the Mitsui station, that Mr. MacMurray, our Minister at
Peking, and Colonel Davis, the representative of the American company,
had endeavored to explain to Mr. Saburi of the Japanese Foreign Office in
Peking that the interested Americans were anxious to cooperate with other
stations in every possible way, and to that end would be ready to make
proper arrangements for exchange of traffic whenever the American station
was ready to function.
The Ambassador remarked that that, of course, was the American proposal
but that the Japanese felt that the Japanese proposal was in every respect
more just, particularly in view of the fact that under the American proposal
competitive conditions would exist which would make it difficult for
several stations to live. I stated that it seemed to me that radio stations could
make arrangements one with the other just as the cable companies had
made traffic arrangements one with the other and that it was the feeling of
our radio interests that there was ample room for a station at Shanghai.
The Ambassador stated that as he had merely come to inquire whether there
had been any recent developments that he was not prepared to go into a
discussion of the details. With my final statement that no recent
developments had occurred in the matter, the conversation ended.
N[ELSON] T. J[OHNSON]
57 Copies transmitted on Apr. 23 to the Ambassador in Japan in instruction
No. 54 and to the Minister in China in instruction No. 206.
58 See Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 932.

893.74/673: Telegram
[Document 824]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 14, 1926—1 p.m.
96. 1. Following is for your information and comments, with reference to
Department’s 97 today.59
2. I am very anxious to have this long-standing case settled in such a
manner as to protect existing legitimate American interests and to be
consistent with our policy of the open door.
3. As I understand it the situation is this: Believing that the Government of
China preferred separate understanding with outside countries instead of
internationalization of her external communications by radio, the
Department has discouraged American radio interests from making
arrangements with such other countries as have radio interests in China, and
it has given its support to them in direct negotiations with the Government
of China. However, events have demonstrated that the influence which the
Japanese and British Governments have with the Chinese Government
appears to be sufficient to prevent the Chinese Government from
completing negotiations with the American company. In your telegram 405,
September 21, 1925, 4 p.m.,60 you have informed me that the Chinese
Government has insisted that the American interests make some
arrangement directly with Japanese interests prior to the completion of the
American company’s contract by the Chinese Ministry of Communications.
We have refrained from doing this because the American company have no
basis for negotiation with the Japanese in the absence of an executed
contract. The proposal of the Japanese is that we give authorization to
American company to discuss matters, with a view to a consortium, with
the French, British, and their own interests. We have also hesitated to do

this, believing that Chinese were opposed to an internationalization of their
external radio communications. The matter is at a stalemate therefore.
4. A reply to the Japanese memorandum of June 1 last61 is being
considered. In regard to its proposal of a radio consortium, I had thought of
informing the Government of Japan that if an arrangement based upon joint
cooperation of Japanese, British, French, and American radio interests, and
including joint operation of the stations to be set up in accord with the
arrangement under the control of China, should prove to be acceptable to
the Chinese Government, and, of course, provided it would involve in no
way a grant of special privileges bearing a character of monopoly which
would operate to prevent independent wireless interests from entering the
field, and provided any existing claim to monopoly were given up, this
Government would have no objection in principle to the working out of
such a plan by the interested private commercial companies.
5. However, on May 12 General Harbord came to consult with me; he
handed me a letter62 in which it was stated that in the opinion of the Radio
Corporation, a position had been reached in regard to its negotiations with
the Chinese where financial retrenchment had become necessary; that its
intention was to recall Colonel Davis, who was needed by the company and
by his family here; and that Davis would be instructed to turn over any
papers to you which were necessary to enable you to continue pressure in
behalf of Chinese-American control of the communication by radio
between the United States and China.
6. The letter from the Radio Corporation concluded with a statement that
unless you were able within six months to bring about definite final action
by the Chinese Government, it would then seem wise to the Radio
Corporation, by way of preparation to enforce a claim for all damages
accrued, to consider recommending to the Federal Telegraph Company that
it declare that the Republic of China was in default under existing contracts
and the further commitments it made last October.
7. I discussed the situation with Harbord as I outlined it above in paragraphs
2 and 3, with which outline he agreed. He stated that the British and French

wireless companies had informed him of their being interested in the Mitsui
Station at Peking.
8. I said to him that the Ambassador from Japan was insisting to me
constantly that the Mitsui Station was adequate to meet China’s needs in
regard to overseas radio communications and that construction of more
stations would only increase China’s financial burdens unnecessarily.
General Harbord replied that he was not able to understand how any such
claim could be advanced by the Japanese, for according to his information
the Japanese station was antiquated and not capable of meeting
requirements of overseas communications. He said he believed the Japanese
would abandon any such claims in negotiations.
9. I inquired of him whether the Radio Corporation would regard an AEFG
arrangement as acceptable, and I informed him of the reply to the Japanese
Government which I had considered making, and which I gave above in
paragraph 4. His answer was that from the beginning the Radio Corporation
had been in favor of an international arrangement, but it had subordinated
its wishes in 1921 to those of the Department in the interest of Chinese-
American control of radio communication directly between the United
States and China. He declared the proposal as I outlined it acceptable to his
company, provided it did not involve, as proposed by Japan, a straight loan
by the Radio Corporation, which has no interest in financing as such.
10. He suggested it was necessary to get some definite decision from the
Chinese Government for Chinese-American control of communication by
radio with the United States, or else for an internationalization of such
communication which was the only alternative that seemed to offer. He
proposed that instructions be sent in accord with the lines of Department’s
97. I agreed to this. Should there be no responsible member of the
Government of China in Peking at present to whom you can make the
statements in Department’s 97, action should not be taken until such an
individual appears. It is understood in any case that the Radio Corporation
will require the return of Davis by June 30.
11. My desire is that you carefully consider the proposals now placed
before you and give me your frank comment and suggestions concerning
the best means of arriving at some settlement that is practical and workable.

I would suggest as an alternative proposal to the one I outlined in
Department’s 97, whether you should not give the Chinese notification that
we are ready to accept the suggestions which the Provisional Chief
Executive made to you September 21, 1925,63 and authorize the Radio
Corporation to proceed to discussions with the Japanese company.
KELLOGG
59 Infra.
60 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 927.
61 Ibid. , p. 906.
62 Dated May 10; not printed.
63 Marshal Tuan Chi-jui; see telegram No. 405, Sept. 21, 1925, from the
Minister in China, Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 927.

893.74/673: Telegram
[Document 825]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, May 14, 1926—2 p.m.
97. Your telegram 114, March 6, 1 p.m., and telegram 37 from Tokyo to the
Department, April 16, 11 a.m.
Careful consideration has been given to the situation regarding the Federal
Company’s 
wireless 
contract 
with 
the 
Chinese 
Ministry 
of
Communications. The United States Government has supported that
original contract since it was signed, in its belief that the contract accorded
with the policy of equality of commercial opportunity and the open door
and that the Government of China preferred to have control over external
radio communications independently rather than internationalization. This
position has been supported by the Government of the United States when,
at times, it seemed the Chinese Government itself appeared to be indifferent
thereto. This Government has discouraged the American radio interests
from participating in any arrangement in which internationalization of the
external radio communications of China would be involved. The continued
delay of the Chinese Government, and its unwillingness, apparently, to take
any action to fulfill the contract made between the Ministry of
Communications and the Federal Company raises the question whether the
desires of the Chinese Government have been correctly understood by the
Government of the United States. You are requested to explain the above to
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Peking, provided it is feasible to do so at
this time, reminding it that the United States Government has displayed
patience in regard to the long delays in these negotiations which have
involved for the private American interests considerable financial loss, and
stating that the Government of the United States hopes that the Chinese
Government will make some decision by June 30th next. You will state that
the Government of the United States hopes to have been informed by the

Chinese Government, by that date, that it has taken action to carry out the
contract, in good faith, as proposed in the notes exchanged last October. If,
by the date mentioned, the Chinese Government should fail to take such
action, this Government could not avoid concluding that the Chinese
Government had determined upon a modification of the position it has
taken heretofore. The Government of the United States would then, while
reserving all the American company’s rights conferred by its contract and
reserving any claim the company may have owing to the Chinese
Government’s failure to complete its contract, feels free to permit such
arrangement to be made by American radio interests as they may care to
work out for radio communications in China with radio interests in other
countries, subject to the single provision that if any arrangement is made
which establishes or perpetuates any monopoly either as to the ownership or
the operation of radio in China, they will not receive support from the
Department of State.
For your information: The Department has been informed by the Radio
Corporation that its intention is to recall Davis, effective about June 30.
Davis may be informed of the contents of this telegram.
KELLOGG

893.74/682: Telegram
[Document 826]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, May 19, 1926—9 a.m.
[Received May 19—2:20 a.m.]
215. Following from Davis for Radio Corporation, referring to your
telegram 97, May 14, 2 p.m.:
“With the support of one of the allied military authorities now
dominating Peking, W. W. Yen, as Premier, is trying to form a
government, but, lacking support by another of such authorities,
he is not making much headway. None of those appointed to
ministerial positions has accepted. I doubt if in the near future a
government will exist to which the American Minister can
appropriately present an ultimatum. I will leave Peking about
June 30th and will sail on President Pierce from Kobe or
Yokohama.”
MACMURRAY

893.74/691: Telegram
[Document 827]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, June 11, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received June 12—4:31 p.m.64 ]
243. Your numbers 96, May 14, 1 p.m. and 97, May 14, 2 p.m.
1. No action on these two telegrams has been taken. I have waited
for some semblance of government to emerge which at least
should possess authority to handle the matter. No one is in charge
of the Ministry of Communications. If the Minister who was
designated by the Acting Premier should take office, seemingly
there would be a prospect more favorable than hitherto for
reaching the immediate objective, the conclusion of the
“clarification agreement”.
2. Pursuant to your 96, paragraph 11, I have thought much on the
possibility of giving American radio interests authority to deal in
the first instance with the Mitsui Company. I have tried to
consider the question from a point of view not biased by personal
prejudices. Having been associated with this question from its
beginning, I find myself still convinced of the unwisdom of the
suggested procedure. Tuan originated the suggestion merely out
of desire to avoid a dilemma and without any idea of attaining
constructive results. It has never been approved by those officials
of the Ministry of Communications who desire at heart to
improve China’s external communications. The adoption of it
would be interpreted as capitulation to the monopolistic
pretentions of the Japanese and as subordination of American
interests to Japanese interests; we would forego such standing
with the Chinese as we have in this matter and would incur

antagonism none the less intense because such action on our part
had been controlled by a former chief executive who is regarded
universally as a tool of the Japanese.
3. In the same spirit I venture to comment upon the procedure I
am directed to take, if possible by June 30th, by your number 97.
To intimate definitely to the Chinese an intention to abandon hope
of executing the Federal contract and to arrange radio
communication by means of combination with the interests of
other nationalities, I fear, would be regarded by the political
leaders of China as a challenge they could accept with impunity.
Relief from the embarrassment they are subjected to by
conflicting American and Japanese pressure would be thereby
given to them, and they would be enabled to take against any
proposals of a wireless consortium a purely defensive position—a
position as strong tactically as the position they have taken in
resisting a financial consortium. Competitive bidding for
piecemeal construction contracts would probably be the result. By
their adherence to the consortium the two American companies
might be excluded from such bidding. In any case no Chinese
Government, in the present state of aroused Chinese feeling
against what is called foreign domination, can be expected to
grant another contract (except through intimidation [sic] or
corruption) as favorable as the Federal contract. If we once give
up that contract, whose essential elements are already accepted
and accomplished facts, my belief is that American interests,
whether independently or associated with other nationalities,
could not obtain in any foreseeable future a contract containing
financial and technical safeguards which would be adequate to
make the enterprise safe as a commercial venture. Therefore, I
should urge that we should avoid, until the very last moment that
the American radio interests can afford to hang on—and I for my
part realize fully the fine spirit shown by the Radio Corporation in
meeting the disappointments and delays—conveying any
intimation of our contemplating a possibility of abandoning hope
that the Federal stations would be built under the contract.
Therefore, to try to bring this matter to a head in connection with

the departure of Davis, I would request authorization to be less
specific than was contemplated in your number 97 regarding the
attitude the United States Government takes toward possible
arrangements being made between Radio Corporation and other
national interests, and to inform the Chinese, in general terms
only, that since China has not lived up to the opportunity
presented, 
the 
whole 
question 
of 
developing 
radio
communications in the Far East must be taken under advisement
afresh by the American interests, reserving entire freedom of
action, if occasion offered, to work with China, or, if their own
advantage should so dictate, to work in disregard of Chinese
interests.
4. I am conscious that no new or more expeditious or hopeful
means of settlement of the question than we have already
followed are presented by these views and suggestions. However,
I believe that none of the other methods suggested could bring the
question to a settlement without definite certainty that the
effectiveness and the authority of the principle of equal
opportunity would be impaired or without a grave risk that
American interests would be barred from participating in Chinese
wireless communications. … I see no way, however, in view of
the failure of the Chinese Government to give the cooperation
they asked of our Government in making the open door effective
in this matter, by which we ourselves can abandon that objective
without injuring a policy we feel vital to American interests, as
well as to Chinese interests. As I see it, this is the whole crux of
the question between ourselves and Japan. Circumstances have
rendered impossible the full consideration of this matter with the
Japanese Foreign Office which Saburi had hoped would take
place, in regard to which see my telegram 35 of January 20, 7
p.m. Yet as he has explained it to me, the upshot amounted simply
to the following: that the Radio Corporation should as a
preliminary to any further negotiations arrange terms with the
Mitsui Company upon which the Mitsui Company would be
ready to give up its monopolistic rights; our suggestion, on the
other hand, had been that the American company would be

prepared to participate in tripartite negotiations for settlement if
the Japanese, without express renunciation of the position they
have taken, would simply permit the Federal Wireless Company’s
contract to take its course without the Japanese raising objection.
To me, their insistence that recognition of their claim to
monopoly be taken as a basis seems to indicate that the reality of
the open-door principle is what is at stake, for, although we may
believe that Japan, at the Washington Conference renewed her
adherence to the doctrine of the open door with entire good faith,
it is the fact nevertheless that the character of Japanese interests in
China prompts a policy restricting the scope of interpretation of
the open-door doctrine rather than of enlarging it. It seems
impossible upon any other hypothesis to explain the pertinacity
they have manifested in fighting our interests in this commercial
matter, which involves but a relatively small radio station, and in
seeking to turn the question by exaggeration into a major issue as
between Japan and the United States, trying to wear down our
patience, as it seems to me, in dealing with a perennial source of
vexation. The Japanese Government’s recent importunities that its
memorandum of June 1, 1925, be answered—which Baron
Shidehara fully understood, last June when I conferred with him,
was to receive only an oral answer, which I made to him in your
behalf at that time—may indicate, I venture to suggest, that it is
the patience of the Japanese themselves which is becoming
exhausted, in which case there is a better hope on our part of
inducing the Japanese to accept an arrangement in which no
surrender of our fundamental position is involved.
5. I infer from your 96, paragraph 6, that Radio Corporation has
in mind to allow 6 months before it definitely abandons its
reliance upon the Federal contract. I am not able to hazard an
assurance that the question can be adjusted within that period in
favor of us along the lines we have followed. However, I strongly
believe we should not abandon that hope, and as a last resort
should attempt through a consortium to provide for wireless in
China, until the expiration of that period.

6. Though I am venturing below to comment upon the matter of
business organization only to the extent that it is involved in the
peculiarities of China’s political situation, I give my full
endorsement to the opinion I understand Davis has written to his
company, which is, in effect, that a consortium or any other form
of international cooperation in regard to radio communication
with China should include that each separate station should be
operated and controlled by a single foreign interest acting in
conjunction with the Chinese. Traditional Chinese tendency to
play off foreigners against each other in the interests) of China,
and the nature of the international rivalries in China, probably
would make the success of stations in China which were
controlled by an international board less likely than in any other
place in the world.
7. Meanwhile I again venture the suggestion that if a further reply
to their proposal is insisted upon by the Japanese the answer
should be in accord with the sense of my telegram 24, January 13,
9 p.m., paragraph 9, rather than with that of your 96, in order to
leave the responsibility upon the Japanese Government for
demonstrating that the proposal it made would be workable so far
as the Chinese are concerned, and that it is not merely a maneuver
designed to have us compromise the present position we have
with the Chinese.
8. I discussed these comments in an entirely frank way with
Davis. He concurs in them.
9. I request permission to send copies of this and your telegrams
referred to above to Embassy, Tokyo.
MACMURRAY
64 Telegram in two sections.

893.74/699: Telegram
[Document 828]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, July 15, 1926—5 p.m.
141. Substance of your essential points in telegram number 243, June 11, 6
p.m. was communicated to Radio Corporation. In reply July 12 the Radio
Corporation agreed that the communication to the Government of China be
worded in accord with suggestions of your third paragraph and stated that to
do so will leave them free under the sanction of the Secretary of State to
proceed, in case they desired to do so, as was outlined to the Minister in the
Secretary’s telegram of May 14, 2 p.m., No. 97; that they have at present no
idea of “abandoning a release on” the Federal contract even though they
were to begin negotiating with the other radio interests. General Harbord
said he agreed with the views of the Minister and Colonel Davis that a
consortium or any other form of international cooperation for radio
communication with China should involve the control and operation of each
separate station by one foreign interest in conjunction with the Chinese. The
reply further stated that the Far Eastern representative of the Radio
Corporation, Colonel Curtis H. Nance, who is at Manila now, had been
designated as Davis’ successor and instructed to write to you. In
communicating with the Chinese Government, you will be guided by the
views of the Radio Corporation as expressed above.
KELLOGG

893.74/711: Telegram
[Document 829]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, August 19, 1926—noon.
[Received August 19—9:30 a.m.]
335. My telegram 243, June 11.
1. Assuming that the conclusion of the “clarification agreement”
is merely a technical negotiation of protective agreements not
involving such new obligations by China as would require a
recognized government as a necessary condition precedent to a
judgment of validity, and proceeding for our part on that
assumption, I had a long talk yesterday with the Acting Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Admiral Tsai. I explained our views in full on
the economic and political hearings of the Federal contract. On
his part he gave no indication of desiring to associate the question
of recognition with the Federal wireless contract.
2. He appeared to understand the significance of carrying out the
Federal contract as a concrete application of the principle of the
open door, and he gave some reason to me to hope that he, in
behalf of the Foreign Office, will give his assent in the near future
to signature of clarification agreement now being awaited by
Ministry of Communications.
3. In the conversation I reiterated the assurance to him that when
once the clarification agreement was signed and necessary orders
given regarding land and bonds, the Chinese may notify the
Mitsui Company immediately that the American radio interests
and the Chinese Ministry are prepared to meet with the Japanese

interests in a tripartite conference with a view to arriving at a
solution of the problem along lines such as Davis has suggested.
4. I also took occasion to intimate to him that the moment is
nearing when Radio Corporation will have to look after its own
interests by means of arrangements elsewhere, in case the
Chinese fail to make use of the opportunity which still is open to
them. Since the Cabinet has a somewhat indeterminate status and
its duration is probably brief, it seemed to me to be injudicious to
make a more categorical statement.
MACMURRAY

893.74/712
[Document 830]
Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Harrison) of a
Conversation With the British Ambassador (Howard)
[WASHINGTON,] August 21, 1926.
The Ambassador referred to his last conversation with the Secretary, and
inquired whether there was anything that I could tell him with regard to the
matter of the Federal Radio’s contract in China. I replied that I had nothing
new to say. The Ambassador said that some months ago when speaking to
the Secretary, Mr. Kellogg had indicated that he was awaiting the views of
the Legation, and he had understood that the Legation had felt that there
was little hope for progress in view of the status of affairs in China. Of
course he appreciated that the situation was now much the same as it was
then.
 
The Ambassador expressed the hope that we might be able to come to some
understanding. He thought that the Japanese proposal for a consortium
taking in China and placing the matter really under Chinese control,
nominally if not actually, was substantially different from the consortium
proposal that had been put forward during the Washington Conference, and
should be acceptable to China. I expressed some personal doubt as to
whether China would consent to a consortium.
The Ambassador also urged the desirability of the consortium solution
which would eliminate the Japanese and American monopoly. I expressed
surprise that he considered that there was any monopoly involved in the
Federal contract. I referred to the fact that some time ago the British
Government had raised a question with regard to an alleged special
privilege entailed in the Federal contract which we had answered, I
understood, to the satisfaction of the British Government. The Ambassador
said that of course it was an intricate matter and that he did not have it all in

mind, but that he would be glad to give me an aide memoire or discuss with
me the position of his Government which maintained that the Federal
contract did involve a virtual monopoly. I remarked that the Federal
contract did not disturb the Japanese station at Peking nor the French station
at Shanghai, but that I was ready to discuss the matter further with him.
While admitting the existence of the Japanese station at Peking and the
French station at Shanghai, the Ambassador remarked that these stations
were not powerful and that the erection of a large powerful station at
Shanghai by the Federal would mean that that station would carry on all
international business. He also observed that his Government was anxious
to reach, if possible, a satisfactory solution of the whole question.
L[ELAND] H[ARRISON]

893.74/716
[Document 831]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Assistant Secretary of
State (Wright)
MANCHESTER, MASS., August 27, 1926.
[Received August 30.]
MY DEAR MR. WRIGHT: When I saw Mr. Harrison in Washington on August 21st, I
touched, amongst other matters, upon the question of wireless in China with
special reference to the so-called Federal Contract. I intimated in the course
of our conversation65 that this contract was regarded with some
apprehension by His Majesty’s Government as vitiating the principle of the
“open door” in China, and Mr. Harrison expressed surprise that any such
fears should be agitating our minds. In the circumstances, permit me to
invite reference to Mr. Chilton’s note No. 704 of July 22nd, 1925,66 which
informed the United States Government that His Majesty’s Government
were in general agreement with the Japanese proposals for a wireless
consortium and which contained the following paragraph:
“In determining their attitude in this matter, His Majesty’s
Government have been impressed by the fact that the difficulties
now handicapping the development of wireless communications
with China afford a striking illustration of the soundness of the
general principles so ably championed by the United States
Government in other spheres of foreign relations with that
country. The essence of these principles consists in the eradication
of international competition in China and the abstention of the
foreign powers concerned from any attempt to seek special
privileges for themselves and their nationals. His Majesty’s
Government do not doubt that these considerations will also
animate the policy of the United States Government in the present
instance. At the same time, however, they view with a certain
apprehension the possibility of practical application being given

to the suggestion put forward by the United States representatives
at the time of the Washington Conference that the conduct of
wireless between the United States and China ought to be solely
in the hands of a Sino-American enterprise. Whilst His Majesty’s
Government for their part were prepared to accept the
recommendations of the wireless experts when taken as a whole,
they cannot but feel, in the light of the present difficulties, that the
suggestion of the American representatives on this particular
point would in practice militate against the above-mentioned
principle of equality of opportunity and encourage the powers to
claim from the Chinese Government a monopoly of the wireless
traffic between themselves and China. Such action on the part of
the powers would materially increase the difficulties of the
situation and result in the infliction of a considerable injustice on
China.”
Since the general contents of the Federal Contract will be well known to
you, I think it is hardly necessary to say any more at present about our
apprehensions over the possibility of a radio monopoly in China. There are,
however, certain points in the Federal Company’s Agreement of September
19th, 1921,67 which I feel may have escaped the notice of the United States
Government, and these I have outlined in the enclosed memorandum for
your information.
In the light of this memorandum, you will realize that, if the Federal
Contract is carried out, my Government may find themselves obliged, at the
request of the British banks and bondholders interested, to take concerted
action with the other Powers concerned for the protection of British
interests in this matter.
Believe me [etc.]
ESME HOWARD
 
[Enclosure]
MEMORANDUM

Clauses 4 and 5 of the Agreement of September 19th, 1921, between the
Federal Company and the Chinese Government read in part as follows:
From Clause 4
“… The Government also pledges as further and additional
security, as aforesaid, the surplus earnings from any and every
source accruing to the Ministry of Communications, and if at any
time such earnings shall prove deficient, the Government agrees
in such event to provide from other Government sources amounts
necessary and sufficient to redeem the Bonds herein authorized to
the end that the obligations of said Bonds shall be promptly and
fully met. … The Ministry of Communications above referred to,
so as to fully pay the same agrees that no deductions of any kind
shall be made from said surplus earnings of said Ministry of
Communications above referred to until full provision has been
made for said payment as aforesaid, the Government further
agrees, in any event, to provide for the full and prompt discharge
of said Bonds, in the amounts falling due each year, together with
the premium thereon, from other earnings of the Ministry of
Communications or from other Chinese Government sources.”
From Clause 5
“… Further so long as any part of this loan is unredeemed and
unpaid, the said China-Federal Radio Administration and the
surplus earnings of the Ministry of Communications, shall not,
under any circumstances, be mortgaged, nor shall the respective
receipts therefrom be given as security to any other party, nor
shall the Ministry of Communications of the Chinese Government
impair the security of this loan by any pledge of, or agreement to
pay 
from, 
the 
surplus 
earnings 
of 
said 
Ministry 
of
Communications, to the end that this loan, so long as any part of
it unredeemed and unpaid, shall have priority as regards principal
and premium, and interest over all other loans, charges, or
mortgages charged or to be charged on the Ministry of
Communications … and no loan, charge or mortgage shall be
raised or credited [created] which shall take precedence or be on

equality with this loan, or which shall in any manner lessen or
impair its security upon the revenue aforesaid.”
It is felt that the pledging of the whole of the surplus revenues of the
Chinese Government Railways to an industrial concern, for purposes
outside railway development, is prejudicial to the working of the
International Bankers’ Consortium of 1918. Moreover, a special lien on
Chinese Government revenues would seem inconsistent with the principle
of complete equality which formed the basis of the wireless resolution
passed by the Consortium Council in Paris on May 28th, 1923, from which
the following (Article 5) is a pertinent extract:
“It was resolved that each group in the new consortium shall be a
national unit and that no member of any group shall, within the
scope of the operation of the consortium, represent directly or
indirectly any other national interest”.
In this connection, it is of interest to note that the Federal Agreement
provides that the Bonds of the Chinese Government shall be secured upon
the radio stations, and all revenue accruing therefrom, and it also
specifically provides that if this security is found to be insufficient, then the
Chinese Government pledges all surplus earnings from whatever source of
the Ministry of Communications, and from all other Chinese Government
resources. Under the agreement, the Chinese Government is further
prohibited from impairing the security of the bonds “by any pledge or
agreement to pay from the surplus earnings of the said Ministry of
Communications to the end that this loan as long as any part of it remains
unredeemed and unpaid shall have priority as regards principle [sic] and
premium and interest above all future loans, charges, or mortgages charged,
or to be charged on the Ministry of Communications.” This would appear to
conflict with the undertaking entered into by the four Powers interested in
the Banking Consortium and seems further to contravene the
pronouncements of the United States Government on behalf of their
national group in their notes to (a) the French, British and Japanese
Embassies of October 8th, 1918,69 and (b) to the Chinese Government on
September 28th, 1920,70 from which the following extracts are respectively
quoted:

(a) “The proposal of the Government of the United
States contemplated that industrial, as well as
administrative loans should be included in the new
arrangement for the reason that, in practice, the line of
demarcation between various classes of loans often is
not easy to draw. Both alike are essential fields for
legitimate financial enterprise and both alike should be
removed from the sphere of unsound speculation and of
destructive 
competition. 
The 
intention 
of 
this
Government was to suggest as a means to that end, that
the interested Governments should, by common
consent, endeavour so to broaden the membership in the
newly formed national groups that all financial firms of
good standing interested in such loans might be
included in the respective groups and should withhold
their support from independent financial operations
without 
previous 
agreement 
of 
the 
interested
Governments”.
(b) “In the proposal of the United States Government
which in practice envisaged a reconstruction of the Old
Consortium it was specifically stated that there was no
intention of interfering with any of the rights of the
Consortium. The hope was expressed, however, that the
new national Groups formed might be made so broad as
to include the members of the former Consortium as
well as others who had legitimate claims to such
inclusion, so as to meet the larger needs and
opportunities of China in a spirit of harmony and of
helpfulness rather than of harmful competition and self-
interest.”
A further portion of Clause 5 of the Federal Agreement lays down that no
deductions of any kind shall be made from the surplus earnings of the
Chinese Ministry of Communications until full provision has been made for
the wireless bonds. This is at variance with Article 5 of the Agreement
regarding the Anglo-French loan of 1908 to the Board of Posts and

Communications,71 which states that the service of the loan will be paid
from these surplus revenues. The text of article 5 of the loan agreement is as
follows: FRANCE (Banque de l’Indo-Chine), GREAT BRITAIN (Hongkong and
Shanghai Banking Corporation) AND CHINA.
Agreement for a loan of £500,000 [£5,000,000] to the board of Posts and
Communications—October 8th, 1908.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Article 5.
“The service of principal and interest of this loan will be paid
from the surplus revenues of the various productive works of
public 
utility 
controlled 
by 
the 
Board 
of 
Posts 
and
Communications; in the event of these surplus revenues being
insufficient, other revenues will be selected to make up the
deficiency.”
“The Board will further, from and after the date of the first
coupon, and during the currency of this loan, leave on fixed
deposit in equal shares with the two contracting banks in
Shanghai, the estimated silver equivalent of the payment of
interest next due. In like manner, from and after the end of the
tenth year, the Board will also leave on fixed deposit with the
contracting banks in Shanghai the estimated silver equivalent of
the instalment of principal next due. These fixed deposits will be
renewed and adjusted half yearly on the dates on which interest
coupons become due to the bondholders, the silver equivalents of
interest and/or principal which they represent being calculated at
the rate of exchange or average rate of exchange, settled for the
remittance of loan service made ten days previously. Interest on
these deposits shall be allowed by the contracting Banks at their
advertised rates for the time being for twelve months fixed
deposits, subject to any change of rate from the date of such
change and will be payable half-yearly.[”]

Finally, Clauses 4 and 5 of the Federal Agreement seem to violate Article 6
of the Agreement of April 10th, 1911, between the Eastern Telegraph
Company and the Chinese Government, which agreement reads as follows:
Copy from Book of Agreements of Eastern Extension, Australasia and
China Telegraph Company, Limited, and the Chinese Government, in F.
1490/667/10 of 1925.
AN AGREEMENT, made this tenth day of April, 1911, corresponding with
the Twelfth day of the Third Moon of the Third Year of Hsuan
Tung, Between THE IMPERIAL CHINESE BOARD OF COMMUNICATIONS (hereinafter called
“The Yuchuanpu”) of the one part and the EASTERN EXTENSION AUSTRALASIA AND
CHINA TELEGRAPH COMPANY, LIMITED, and THE GREAT NORTHERN TELEGRAM COMPANY, LIMITED, of
Denmark (hereinafter called “The Companies”), of the other part.
WHEREAS the Yuchuanpu for the purpose of reorganising, improving
and developing the Telegraph and Telephone Services throughout
the Chinese Empire has to provide large sums of money in the
immediate future.
AND WHEREAS in accordance with the existing agreements between
the Imperial Chinese Telegraph Administration and the
Companies certain revenues administered by the Companies are
paid quarterly to the said Administration.
AND WHEREAS the Companies are prepared to make an advance on
account of the said revenues to the Yuchuanpu for the purposes
stated.
IT IS THEREFORE MUTUALLY AGREED between the parties hereto, as follows:—
ARTICLE 1
The Companies agree to make an advance to the Yuchuanpu of
the sum of £500,000 (five hundred thousand pounds sterling) on
the conditions hereinafter named.
ARTICLE 2

The advance shall be made at par, and shall bear interest at the
rate of five per cent per annum.
ARTICLE 3
Of the said sum of half a million pounds sterling a sum of
£300,000 (three hundred thousand pounds sterling) shall be paid
by the Companies to the Yuchuanpu on May First, 1911,
corresponding with the Third Day of the Fourth Moon of the
Third Year of Hsuan Tung, and the balance of £200,000 (two
hundred thousand pounds sterling) shall be paid within six
months after the date of the payment of the above stated
£300,000. The said payments shall be made to a bank designated
by the Yuchuanpu.
ARTICLE 4
The advance of money together with all interest in respect thereof
shall be satisfied and extinguished by the payment by the
Yuchuanpu to the Companies of a series of equal half-yearly
instalments of £21,018 (Twenty-one thousand and eighteen
pounds sterling) each. The first of these half-yearly instalments
shall be paid on June 30th, 1912, corresponding with the
Sixteenth day of the Fifth Moon of the Fourth Year of Hsuan
Tung, and the last of the half-yearly instalments shall be paid on
or before the 31st December, 1930. All payments shall be made in
sterling or its equivalent through a Bank designated by the
Companies either in London or at Shanghai. Should from any
unforeseen circumstances of whatsoever nature the Yuchuanpu
find itself unable to make the stipulated payment on the date
agreed upon, the Companies shall be paid interest at the rate of
five per cent per annum on the amount of the outstanding account
from the date on which payment was due and until the actual date
of payment, it being understood that in case of non-payment or
short payment the Companies may deduct any amount due under
this Agreement from money due from the Companies to the
Imperial Chinese Telegraph Administration under the existing

Agreements or Contracts between the said Administration and the
Companies or either of them.
ARTICLE 5
The Imperial Government of China hereby guarantees the
repayment of the £500,000 and the payment of interest thereon in
accordance with the stipulations contained in Article 4, and as
security for the money advanced hereby grants to the Companies
a preferential lien on China’s revenue from “Through Traffic” and
“Limitrophe Traffic”: subject always to the lien held by the
Companies under any Agreement or Agreements in force for the
time 
being 
between 
the 
Imperial 
Chinese 
Telegraph
Administrations and the Companies. The above revenues are
declared free from all other loans, mortgages or charges.
By the aforesaid “Through Traffic” is understood traffic as
defined in the sixth recital of the Agreement dated the 26th of
July, 
1904, 
between 
the 
Imperial 
Chinese 
Telegraph
Administration and the Companies, and by the aforesaid
“Limitrophe Traffic” is understood traffic as defined in Article
one of the Telegraph Convention dated the 13th of May, 1897,
between the Imperial Chinese Telegraph Administration, and the
Great Northern Telegraph Company, Limited, of Denmark, with
the additional traffic as mentioned in Article seven of the
Agreement dated the 22nd of October, 1902, between the same
parties.
ARTICLE 6
No Loan or Mortgage shall be charged upon the security named
above until this present advance of money by the companies is
redeemed, and neither the Yuchuanpu nor the Imperial Chinese
Telegraph Administration shall make any arrangements or
agreement or take any other step during the term of this present
Agreement that would in any way diminish China’s share of the
revenue from the aforenamed “Through Traffic” and “Limitrophe
Traffic”.

ARTICLE 7
This Agreement is signed under authority of an Imperial Edict
dated the Eighth day of the Third Moon of the Third Year of
Hsuan Tung which has been officially communicated to the
Ministers of Great Britain, Russia and Denmark in Peking by the
Waiwupu.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned duly authorised to this effect have
signed the present agreement.
Done in Peking in the English language and in the Chinese
language. Six expeditions [sic] duly compared and found to be in
agreement, of which one shall be retained by the Yuchuanpu, one
by the Waiwupu, one by the British Minister, one by the Russian
and Danish Minister[s], and one by each of the Companies, have
been signed in each of these languages on the Tenth day of April,
1911, corresponding with the Twelfth day of the Third Moon of
the Third Year of the reign of Hsuan Tung.
For the Imperial Chinese Board of Communications,
(Signed) Chow Wan Pang. (seal)
Appointed with Imperial approval Director
General of the Imperial Chinese Telegraph
Administration and being an expectant Taotai
with the brevet rank of the second class.
For . . . . . . .
For the Eastern Extension Australasia and China Telegraph Company,
Limited.
(Signed) A. B. Skottowe.
The Acting Manager in China.
For the Great Northern Telegraph Company, Limited, of Denmark.
(Signed) J. J. Bahnson.
The General Manager in China and Japan.
65 See memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State, Aug. 21, supra.
66 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 910.

67 See despatch No. 37, Sept. 27, 1921, from the Minister in China, Foreign
Relations, 1921, vol. I, p. 450; for text of agreement, see List of Contracts of
American Nationals With the Chinese Government, etc., annex vni
(Washington, Government Printing Office, 1925).
69 See note to the French Ambassador, Foreign Relations , 1918, p. 193.
70 Ibid., 1920, vol. I, p. 572.
71 For text of agreement, see Foreign Relations , 1908, p. 204.

893.74/714: Telegram
[Document 832]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, September 1, 1926—6 p.m.
[Received 8:18 p.m.]
365. My 335, August 19.
1. After further conversation with Minister of Communications
and Admiral Tsai, latter presented the Federal question to Cabinet
meeting August 26 by a memorandum which requested
instructions and which clearly favored the fulfillment of the
Federal Company contract, despite the opposition of the Japanese.
He has informed me since then that Minister of Communications
Chang and Minister of Finance Koo, supported him. The Cabinet
decided that there should be discussion of the matter again after
settlement of the political situation, in other words, further
consideration should not be given until a “regular” government,
or as was intimated by Tsai, a “recognized” government, is
established.
2. After I received an intimation that no very mature deliberation
had in fact preceded the taking of this decision by the Cabinet, but
with rather a casual hope that the Cabinet might arrange to
exchange performance of the contract for an early recognition of
their regime by us, I saw Admiral Tsai again and emphasized to
him the importance of any action which would necessitate my
reporting that we must give up hope definitely that China would
carry out her obligations. Thereupon Tsai offered to request
reconsideration by the Cabinet at its August 31st meeting. I have
just been told by him that at this meeting the Cabinet, although
attempting not to close the subject by declaring that their

intention was not to end negotiations in this matter, confirmed the
previous decision.
3. This action, taken admittedly in consequence of threats recently
reiterated by the Japanese and of intimations of British
opposition, I can only consider as definitely putting an end to all
hopes of securing from the Peking regime favorable action in
regard to the Federal contract. A more favorable conjuncture
could not have been hoped for. Chang, who himself had signed
the supplementary agreement made in September, 1921,72 was
prepared to make the clarification agreement, subject only to its
receiving approval from the Minister for Foreign Affairs who
probably has the most friendly attitude in regard to the United
States of any official of China and personally was most anxious to
have the agreement given effect, but who felt compelled, under
duress of political circumstances, to bring the matter before the
Cabinet. He has assured me he presented the question as a choice
between possibly offending the Japanese by failure to observe a
monopolistic contract and possibly offending us by failing to
meet the test, as our Government regards it, of the policy of the
open door and of the sincerity of China in cooperating in that
policy. That the Cabinet should on this presentation of the case
have repudiated or postponed indefinitely the execution of the
Federal contract is, in my opinion, final evidence that reliance can
no longer be placed upon the Peking authorities by the American
company to effect its rights under their contract. I can no longer
recommend therefore that they continue to exert effort along this
line.
4. However, I would advise most earnestly that prior to
abandoning possibility of progress upon the basis of the Federal
contract, the American interests concerned and the Department
[give consideration to?] an alternative plan I have discussed with
Davis. This is in essence the following: In view of the lack of
active support from the administration in Peking, although
already having contractual rights which assures its legal consent
to carry out the contract, a practical solution of the difficulties of

the American interests should be sought by those interests
independently of Peking. Sun Ch’uanfang, who controls the
Shanghai area in which it is proposed that the main station is to be
erected, holds the key to the situation. If he could be induced to
allocate the necessary land for the station, construction might
immediately be started, in confidence that the administration in
Peking would have to acquiesce in the various arrangements
which would be incidentally necessary. I believe that in regard to
the signature of bonds I am justified in thinking that that matter is
considered by Davis to be of no consequence since the Chinese
Government then existing gave a formal preliminary bond which
covered the entire indebtedness. And in regard to the clarification
agreement, it would appear that the central administration in
Peking—the technical experts of the Ministry of Communications
are friendly—will of necessity come to such an agreement in the
face of a fait accompli in order to secure the benefits the
agreement confers as to equipment and financial arrangements.
5. If the Radio Corporation after consultation with the
Department were to approve this course, I should recommend that
I be authorized by you to discuss the matter with Marshal Sun
during the trip to the South which I am to make soon. Presumably
Moss could later arrange all the necessary details in regard to the
land.
MACMURRAY
72 See despatch No. 37, Sept. 27, 1921, from the Minister in China, Foreign
Relations, 1921, vol. I, p. 450.

893.74/714: Telegram
[Document 833]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, September 7, 1926—6 p.m.
184. Paragraphs 4 and 5 of your telegram 365, September 1, 6 p.m. Belief
of Department is that it would not be wise for this Government to take the
responsibility of encouraging Radio Corporation to make arrangements
with local Shanghai authorities which would ultimately depend upon the
good will of the Central Government at Peking for final fulfillment either in
regard to intercourse between the Government and the wireless station at
Shanghai or in regard to ultimate payment of bond. Procedure such as that
should be left to the Radio Corporation entirely. In communicating your
telegram in substance to the Radio Corporation, answering a letter dated
September 2,73 Department is so informing Radio Corporation.
In view of previous negotiations in this matter with the Central
Government, the Department in any case would not be willing to give you
authorization to discuss the matter on behalf of the Corporation with the
local authorities at Shanghai.
KELLOGG
73 Neither letter printed.

893.74/722
[Document 834]
Memorandum by the Secretary of State
[WASHINGTON,] September 25, 1926.
The Japanese Ambassador called on me today and we discussed the radio
situation in China. He reminded me that the Japanese Government had sent
its original note on this question about a year ago and that he had had
various discussions since. His Government was very much disappointed
that they had not received a reply to their note. The Japanese Ambassador
said that I told him on May 10 that we had considered the matter, had
drafted a note, and were telegraphing it to MacMurray for suggestions. I
think this is correct but in addition to this I did ask MacMurray to try to find
out from the Chinese Government what answer they were going to make to
the Japanese proposal for a consortium and as to whether the Chinese
would consider a consortium as they had always opposed it; also what the
Chinese Government generally would do about the situation. The Japanese
Government thinks that I did not tell him that on the 10th of May. I think
that I did tell him but he says not.
The Japanese Ambassador feels as though he should have an answer to the
question; that the Japanese Government under the present conditions in
China feels it is very important that there should be more harmony between
the United States and Japan as to the radio interests; that Japan is not finally
committed to the proposition that it has made but is prepared to consider
any reasonable proposition which the United States will make if the spirit of
the proposal is in harmony with the general ideas expressed by the Japanese
Government. The Ambassador said that the Japanese Minister in Peking has
lately had a conversation with the new Minister of Foreign Affairs of China
and the Chinese Minister of Foreign Affairs suggested that it would be well
for Japan, the United States and China first to have a conference before
taking the matter up with the British and the French.

893.74/721: Telegram
[Document 835]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, September 29, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received 8:33 p.m.]
437. Department’s telegram number 184, September 7, 6 p.m., and
Legation’s telegram number 365, September 1, 6 p.m.
1. Word has been sent me by Admiral Tsai Ting-kan, now ill in a
hospital, that the Japanese Chargé d’Affaires had informed him
that the Japanese Minister who is returning here from Japan about
the 10th of October had instructions from his Government that he
take up the wireless question with me and with the Chinese.
Admiral Tsai desired that I be advised of this so I might be
prepared.
2. I at once went informally to the Admiral, September 27th. He
somewhat 
elaborated 
on 
the 
above-described 
message.
Apparently some time ago, no doubt during the period of his
activity in behalf of the Federal wireless contract, for which see
Legation’s 335 and 365, Tsai told the Japanese Chargé, Hori, in a
very frank conversation that he felt it necessary equally for Japan,
the United States, and China to settle the one question now
clouding their perfect friendship, that he was convinced
completely that the interested Americans were willing to make
any reasonable compromise once they were placed on a footing of
equality with the Japanese, and to insist that the Chinese
Government execute the Federal contract, and that furthermore, to
the latter end, he would do all he could. Tsai believed that Hori
was much impressed and that he reported the conversation to
Tokyo with the result I described in paragraph 1.

3. I briefly reiterated our position to Tsai that when the
“clarification agreement” had been signed and necessary orders
given as to land and bonds, we would be willing to meet the
Japanese and the Chinese with a view to finding a solution of the
problem along the reasonable lines proposed heretofore, but that,
before we would do anything further, we must be put on this basis
of parity with the Japanese.
4. I could not help being impressed with the apparent sincerity of
the stand the Admiral declared he had taken with the Japanese in
support of the Federal contract, with the logic of his remarks, and,
likewise, with the belief he seemingly had that he could succeed
in achieving the result desired. He stated at the end of our
conversation that he would have a talk with Yoshizawa as soon as
the Minister arrived, and that he would inform me of the result
and then invite Yoshizawa and me, and probably Chang, the
Minister of Communications, to an unofficial dinner at which we
could informally discuss the matter. I shall accept such an
invitation unless instructed to the contrary, provided it appears
advantageous then, and I shall quite frankly tell all that we desire
to solve the problem but state that we are unable to enter any
negotiations for that purpose until and unless our contract is
executed by the signature of the “clarification agreement”, and so
forth.
5. Since, in addition to the conversation I had with Tsai, Saburi
very earnestly spoke to me in the above regard when he returned
recently from a brief visit to Tokyo, I am the more inclined to the
belief that the Japanese are becoming increasingly anxious that
this matter be settled. Saburi emphasized that the only question
pending between his country and the United States was the
wireless question and that our inability to come to a decision on it
was a great pity. From a frank discussion of it with him I gathered
quite conclusively that the Japanese Government now regarded
the question primarily as one involving their national prestige and
therefore that the finding of a solution which would save face for
them was the principal problem.

6. Pending the arrival of Yoshizawa, at which time presumably it
will develop whether definite proposals are contemplated by the
Japanese, I suggest that it is inadvisable to communicate to Radio
Corporation this recent phase of the situation unless doing so is
necessary to keep alive the interest of the corporation in the
matter, since, until the matter is further in progress, for them to
send their representatives here would hardly serve any useful
purpose or be justified. However, should the Department give
information of the matter to Radio Corporation, may I suggest
that it be given somewhat in this sense?
MAYER

893.74/721: Telegram
[Document 836]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, September 30, 1926—6 p.m.
210. Paragraph 4 of your number 437, September 29, 1 p.m. Until further
instructed you should not commit yourself in connection with the proposed
discussions between Minister Yoshizawa, Admiral Tsai, and the Minister of
Communications concerning radio contracts. In a day or two the
Department expects to consider the entire situation with General Harbord,
after which the Department will be in a position to give the necessary
instructions. You should refrain from comment, which includes the
statement you suggested, if the unofficial dinner is given, and you should at
once report to the Department any proposals or suggestions.
KELLOGG

893.74/722
[Document 837]
Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Far Eastern Affairs
(Johnson)
[WASHINGTON,] October 11, 1926.
The Japanese Ambassador called on me at 3 o’clock today and referred to a
conversation which he had had with the Secretary of State on September 25,
at which time the Secretary had stated that he hoped to make some reply to
the Japanese Embassy’s note of June 1, 1925, in regard to the question of
the Federal Wireless contract with China. I told the Ambassador that I
hoped that within two or three days we would be able to make a reply. He
stated that he hoped that our reply would be favorable. He said that when he
left Tokyo he had been told by his Government that it looked upon the
Federal Wireless question as one of great importance second only to the
immigration question and that he had been instructed to make every effort
to find some way whereby this question might be settled in a manner
acceptable to both sides. He stated that he had now been in Washington for
more than a year and that he was very disappointed that he had been unable
to accomplish anything in this matter.
N[ELSON] T. J[OHNSON]

893.74/727: Telegram
[Document 838]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, October 13, 1926—1 p.m.
[Received October 13—8:01 a.m.]
474. Your telegram 210, September 30, 6 p.m.
1. The confidential Chinese agent of the Federal Company here
states that the Director General of Telegraphs, Chiang, has told
him twice lately that it is now a propitious time for us to take up
the wireless question again, and each of them considers Koo
favorable to our desires regarding the question. That Koo is both
Acting Premier and Minister for Foreign Affairs would likewise
appear to be to our advantage.
2. I was further informed by the Federal Company’s agent that he
is reliably advised that within about two months Chang Tso-lin
intends to put his own cabinet in power here and that the present
stop-gap organization is only permitted out of respect for Wu Pei-
fu, who had a working agreement with Chang Tso-lin and whose
influence is now waning in China, if it is not practically lost.
Should this information be correct, as I am rather inclined to
think, it would be preferable for us, in view of the pro-Japanese
connections of Chang Tso-lin, to make a further attempt to have
the Federal Company contract executed during the lifetime of the
present cabinet.
3. Pursuant to the Department’s telegram aforementioned, I shall
take no action in the matter unless directed to do so.
MAYER

893.74/727: Telegram
[Document 839]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 16, 1926—1 p.m.
232. Your number 474, October 13, 1 p.m. A conference with General
Harbord and Colonel Davis has been held by the Department in regard to
the wireless matter and the questions which were covered by recent
telegrams from the Legation. Department is now preparing a reply to the
note of June 1, 1925, from the Japanese Embassy. It will discuss the various
points which were raised in that note, and it will conclude with stating that
if the Governments of China and Japan approve, Radio Corporation of
America will extend an invitation to the Chinese Ministry of
Communications, the Mitsui Company, and the Federal Telegraph Company
as well, to meet in the city of New York to discuss the various matters at
issue with a view to working out in common accord a solution of those
difficulties. The substance of this draft will be communicated to you when
it has been completed, for communication simultaneously to the Chinese
Foreign Office.
You may, pending receipt of these instructions, listen to whatever proposals
may be made, immediately reporting them to the Department by telegraph.
KELLOGG

893.74/730a
[Document 840]
The 
Secretary 
of 
State 
to 
the 
Japanese 
Ambassador
(Matsudaira)74
MEMORANDUM
The Secretary of State has recently been informed by the Japanese
Ambassador that the Japanese Government desired to receive a reply to the
memorandum of the Japanese Ambassador on the subject of wireless
telegraphy in China which was left with the Secretary of State on June 1,
1925.75 Careful consideration was given by the Government of the United
States to the Japanese Ambassador’s memorandum above referred to and its
views on this subject were orally conveyed to the Foreign Minister of Japan
by Mr. John Van A. MacMurray, the American Minister to China, on the
occasion of his visit to Tokyo on June 30, 1925.76 Nevertheless the
Government of the United States is desirous of clearing up any uncertainties
which may still exist as to its position in this matter, with a view to
hastening an amicable settlement of this question, and to that end submits
the following expression of its views.
The Government of the United States is gratified to note that the Japanese
Government in the suggestions it makes has no other desire than to reach a
practical solution of the difficulty that will best serve the lasting interests of
China and will at the same time obtain friendly cooperation among the
Powers interested in radio enterprise in that country. With such desire the
Government of the United States is in complete accord.
The Government of the United States has made note of the observation of
the Japanese Government that the Mitsui Company, pursuant to contracts
entered into in 1918,77 has completed a radio station at Peking. As pointed
out by the Japanese Government the establishment and operation by the
Mitsui Company of the Peking station have never been questioned by the
Government of the United States or by the Federal Telegraph Company.

Nor has the right of Japanese subjects freely to contract with the agencies of
the Chinese Government in this regard been questioned.
The Japanese Government recalled that it had felt constrained to take
exception to the establishment by the Federal Company of wireless stations
at Shanghai and elsewhere since the establishment of such stations was
considered to be an infringement of the contractual right already acquired
by the Mitsui Company from the Chinese Government. The Japanese
Government observed that it still held to the belief that such contractual
right, as opposed to the claim of the Federal Company, was not inconsistent
either with treaty provisions between the United States and China or with
the principle of equal opportunity and that it found ample support in a series
of international precedents. It is the understanding of the United States
Government that the contractual right of the Mitsui Company which is
especially referred to by the Japanese Government is set forth in a
supplementary clause of the contract between the Mitsui Company and the
Chinese Ministry of the Navy, which was agreed to on March 5, 1918, and
which reads as follows:
“During the period of thirty years mentioned in Article 4 of the
Contract, the Government shall not permit any other person or
firm to erect, nor shall it erect by itself any wireless station in
China for the purpose of communicating with any foreign
country.”78
and that it is this clause which the Japanese Government maintains is
neither inconsistent with the treaty provisions between the United States
and China nor with the principle of equal opportunity. The Government of
the United States regrets that it is unable to find itself in accord with the
position of the Japanese Government on this point. It is the view of the
United States Government that the clause in question is inconsistent with
the terms of Article XV of the Sino-American Treaty of 1844,79 which
provides that American citizens in China shall not be “impeded in their
business by monopolies or other injurious restrictions;” with the provisions
of the exchange of notes, dated November 30, 1908, between His
Excellency K. Takahira, Japanese Ambassador to the United States, and the
Honorable Elihu Root, Secretary of State, in which it was set forth that “the

policy of both Governments … is directed … to the defense of the principle
of equal opportunity for commerce and industry in China.”80 This principle
has, therefore, long been accepted by the Chinese, the Japanese and the
American Governments. It was the restatement of an old and accepted
principle and not a new engagement which found expression in Article III
of the treaty between the United States of America, Belgium, the British
Empire, China, France, Italy, Japan, The Netherlands and Portugal, relating
to principles and policies concerning China, which was signed at
Washington on February 6, 1922.81 This Article reads as follows:
“With a view to applying more effectually the principles of the
Open Door or equality of opportunity in China for the trade and
industry of all nations, the Contracting Powers, other than China,
agree that they will not seek, nor support their respective
nationals in seeking—
(a) any arrangement which might purport to establish in
favor of their interests any general superiority of rights
with respect to commercial or economic development in
any designated region of China;
(b) any such monopoly or preference as would deprive
the nationals of any other Power of the right of
undertaking any legitimate trade or industry in China,
or of participating with the Chinese Government, or
with any local authority, in any category of public
enterprise, or which by reason of its scope, duration or
geographical extent is calculated to frustrate the
practical application of the principle of equal
opportunity.
“It is understood that the foregoing stipulations of this Article are
not to be so construed as to prohibit the acquisition of such
properties or rights as may be necessary to the conduct of a
particular commercial, industrial or financial undertaking or to the
encouragement of invention and research.

“China undertakes to be guided by the principles stated in the
foregoing stipulations of this Article in dealing with applications
for economic rights and privileges from Governments and
nationals of all foreign countries, whether parties to the present
Treaty or not.”
 
It should be added that the attitude taken by the United States Government
in connection with the claims of the Mitsui Company for the exclusive right
to establish radio stations in China is similar to the attitude assumed by it in
connection with the contract entered into by the Great Northern Telegraph
Company and the Chinese Government, whereby the former claimed a
monopoly of cable communications in China.82
The Japanese Government stated in its memorandum of June 1, 1925, that it
appeared that the American counter-project was intended to secure for the
Federal Company the exclusive control of all radio stations to be
constructed by the Company. With reference to this point the attention of
the Japanese Government is invited to the terms of the contract between the
Federal Telegraph Company of California and the Chinese Government of
January 8, 1921,83 and the supplementary agreement of September 19,
1921,84 which provide that the stations to be erected under the contract are
to be managed by a joint partnership entitled the “China-Federal Radio
Administration” rather than placed under the exclusive control of the
Federal Company.
The Japanese Government also stated that it appeared that the American
counter-project was intended to secure for the Federal Company a
monopoly of the radio service between the United States and China. In
making this statement the Government of Japan apparently had reference to
Article XIV of the supplementary agreement of September 19, 1921,
between the Federal Telegraph Company of California and the Chinese
Government, which reads as follows:
“The Government agrees that all moneys and income accruing to
it from the operation of said stations or from the operation of the

China-Federal Radio Administration shall be immediately upon
the receipt thereof deposited in the Asia Banking Corporation, or
such other bank or banking institution as may be from time or
(sic: to?) time designated by the Federal Telegraph Company, and
that all radio messages from China and for the United States of
America are to be handled exclusively by the Federal Telegraph
Company for a time twenty (20) years from the date of the
completion of the last station erected and provided for under the
agreement of the 8th day of January 1921. It is further agreed that
for and throughout said twenty (20) year period, the land upon
which said stations are constructed, and all buildings and
improvements thereon, shall be kept and maintained free and
clear of all liens, charges, and incumbrances of every kind and
character whatsoever excepting only the lien of the bonds hereby
secured, and the obligations of the Government to the Federal
Telegraph Company.”
The meaning of the clause in this Article which reads “that all radio
messages from China and for the United States of America are to be
handled exclusively by the Federal Company for a time twenty (20) years
from the date of the completion of the last station erected and provided for
under the agreement of the 8th day of January, 1921” is that all radio
messages transmitted to the United States by the China-Federal Radio
Administration, from the stations constructed for that Administration by the
Federal Company, are to be received and handled in the United States
exclusively by the Federal Company for the period specified. It is in fact
merely an arrangement by which the stations in China, in which the Federal
Company is interested jointly with the Chinese Government, are, as regards
their traffic to the United States, to work in circuit with the stations operated
in the United States by that company. It is obvious that such an arrangement
does not operate to exclude the possibility of operation of other circuits that
may be established. The United States Government does not therefore
conceive that a traffic arrangement of this character constitutes a monopoly
or exclusive privilege, nor that it would constitute a monopoly in China, or,
it may be remarked, in the United States. The Japanese Government is
perhaps aware that, from the beginning of the Federal Company’s
negotiations with the Chinese Government, the United States Government

has given appropriate diplomatic support upon the express condition that
the project should involve no monopolistic element or abridgment of
equality of opportunity. The Japanese Government may be assured that this
will continue to be the policy of the Government of the United States.
The Japanese Government observed that it was not convinced of the
immediate need of China for two high powered radio stations for external
communications; that the expenditure charged to China could not fail to
intensify the strain on her already overburdened treasury; and that
experience had shown that radio communication is not financially
profitable, at least for a number of years after its initiation. These questions
have not been discussed between the Governments of the United States and
China since the Federal Company’s project has been regarded as a purely
commercial enterprise. In this connection the views of the American
interests concerned, with which views the Government of the United States
is disposed to agree, are set forth in a memorandum attached hereto as an
enclosure.
 
In a memorandum of the Japanese Ambassador dated December 24, 1924,85
the Japanese Government made the following proposals:
“That the principles governing the Consortium be applied to the
contracts secured by the Mitsui Company and the Federal
Telegraph Company.
“These contracts are thus to be pooled and superseded by a loan
agreement for wireless enterprise in China of the same nature as
ordinary railway loans that may be undertaken by the
Consortium.
“The parties to the proposed loan agreement shall be, on the one
side, the Chinese Government and, on the other, a financial group
representing American, British, French and Japanese interests.
The financial group is to consist of the Federal Telegraph
Company, the Marconi Company, the French General Wireless
Telegraph Company and the Mitsui Company, and is to be

constituted upon full communication and understanding with the
Consortium.
“The operation of wireless telegraphy in question shall be placed
under the exclusive control of the Chinese Government, while the
financial group is to supply the services of engineers and
accountants in order to assist China in the enterprise.”
Referring to the Japanese Government’s proposals above quoted the
Government of the United States in a memorandum dated February 28,
1925,86 stated that it was in doubt whether the arrangement suggested by
the Japanese Government would be acceptable to the Chinese Government
and that it desired to be reassured on that point before giving further
consideration thereto. The Japanese Government stated in its memorandum
of June 1, 1925, that it was hoped that the terms of its proposals, which it
believed to be more in accord with the interests of the Chinese than were
the terms of the American proposal, would eventually be found acceptable
to the Chinese.
Since the date of the Japanese Embassy’s memorandum of June 1, 1925, the
Government of the United States has been informed that the Japanese
Government, in response to a proposal of the Chinese Government of
August 28, 1925,87 for a joint American-Japanese radio loan, informed the
Chinese Government that it found in that proposal an acceptance of the
proposals which it had made to the United States on December 24, 1924,
which would take in the interests of all of the Powers concerned in this
question. The Government of the United States would be interested to know
what response the Chinese Government has made to this suggestion of the
Japanese Government.
The views of the American interests concerned in regard to the proposals of
the Japanese Government are attached as a second enclosure to this
memorandum.
 
The Government of the United States has carefully considered the
arguments of the American interests concerned respecting the consortium

proposed by the Japanese Government. It is disposed to believe those
arguments are sound. It is further disposed to view with favor the
suggestions of the American interests concerned of a cooperative
arrangement by which the Mitsui and the Federal Stations completed and
brought up to date might coordinate their efforts to obtain the best operating
efficiency, then pool their gross receipts and divide them on an equitable
basis. The Government of the United States would venture to express the
hope that the Japanese Government will believe that such an arrangement
for cooperation would better serve the interests of the Japanese company
concerned than would the proposal of an international consortium, or at
least that the suggested arrangement for cooperation may furnish an
acceptable basis for discussion between the parties financially concerned.
In this connection the Government of the United States would recall that on
September 25, 1926, the Japanese Ambassador had a conversation with the
Secretary of State, during the course of which he stated that the Japanese
Minister at Peking had lately had a conversation with the new Minister for
Foreign Affairs for China concerning these matters and that the Chinese
Minister for Foreign Affairs had suggested that it would be well for Japan,
the United States and China first to have a conference on these matters
before taking the question up with the other Governments. The Government
of the United States in setting forth its views with regard to the points raised
in the Japanese Government’s memorandum of June 1 and in furnishing
somewhat at length, in the enclosures hereto attached, the views of the
American interests concerned has desired to indicate how fully it is in
accord with the suggestion of the Japanese Government that the parties
financially interested should meet together in an attempt to work out in
common accord a solution that will serve the lasting interest of China and
obtain friendly cooperation among interested parties. It would therefore
express the hope that in the suggestions herein made the Japanese
Government will find an acceptable basis for the discussions which all
parties apparently believe to be desirable.
The discussions regarding those matters have heretofore been limited to
Japanese, Chinese and Americans. The Government of the United States
would therefore suggest that a meeting be held to discuss the proposal
above outlined and that each meeting, at least in the first instance, be

limited to accredited representatives of the Chinese Ministry of
Communications, the Mitsui Company and the Federal Telegraph Company
of Delaware.
 
The Radio Corporation of America, while financially and technically
interested in the problems to be discussed, is not a party to the Federal
contracts. This Corporation has indicated a desire to entertain as its guests
in the City of New York accredited representatives of the Chinese Ministry
of Communications, the Mitsui Company and the Federal Telegraph
Company of Delaware that they may there study wireless communication
systems and find, if happily they may, a means whereby the Japanese and
American interests may by cooperation between their respective projects
amicably solve the wireless difficulty which has for so long been the subject
of discussion between the Governments of China, Japan and the United
States. If the Government of the United States may be informed that the
foregoing suggestion is acceptable to the Governments of Japan and China,
it will be pleased to communicate that fact to the Radio Corporation of
America to the end that invitations may be accordingly issued.
WASHINGTON, October 28, 1926.
[Enclosure 1]
If China depends for overseas wireless service upon the Peking station
alone, the development of such service will be retarded to the injury of
China and as well to the injury of other countries and their nationals. The
Peking station is not thought to be technically efficient; it is badly located;
but a small portion of China’s overseas traffic originates in the Peking area;
the station must depend for the greater part of its traffic upon the land lines,
incurring in consequence for its messages additional expense, delay and
liability to mutilation. The station cannot furnish effective competition with
the cable and perhaps could never develop revenues sufficient to pay for
itself. Moreover one receiver and one transmitter alone could not establish
efficient circuits with the many wireless stations of the world. The delays
on such circuits would discourage not encourage development of the
service. On the other hand, the American interests concerned believe that a

comprehensive and efficient wireless service can be formed in China by
cooperation between the Mitsui and the Federal projects both completed
and brought up to date; that such a system would prove profitable and
produce revenues sufficient to pay for both projects. The American
companies, disposed to enter into such a cooperative arrangement, are
willing to put large sums of their own money to the hazard of the
correctness of their beliefs. In the opinion of the American interests
concerned the Japanese Government, entertaining the fears it does
concerning the strain upon China’s treasury the completion of these projects
would entail, does not correctly evaluate the increased revenues sure to
result from new facilities of high efficiency. American communication
companies find that facilities newly created, create revenues by which they
are sustained and stimulate rather than diminish the revenues of those
facilities which existed before. And further, the question of whether the
results to be expected would justify the expenditures which must be made,
would appear rather to be one for decision by the parties financially
interested, who, better than their Governments, can determine the
soundness of their business arrangements.
[Enclosure 2]
The Japanese Government suggests as a solution the cancellation of the
Mitsui and the Federal contracts and the organization of a consortium
including Japanese, British, French and American radio interests to make
with the Chinese Government whatever arrangements may be found
necessary for the establishment and operation of China’s overseas wireless
service. In its memorandum the Japanese Government points out that the
Mitsui Company has completed its station at Peking. The American
companies for their part would point out that the completion of the Mitsui
station is the very fact which would make this suggestion in its present form
impossible of acceptance. Cancellation of the contract would not cancel the
completed station. The Mitsui Company would properly expect payment for
the station it had built. Under its contract with the Chinese Government
payment is the only right the Mitsui Company has. The monopoly asserted
is only a security for that right. If through the organization of an
international consortium the Mitsui Company should secure payment, then
all its rights under its arrangement with the Chinese Government would

have been realized. In exchange for this, the Japanese Government suggests
the Federal Company shall surrender all its rights under its contracts. On
further consideration the Japanese Government will doubtless agree that
acceptance of this suggestion would result in the complete abandonment by
the Federal Company of its legal position relative to the establishment of
radio stations in China without any corresponding concession on the part of
the Mitsui Company. Moreover the Japanese Government has perhaps not
had opportunity correctly to estimate the difficulties of developing overseas
wireless communication through the instrumentality of a consortium. The
negotiation of entirely new arrangements with China, representatives of five
nations participating in such negotiations; the construction of wireless
installations when four interested parties would each strive with the others
to furnish equipment; the hodgepodge construction resulting from the
compromises inevitable in such situation; the operation of wireless stations
by a management composed of representatives of five different nationalities
each, controlled from a different world center; the poor quality and the high
cost of service resulting from arrangements so made and stations so built
and operated would apparently preclude such method furnishing the
practical and helpful solution so much desired by the Japanese Government.
In the opinion of the American interests concerned the best sort of
consortium would be one of final results. Many grave difficulties would be
avoided if the Japanese and the Americans would complete their respective
projects, bring them up to date, thereafter separately manage them
according to the provision of their several contracts but coordinate their
efforts to obtain the best operating efficiency, then pool their gross receipts
and divide them on an equitable basis. The American interests concerned
would be disposed to enter such a consortium. They believe it would
furnish an efficient wireless service and would provide revenues to pay for
all the installations. Cooperation is normal in radio. Japanese and
Americans successfully cooperate in maintaining the Japanese-American
circuit. They could be mutually helpful in their wireless projects in China.
74 Copies of this memorandum and its enclosures were sent to the
Ambassadors in Great Britain and France, Nov. 4, 1926.
75 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 906.

76 See telegram No. 117, July 1, 1925, from the Ambassador in Japan, ibid .,
p. 909.
77 MacMurray, Treaties, 1912–1919, vol. II, pp. 1519–1523.
78 See ibid., p. 1519 n.
79 Miller, Treaties, vol. 4, p. 559.
80 Foreign Relations , 1908, pp. 510–512 .
81 For text of treaty, see ibid., 1922, vol. I, p. 276.
82 See ibid., 1921, vol. I, pp. 414–416 , 442 ; for text of contract of the Great
Northern Telegraph Co., see MacMurray, Treaties, 1894–1911, vol. I, p. 59.
83 See telegram No. 14, Jan. 8, 1921, from the Minister in China, Foreign
Relations, 1921, vol. I, p. 408; for text of contract, see List of Contracts of
American Nationals With the Chinese Government, etc., annex viii
(Government Printing Office, 1925).
84 See telegram No. 37, Sept. 27, 1921, from the Minister in China, Foreign
Relations, 1921, vol. I, p. 450; for text of supplementary agreement, see List
of Contracts, etc.
85 Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, p. 890.
86 Ibid. , p. 900.
87 See telegram No. 360, Aug. 29, 1925, from the Minister in China, ibid. ,
p. 919.

893.74/730b: Telegram
[Document 841]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, October 28, 1926—noon.
251. Department’s 232 of October 16, 1 p.m. Following memorandum will
be handed today to Japanese Ambassador: [Here follows the memorandum,
dated October 28, to the Japanese Ambassador, and its enclosures, printed
supra.]
You will leave a copy of the above with the Chinese Ministry of Foreign
Affairs accompanied by a memorandum somewhat along the following
lines: stating that this is a copy of a memorandum which has been handed to
the Japanese Ambassador at Washington in reply to his memorandum of
June 1, 1925, and state that you have been instructed to invite attention of
the Chinese Foreign Office to the proposal of the Radio Corporation of
America to invite duly accredited representatives of the Chinese Ministry of
Communications, Mitsui Company and the Federal Telegraph Company of
Delaware to meet in the City of New York for the purpose of making a
study of wireless communication systems and of finding a means whereby
Japanese and American interests concerned may by cooperation between
their respective projects amicably solve the wireless difficulty which has for
so long been the subject of discussion between the Governments of China,
Japan and the United States. You should remind the Chinese Ministry of
Foreign Affairs that the Federal Telegraph Company of Delaware expects
the Chinese Ministry of Communications to proceed without delay to the
execution of its part of the contract made with the Federal Company. You
should express orally the hope of that Company that the Ministry of
Communications will not make use of this proposal as an excuse for further
delay in the execution of the contract. In your memorandum to the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs you will conclude by asking for an early indication of the
attitude of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of
communications towards this proposal which is in conformity with
suggestions heretofore made to you by Chinese officials, in order that you

may, without loss of time, advise the Department so that it can
communicate the information to the Radio Corporation of America.
KELLOGG

893.74/733: Telegram
[Document 842]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, November 4, 1926—11 a.m.
[Received November 4—6:45 a.m.]
529. Department’s 251, October 28, noon. Copy of Department’s
memorandum to the Japanese Ambassador of October 28 handed by me
yesterday evening to Dr. Koo accompanied by memorandum pursuant to
Department’s instructions. I expressed orally the hope of the radio company
that the Ministry of Communications would not make use of this proposal
as an excuse for further delay in the execution of the contract and pressed
Dr. Koo to reply at his very earliest convenience. He stated he would take
up the matter immediately with this in view.
MAYER

Disapproval by the Department of
State 
of 
proposed 
grant 
of 
oil
monopoly by the Canton Government
to the Standard Oil Company
[843] The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Canton, December 21, 1925.
893.6363/59
[844] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 7, 1926—3 p.m. [Received January 7—7:20 a.m.]
893.6363/58: Telegram
[845] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, January 11, 1926—9 p.m.
893.6363/58: Telegram
[846] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, January 30, 1926—3 p.m. [Received January 30—5:42 a.m.]
893.6363/60: Telegram

[847] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, March 16, 1926—10 a.m. [Received March 16—6:22 a.m.]
893.6363/62: Telegram
[848] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, April 6, 1926—1 p.m.
893.6363/62: Telegram
[849] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, June 7, 1926—8 p.m. [Received June 7—8:25 a.m.]
893.00/7441: Telegram
[850] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, July 6, 1926—3 p.m. [Received July 6—8:30 a.m.]
893.6363/70: Telegram

893.6363/59
[Document 843]
The Consul General at Canton (Jenkins) to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)89
CANTON, December 21, 1925.
No. 352
SIR: I have the honor to refer to my despatch No. 333 of December 3,
1925,90 and previous correspondence concerning the Canton government’s
monopoly on petroleum products and to report that Mr. Cameron, the
general manager in South China of the Standard Oil Company of New
York, recently had a conference with Mr. T. V. Soong, Minister of Finance
and head of the Canton government’s Oil Monopoly Bureau.
Mr. Cameron came to Canton from Hongkong at the express invitation of
Mr. Soong. Mr. Soong made it quite plain that the Canton regime intended
to continue its monopoly on petroleum products. He admitted that the price
of oil was high and that the government was experiencing difficulty in
obtaining an adequate supply. He asserted, however, that a very
considerable revenue was coming in and that he expected to increase this as
time went on.
Mr. Soong then intimated to Mr. Cameron that the Canton government
would like to enter into some agreement with the Standard Oil Company by
which the company would supply most, if not all, of the oil and gasoline
consumed in this district, and might at the same time undertake the
distribution of petroleum products under the local government’s
supervision. Mr. Cameron explained that he had no authority to discuss a
proposal of this sort but promised to refer Mr. Soong’s suggestions to the
Standard Oil Company’s general offices in New York.

Subsequent to this interview Mr. Parker, assistant general manager in South
China, and Mr. Clark, the company’s manager in Canton, had another
conference with Mr. Soong in order to have a clearer idea of the local
government’s proposal. Mr. Clark has told me confidentially that the local
government’s offer will be submitted in detail to Mr. Cole, one of the
company’s directors now inspecting in the Far East. Mr. Parker will go to
Shanghai to meet Mr. Cole and confer with the company’s general manager
for North China at the same time.
Mr. Clark said that he did not think the company would consider the Canton
government’s proposal. He declared he was opposed to it and that both Mr.
Cameron and the manager for North China were of the same opinion.
Mr. Clark said that although the company might be able to make a
profitable arrangement with the local government, it should not be
overlooked that the acceptance of such a plan as the Canton authorities now
propose would be construed as a tacit approval of the monopoly, which
would undoubtedly spread to other provinces in China. In addition the
British and other American companies would be well within their rights in
protesting vigorously against any such arrangement because it would
effectively shut them out of a legitimate market.
 
In connection with the Canton government’s proposals it may be interesting
to the Legation to know that the imports of Russian oil from Vladivostock
have been as follows:
1925
October
120,450 gals.
November
131,550
“
December 1 to 17th, 92,500
“
It is admitted that this Russian oil is not satisfactory because its quality is
inferior to American and British oils. It is also interesting to note that the
quantity of American oil imported by the Monopoly Bureau from the
Pacific coast is now increasing rapidly, so that the indications are Russian
oil will ultimately be forced out of the market. These importations are being

made by independent companies, including general commission merchants,
who have not hitherto dealt in kerosene. It is understood that at present the
imports of oil are less than a fourth of what they should be under normal
conditions.
I have [etc.]
DOUGLAS JENKINS
89 Copy transmitted to the Department by the consul general as an enclosure
in his despatch No. 419, Dec. 21, 1925; received Jan. 16, 1926.
90 Not printed.

893.6363/58: Telegram
[Document 844]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 7, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received January 7—7:20 a.m.]
10. Following from American consul [general,] Canton:
“January 5, 2 p.m. Referring to my despatch number 352 of
December 21st, I have been informed Standard Oil Company is
seriously considering accepting local government’s offer to
operate oil monopoly. Perhaps there is no alternative, but such
step would seem to be very unfortunate because of the effect upon
the rest of China and probable complications with other oil
companies.
General Boulder [Chiang Kai-shek] of Whampoa Cadets has
returned to Canton. It is understood that he has compromised his
differences with other party leaders. Reliably informed Borodin is
leaving Canton shortly, probably for Moscow.”
2. To which I have replied as follows:
“January 7, 3 p.m. (1) Your January 5, 2 p.m. The Legation could
not countenance or support any arrangement between the socalled
Canton Government and an American Company imposing or
based upon restraint on trade contrary to treaty and to the
established policy of the United States Government as concerns
monopolies.
(2) You should informally advise the local representative of the
Standard Oil Company in the above sense.

(3) Iam repeating your January 5, 2 p.m. and this telegram to the
Department.”

MacMurray

893.6363/58: Telegram
[Document 845]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, January 11, 1926—9 p.m.
14. Your 10 January 7, 3 p.m. Your instruction to Consul General at Canton
is approved. Any such monopolistic arrangement as described in your
paragraph 1 could not be countenanced or supported by this Government in
view of its established policy as set forth specifically in Article III of the
Nine Power Treaty of February 6, 1922.91
KELLOGG
91 Foreign Relations, 1922, vol. I, p. 279.

893.6363/60: Telegram
[Document 846]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 30, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received January 30—5:42 a.m.]
59. American consul at Swatow telegraphs that Swatow authorities have
instituted oil monopoly similar to that in operation at Canton—see Canton’s
despatch 366, October 27th, to Department.92
MACMURRAY
92 Not printed.

893.6363/62: Telegram
[Document 847]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, March 16, 1926—10 a.m.
[Received March 16—6:22 a.m.]
131. My 10, January 7, 3 p.m.
1. American consul general, Canton, has transmitted information
obtained from Standard Oil Company and representative there
and understood to be confidential to the effect tentative agreement
for the resumption of business has been worked out in detail
subject to confirmation by company’s head office in New York as
well as by Canton Government. The plan does not contemplate a
monopoly nor action by company as agent of Government; nor
any signed agreement or undertaking on the part of company. The
undertaking if actually arrived at apparently will be that Canton
Government will issue regulations for importation and
distribution of oil providing for internal revenue tax; that
immediately after promulgation of regulations, company will
resume sale of oil to be taxed by local authorities as it leaves
company’s warehouses. Tax will of course fall upon Chinese
consumer and not American company although it will be a gross
violation of existing treaty rights (see Canton’s despatch No. 387,
February 18, to the Legation; copy to the Department.95
2. While conscious of the difficulties of the American oil trade in
Kwangtung and prepared to support any proper measures for its
relief, I cannot but consider that it would be extremely regrettable
if such representative American interests were to compound with
the Canton authorities in disregard of treaty provisions by an
arrangement which would undermine constant efforts of our
Government to prevent illegal taxation of American trade in
China. The Legation’s position in endeavoring to protect

American business interests from unlawful restrictions and
exactions is compromised whenever those interests enter into
arrangements recognizing those restrictions. I venture to suggest
that this matter be taken up with the Standard Oil Company in the
sense of the foregoing.
MACMURRAY
95 Not printed.

893.6363/62: Telegram
[Document 848]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, April 6, 1926—1 p.m.
77. Your 131, March 16, 10 A.M. Department prefers to take no action in
matter in the absence of a request from interested firm. In this connection
see Department’s telegram No. 298 of November 17, 6 p.m. 1921.95
KELLOGG
95 Not printed.

893.00/7441: Telegram
[Document 849]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, June 7, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received June 7—8:25 a.m.]
241. My 239, June 3, noon.95 Following from American consul general at
Canton:
“June 5, noon. Canton regime has appointed Eugene Ch’en, T. V.
Soong and Chan Kung-pok to negotiate with Hongkong for the
settlement of the strike. Government has ordered also the
abolition of the oil monopoly on June 15th, but it is understood
high stamp tax will be retained.
Office of Provincial Commissioner of Foreign Affairs has been
abolished and Ministry of Foreign Affairs will communicate
direct with consuls.”
MACMURRAY
95 Not printed.

893.6363/70: Telegram
[Document 850]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, July 6, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received July 6—8:30 a.m.]
274. My 131, March 16, 10 a.m., and your 77, April 6, 1 p.m. Following
from American consul general, Canton, July 2, 2 p.m.:
“July 2, 2 p.m. Standard Oil Company is about to resume sale of
oil under agreement by Cantonese regime requiring the company
to apply for license and submit to the presence of Chinese tax
official in the warehouse to check sales, affix stamp, et cetera.”
MACMURRAY

Attitude of the United States toward
the 
demand 
of 
the 
Chinese
Government for the recall of the Soviet
Ambassador in China96
96 For previous correspondence concerning relations with the Soviet
Ambassador, see Foreign Relations, 1925, vol. I, pp. 636 ff.
[851] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, August 18, 1926—noon. [Received August 18—9:45 a: m.]
701.6193/84: Telegram
[852] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
Washington, August 19, 1926—6 p.m.
701.6193/84: Telegram
[853] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
Peking, September 1, 1926—8 p.m. [Received September 1—11:12 a.m.]
701.6193/85: Telegram

701.6193/84: Telegram
[Document 851]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, August 18, 1926—noon.
[Received August 18—9:45 a: m.]
331. 1. I was approached yesterday in behalf of the nominal Minister for
Foreign Affairs by a member of the Foreign Office, Wei, who informed me
that the Soviet Government has been notified by this administration that
Karakhan no longer is persona grata as Ambassador from Russia, but that
his recall is likely to be refused by Moscow. Demands have persistently
been made by Moscow that information be given to it of the reason alleged
against him. The Peking authorities, while convinced Karakhan has abused
his diplomatic status by meddling in Chinese domestic politics and by
indulging in subversive propaganda, have refused to state their grounds for
desiring that he be recalled or transferred and so make the question a matter
of debate.
2. Wei had been sent to me, and to the Senior Minister and the British
Legation, to inquire what view we would take of the matter if the Chinese
Foreign Office gave Karakhan his passport and, in case the Ambassador
refused to leave the security he has in his Embassy in the Diplomatic
Quarter, insisted on dealing with his staff instead of with him.
3. My reply was that it must not be assumed from the fact that my
Government had no official relations with the regime of the Soviets that we
are hostile to Russia. We are merely aloof. So far as I as American Minister
am concerned, I do not have any relationship with Ambassador Karakhan
except in his capacity as dean of the diplomatic body, which he is in
consequence of his acceptance as Russian Ambassador by the Chinese. If
his functions as such were to be terminated by the Chinese, the question for
us would be equally determined by that act. His status is a matter wholly

between the Chinese and the Russians. We are completely unconcerned,
even though we may deplore the fact that an attitude of active hostility has
been taken openly by the Soviet representative in regard to what we deem
our just rights in China.
4. A rather outspoken conversation followed, in the course of which I
intimated that in case the Chinese attempted Karakhan’s removal by force,
it was ironical that we who uphold the Boxer protocol97 would have to give
protection to Karakhan, for he has proclaimed that protocol iniquitous and
obsolete although he insists occasionally upon participating in the privileges
conferred by it.
5. In addition I made reference to the possible position of the Russians that
the present Peking regime lacked competence to declare a diplomatic
representative to be persona non grata. Wei said it was not impossible that
the Russians might take such a position but he thought they could not do so
consistently, not only in view of their Manchurian interests but of the
attitude they have adopted hitherto. I intimated that, whatever attitude
toward the present Peking regime we ourselves might have, it might well
be, if in fact the Russians had dealt with that regime as the Government of
China, that any questioning by them of the competence of the regime to
dismiss the unwelcome Russian Ambassador might be considered as
estopped.
6. I trust you approve of my views in this matter.
MACMURRAY
97 of September 7, 1901; Foreign Relations, 1901, appendix (Affairs in
China), p. 312.

701.6193/84: Telegram
[Document 852]
The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in China
(MacMurray)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, August 19, 1926—6 p.m.
168. Your telegram number 331 of August 18th, noon. The question of the
Soviet Ambassador’s status concerns only China and the Soviet
Government. No doubt as to this fact should be left in the minds of the
Chinese.
HARRISON

701.6193/85: Telegram
[Document 853]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
PEKING, September 1, 1926—8 p.m.
[Received September 1—11:12 a.m.]
367. My 331, August 18, noon. I am informed by Admiral Tsai that
Karakhan, in consequence of Chinese representations, is to be withdrawn in
a few days from Peking.98
MACMURRAY
98 L. Karakhan, Soviet Ambassador in China, sailed from Shanghai Sept.
26, 1926.

Right of American citizens to bring
suits in Chinese courts against the
Government of China
[854] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
Peking, October 22, 1926. [Received November 24.]
811.0433/63

811.0433/63
[Document 854]
The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, October 22, 1926.
[Received November 24.]
No. 788
SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Department’s
instruction No. 307 of August 20, 1926,” requesting me to endeavor to
obtain information as to whether citizens of the United States may bring
suit in China against the Government of China. In reply I have the honor to
state that at the sixth meeting of the Commission on Extraterritoriality held
on February 19, 1926 (see page 11 of the minutes)99 the American Delegate
inquired in what manner claims might be filed against the Chinese
Government. To this inquiry Dr. Wang Chung-hui, the Chinese Delegate,
replied as follows:
“In China the Treasury is a public juristic person. It represents the
state. Now from the standpoint of private law, it is capable of
having rights and is fully subject to liability and may, therefore,
be sued even without its consent. A claim against the Treasury
may be enforced by legal proceedings in the same manner and by
the same procedure as against private individuals.”
Article XVI of the Regulations relating to Civil Procedure provides as
follows:
“General forum of the Treasury shall be determined by the place
in which the public office representing the Treasury in action is
situate; that of any public juristic person other than the Treasury,
by the place in which the office of such public juristic person is
situate.”

 
In view of the present informal relations existing between the United States
and the Peking Régime, I did not consider it advisable to make an official
inquiry regarding the matter. However, a member of the Legation inquired
informally of one of the Judges of the Chinese Supreme Court, and his
reply, a copy of which is transmitted herewith,1 is to the effect that an
American citizen may bring suit in China against the Government of China
either in the Higher Court of Justice or the District Court of Justice.
From the foregoing it would appear that in theory an American is entitled to
bring suit in the Chinese courts against the Government of China or against
one of its departments. However, in actual practice it would probably be
very difficult for an American to obtain a judgment, or to secure execution
thereof, if judgment were rendered in his favor. …
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I have [etc.]
FERDINAND MAYER
99 Not printed.
1 Not printed.

Status of persons of Chinese race in
China claiming American citizenship
[855] The Secretary of State to the Consul in Chargé at Hongkong
(Carleton)
Washington, January 5, 1925.
151.10 Wong Chong-sing
[856] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, February 20, 1926.
130 Ng Ming
[857] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, April 19, 1926.
393.1121 Chu Shea-wai
[858] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
Washington, May 20, 1926.
130 Ng Ming

151.10 Wong Chong-sing
[Document 855]
The Secretary of State to the Consul in Chargé at Hongkong
(Carleton)
WASHINGTON, January 5, 1925.
SIR: The Department has received your despatch No. 621 of October 15,
1924,1 upon the subject of the visa of certificates of identity held by
American citizens of the Chinese race, and in this connection the
Department encloses a copy of a letter received from Mr. August J. Knapp1
stating that one Wong Mow, a native born American citizen of Chinese
descent, has a minor son named Wong Chong Sing, residing in China whom
he desires to bring to the United States but that some difficulty has been
experienced in obtaining the necessary visa from your office.
You are informed that a person of the class above described, who may claim
American citizenship under the provision of Section 1993 of the Revised
Statutes of the United States, may present to the Consulate General his own
affidavit setting forth that his blood father was born in the United States,
and giving the place and date of the affiant’s birth. This affidavit should be
accompanied by documents bearing the endorsement of a qualified
representative of the Immigration Service, Department of Labor, showing
that Department’s findings as to the father’s status. Upon presentation of
such an affidavit and accompanying document, the consular officer is
authorized to issue a certificate under the seal of the Consulate General,
giving the name of the person concerned and showing the nature of the
evidence submitted to establish his father’s birth in the United States. To the
certificate the Consul should attach and certify thereto a photographic
likeness of the person to whom the certificate is issued. Such certificate
may then be used as a travel document for use in returning from China to
the United States. The question of the admission to the United States of the
bearer of such a document is one which must be determined upon his arrival
at an American port of entry, and the person to whom the certificate is

issued should be made clearly to understand this point. Your attention is
invited in the above connection to the Department’s telegrams of October
11, 1919, and January 20, 1920, to your office upon this general subject.2
With respect to the recommendation contained in your dispatch under
acknowledgment that finger prints be required on certificates of identity and
on the applications of Chinese persons for passports or registration, you are
informed that the Department is not disposed to concur in this
recommendation, since it is believed that such a practice would be
calculated to arouse more or less complaint on the part of Chinese
Americans who might be subject thereto.
I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
J. V. A. MACMURRAY
1 Not printed.
1 Not printed.
2 Neither printed.

130 Ng Ming
[Document 856]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, February 20, 1926.
No. 159
SIR: There is enclosed a copy of the Department’s instruction of January 5,
1925, concerning the procedure which should be followed in cases of
children of native born American citizens of Chinese descent, who are
residing in China and who may claim American citizenship under the
provision of Section 1993 of the Revised Statutes of the United States.
You are requested to circularize the instruction above mentioned to all
consular officers in China.
I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
JOSEPH C. GREW

393.1121 Chu Shea-wai
[Document 857]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, April 19, 1926.
No. 202
SIR: The Department has received your despatches No. 325 of December 7,
1925 and No. 388 of January 7, 1926, and their enclosures,3 in regard to the
arrest and detention of Chu Shea-wai, an American citizen of Chinese race,
by the military authorities at Canton.
The Department notes from the passport record of Chu Shea-wai that he
was born at New York City on February 13, 1903, that he last left the
United States on August 18, 1921, since which time he has apparently been
residing at Hongkong and Canton; that on October 6, 1923, he applied at
Canton for a Departmental passport, which was issued to him on November
22, 1923; and that at the time of his arrest this passport had not yet expired.
It is further noted that the Consul General at Canton stated in his despatch
No. 321 of November 5, 1925,4 to the Legation that Chu Shea-wai had
many Chinese relatives, that he was living as a Chinese and that he possibly
may have had some connection with politics although there appeared to be
no proof of this. In view of these facts the Department considers that it is
doubtful whether Chu Shea-wai is entitled any longer to receive the
protection of this Government.
It is a generally recognized rule, which may be regarded as a rule of
international law, that when a person who was born with dual nationality is
residing in either of the countries of which he is a national, that country has
a right to assert its claim to him without any interference by the other,
unless perhaps such person, having reached the age of majority, has clearly
elected the nationality of the other country and is only temporarily residing
in the country asserting the claim. Even in the latter case it cannot be
asserted with any degree of confidence that the country in which the person

is found has no right to assert its claim to his nationality and allegiance,
since it may not recognize the principle of election. It is not believed that
extraterritoriality affects this rule. In the present case it seems clear that Chu
Shea-wai, although he is a citizen of the United States, under the law of this
country, because of the fact that he was born in this country, is also a citizen
of China, under the law of that country, because his father was of Chinese
nationality, and it does not appear that the existence of extraterritorial
jurisdiction in China interferes in any way with the right of China to claim
this individual as a Chinese citizen.
 
You will accordingly instruct the Consul General at Canton to take no
further action in the case and to be guided by this instruction when similar
cases arise in the future in his district.
I am [etc.]
For the Secretary of State:
ROBERT E. OLDS
3 None printed.
4 Not printed.

130 Ng Ming
[Document 858]
The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, May 20, 1926.
No. 227
SIR: With reference to the Department’s instruction of February 20, 1926,
concerning the procedure which should be followed in the cases of children
of native born American citizens of Chinese descent who are residing in
China and who may claim American citizenship under the provisions of
Section 1993 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, and with which
was transmitted a copy of the Department’s instruction of January 5, 1925,
concerning the case of Wong Chong Sing, you are informed that the
Department, after carefully considering the cases of persons coming within
the class above mentioned, has reached the conclusion that all persons of
the Chinese race who claim to be American citizens and who are eighteen
years of age or more should be required to apply for passports in the usual
manner. The applications of such persons should be accompanied by all
available evidence to establish the applicant’s identity and claim to
American citizenship and a report by the officer before whom the
application is executed, setting forth in detail the result of such
investigation as he may make concerning the case. Special care should be
exercised in definitely establishing the applicant’s identity. In the cases of
persons who claim American citizenship under the provisions of Section
1993 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, the officer taking the
application should report whether the applicant had evinced a desire to
retain his American citizenship upon reaching eighteen years of age, as
provided by the Act of March 2, 1907,5 and whether during his foreign
residence he has committed any act which resulted in his expatriation or
which indicated a desire to elect Chinese rather than American nationality.
You are requested to circularize this instruction to all consular officers in
China, as supplementing the previous instruction dealing with this question.

I am [etc. ]

For the Secretary of State:
Roserr E. Orns

2 34 Stat. 1228.

Index
Abyssinia. See Permanent Court of International Justice.
Aerial navigation convention. See under Treaties.
Afghanistan, proposed treaty for establishment of diplomatic and
consular relations with United States, 557–560 [Pgs. 557–560 include
portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]
Agreements. See Treaties, conventions, etc.
Albania. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of International
Justice.
Alien Property Custodian, U. S. proposed legislation providing
for disposition of property held by:
Inquiries and discussions as to plans for Austria, 125
[Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98], 128–130
[Pgs. 128–130 include portions of Doc. 100, Doc. 101, and Doc. 102],
131–135 [Pgs. 131–135 include portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and
Doc. 104], 136–140 [Pgs. 136–140 include portions of Doc. 104, Doc.
105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, and Doc. 108]; for Germany, 125–127
[Pgs. 125–127 include portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99,
and Doc. 100], 130–131 [Pgs. 130–131 include portions of Doc. 101,
Doc. 102, and Doc. 103], 135–136 [Pgs. 135–136 include portions of
Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, and Doc. 106]; for Hungary, 125
[Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98], 143–144
[Pgs. 143–144 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]
Mills Bill and other proposals, 125n [Pg. 125 includes
portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98], 127–129 [Pgs. 127–129
include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 130–
134 [Pgs. 130–134 include portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc.
103], 141–142 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 109]

Recommendations of President Coolidge, XXV [Pg. XXV is
part of Message of the president of the United States to Congress,
December 7, 1926]
U. S. Treasury policy, 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 96,
Doc. 97, and Doc. 98], 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of
Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 128–129 [Pgs. 128–129
include portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 144–145 [Pgs. 144–145
include portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]
American league of nations, proposed, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of
Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]
American Red Cross, offer of assistance to civilian population of
Wuchang, China, 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and
Doc. 505]
American 
Unofficial 
Observer, 
Reparation 
Commission,
discontinuance of office, 120–125 [Pgs. 120–125 include portions of Doc.
90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98]
Andrews, Roy Chapman (U. S. citizen), escape from bombing in
China, 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]
Arbitration:
Bolivian-Paraguayan boundary controversy, proposed
submission to United States, 531–534 [Pgs. 531–534 include
portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367]
Tacna-Arica controversy. See Tacna-Arica controversy.
Argentina (see also Tacna-Arica controversy: Good offices):
Reconditioning of battleships by American firm, 562 [Pg. 562
includes portions of Doc. 394, Doc. 395, and Doc. 396]; U. S. representations
for equal treatment of American arms manufacturers with those of
other nations, 561–563 [Pgs. 561–563 include portions of Doc. 393, Doc. 394,
Doc. 395, and Doc. 396]

Arica. See Tacna-Arica controversy.
Armament limitation. See Preparatory Commission for the
Disarmament Conference.
Armenians, Department of State ruling with regard to
presumption of expatriation of naturalized U. S. citizens of
Armenian origin, 553–555 [Pgs. 553–555 include portions of Doc. 387, Doc.
388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390]
Arms and munitions: Embargo on shipments to China, question
of continuation, 733–736 [Pgs. 733–736 include portions of Doc. 604, Doc.
605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]; U. S.
representations to Argentina for equal treatment of American arms
manufacturers with those of other nations, 561–563 [Pgs. 561–563
include portions of Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, and Doc. 396]
Australia. See Permanent Court of International Justice.
Austria. See Alien Property Custodian; Narcotic drugs; and
Permanent Court of International Justice.
Belgium (see also China: Foreign powers and Sino-Belgian
treaty; also Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of International
Justice), attitude toward work of Preparatory Commission for the
Disarmament Conference, 77–78 [Pgs. 77–78 include portions of Doc. 66,
Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69]
Bolívar Congress at Panama. See under Conferences.
Bolivia (see also Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice; also Good offices and Renewal of good
offices under Tacna-Arica controversy): Boundary dispute with
Paraguay, proposed submission of controversy to United States
for arbitration, 531–534 [Pgs. 531–534 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364,
Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367]; U. S. representations regarding oil
concessions containing clauses discriminating against American

citizens, 564–568 [Pgs. 564–568 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc.
399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]
Boundary disputes (see also Tacna-Arica controversy):
Bolivia–Paraguay, submission of controversy to United
States for arbitration, proposed, 531–534 [Pgs. 531–534
include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc.
367]
Brazil–Colombia, proposed treaty fixing boundary,
534–535 [Pgs. 534–535 include portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and
Doc. 368]
Colombia–Peru, question of ratification by Peru of
boundary treaty of Mar. 24, 1922, 534–539 [Pgs. 534–539
include portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370,
Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc.
377]
Costa Rica–Panama, delimitation of boundary, U. S.
representations to Panama concerning Costa Rican
proposal of Dec. 17, 1925, 539–542 [Pgs. 539–542 include
portions of Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]; Panaman
rejection, 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 377,
Doc. 378, and Doc. 379]
Dominican Republic–Haiti: Direct negotiations for
settlement, 543–544 [Pgs. 543–544 include portions of Doc. 378,
Doc. 379, and Doc. 380], 546–547 [Pgs. 546–547 include portions of
Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384]; offer of informal good
offices of United States, 544–545 [Pgs. 544–545 include
portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381]
Boundary treaties:
Brazil–Colombia, proposed, 534–535 [Pgs. 534–535 include
portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368]

Colombia–Peru (Mar. 24, 1922), question of Peruvian
ratification, 534–539 [Pgs. 534–539 include portions of Doc. 366,
Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373,
Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc. 377]
U. S.–Great Britain, boundary waterways, Jan. 11,
1909, 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 583
[Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 416], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc.
417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]
Brazil (see also Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice): Boundary dispute with Colombia, proposed
treaty, 534–535 [Pgs. 534–535 include portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc.
368]; Colombian-Peruvian boundary treaty (Mar. 24, 1922),
renewal of representations to Peru concerning ratification, 536 [Pg.
536 includes portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, and Doc. 371], 537 [Pg. 537
includes portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374]; proposals to
stimulate rubber production in Amazon Valley, 575–577 [Pgs. 575–
577 include portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, and Doc.
410]; proposed treaty of friendship, commerce and consular rights
with United States, negotiations, 569–573 [Pgs. 569–573 include portions
of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]; U. S. naval mission, renewal of contract
signed Nov. 6, 1922, 574–575 [Pgs. 574–575 include portions of Doc. 404,
Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407]
Bulgaria. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice.
Canada (see also Permanent Court of International Justice):
Great Lakes, increased diversion of waters by the
Sanitary District of Chicago:
Inquiries 
and 
protests 
of 
Canadian
Government, 580–585 
[Pgs. 
580–585 
include
portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc.
417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]; U. S. replies, 585–587
[Pgs. 585–587 include portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and

Doc. 419], 589–590 [Pgs. 589–590 include portions of
Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]
Joint Board of Engineers, report, XV [Pg. XV is
part of Message of the president of the United States to
Congress, December 7, 1926], 584 [Pg. 584 includes
portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 589–590 [Pgs. 589–
590 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]
Publication of correspondence, question of,
588–590 [Pgs. 588–590 include portions of Doc. 420,
Doc. 421, and Doc. 422]
Resolution of Legislative Assembly of
Ontario, 582–584 [Pgs. 582–584 include portions of
Doc. 415, Doc. 416, and Doc. 417]
U. S. legislation, proposal for Illinois-
Mississippi waterway, Canadian protests, 582
[Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416],
582–584 [Pgs. 582–584 include portions of Doc. 415,
Doc. 416, and Doc. 417]; U. S. replies, 585–587
[Pgs. 585–587 include portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and
Doc. 419]
Minister at Washington: British proposal for, and U. S.
acceptance, 578–579 [Pgs. 578–579 include portions of Doc. 411,
Doc. 412, and Doc. 413]; appointment, 579–580 [Pgs. 579–580
include portions of Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc.
415]
Proposal for joint discussion with United States of
outstanding questions affecting Great Lakes and their
waterways, 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc.
417], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 419]
St. Lawrence waterway project, report of Joint Board of
Engineers, XV [Pg. XV is part of Message of the president of the United

States to Congress, December 7, 1926], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions
of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 589–590 [Pgs. 589–590 include portions of
Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]
Chile. See Narcotic drugs, Permanent Court of International
Justice, and Tacna-Arica controversy.
China (see also Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice):
Ankuochun, 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 522 and Doc.
523], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]
Antiforeign attitude and demonstrations (see also
Boycotts and strikes and Protection of American
missionary interests, infra), 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of
Doc. 437 and Doc. 438], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 438 and
Doc. 439], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440],
626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475],
634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 487], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of
Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 656–657 [Pgs. 656–657 include
portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, and Doc. 520]
Arms and munitions embargo, question of continuation,
733–736 [Pgs. 733–736 include portions of Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc.
606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611]; of lifting
ban on commercial airplanes, 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of
Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609], 736 [Pg. 736 includes
portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611]
Boycotts and strikes at—
Canton:
British measures against strike
pickets, 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of
Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 723 [Pg. 723
includes portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591],

727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 594,
Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 729 [Pg. 729
includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599];
request for U. S. cooperation, and
U. S. reply, 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions
of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 726–727 [Pgs.
726–727 include portions of Doc. 593, Doc.
594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596]
Compensation of strikers, question
of, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc.
599, Doc. 600, and Doc. 601], 863–864
[Pgs. 863–864 include portions of Doc. 651 and
Doc. 652]
Customs, possibility of seizure by
local authorities, 715 [Pg. 715 includes
portions of Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]
Negotiations and ending of boycott,
665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 532], 674 [Pg.
674 is part of Doc. 538], 721 [Pg. 721
includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587],
722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 588
and Doc. 589], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions
of Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 729
[Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 598 and
Doc. 599], 730–731 [Pgs. 730–731 include
portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc.
602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604], 854 [Pg. 854
includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644],
863–864 [Pgs. 863–864 include portions of
Doc. 651 and Doc. 652]
Reports concerning situation, and
recommendations as to protection
of U. S. interests, 690–693 [Pg. 690 is
part of Doc. 552], 698–699 [Pgs. 698–699

include portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and
Doc. 563], 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of
Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 701–
702 [Pgs. 701–702 include portions of Doc.
565, Doc. 566, and Doc. 567], 704–705
[Pgs. 704–705 include portions of Doc. 570 and
Doc. 571], 714–715 [Pgs. 714–715 include
portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and
Doc. 583], 719–722 [Pgs. 719–722 include
portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc.
586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, and Doc. 589],
724–725 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 592],
727–729 [Pgs. 727–729 include portions of
Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc.
598, and Doc. 599], 730–731 [Pgs. 730–731
include portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc.
601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604]; U.
S. policy, 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of
Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 715 [Pg.
715 includes portions of Doc. 581, Doc. 582,
and Doc. 583], 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions
of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 726 [Pg. 726
includes portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594],
729–730 [Pgs. 729–730 include portions of
Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, and Doc. 601]
Seizures of import cargoes, 714–
715 [Pgs. 714–715 include portions of Doc.
580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]
Standard Oil Co., request for
convoy 
from 
Hongkong 
to
Wuchow, 719–721 [Pgs. 719–721 include
portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc.
586, and Doc. 587]
U. S. naval forces:

Firing upon U. S. S.
Sacramento, protest, 724
[Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 592]
Proposed use to convoy
petroleum, 719–721 [Pgs.
719–721 include portions of Doc.
583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc.
586, 
and 
Doc. 
587]; 
to
maintain communications
between U. S. citizens
and ships in harbor, 726
[Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc.
593 and Doc. 594], 727–728
[Pgs. 727–728 include portions of
Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, and
Doc. 597], 729–730 [Pgs. 729–
730 include portions of Doc. 598,
Doc. 599, Doc. 600, and Doc.
601]; to protect landings of
cargoes, 
715 
[Pg. 
715
includes portions of Doc. 581,
Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]; to
seize strike picket boats,
723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of
Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 724
[Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 592],
725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 592]
U. 
S. 
policy 
toward
British 
request 
for
cooperation, 723 [Pg. 723
includes portions of Doc. 590 and
Doc. 591], 726–727 [Pgs. 726–
727 include portions of Doc. 593,
Doc. 594, Doc. 595, and Doc.
596]

Hankow: Disinclination of United States to
intervene to prevent paralyzing of Chinese
customs service by strike, 964–966 [Pgs. 964–
966 include portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and
Doc. 744]; protection of foreign interests during
strikes, question of, 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions
of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 656 [Pg. 656
includes portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518];
strike of Standard Oil Co. employees, 660 [Pg.
660 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]
Swatow, end of strike of employees of
Standard Oil Co., 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of
Doc. 596 and Doc. 597]
Tientsin, strikes in rug factories, 715–719 [Pgs.
715–719 include portions of Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583,
and Doc. 584]
Canton. See Canton regime and Protection of American
missionary interests, infra; also under Boycotts and
strikes, supra.
Canton regime (see also Taxation and Yangtze Valley,
infra; also under Recognition, infra): Disapproval by
Department of State of proposed grant of oil monopoly
to Standard Oil Co., 1092–1097 [Pgs. 1092–1097 include
portions of Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846,
Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, and Doc. 851]; opposition
to Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff,
844–846 [Pgs. 844–846 include portions of Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc.
637, and Doc. 638], 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 639], 849–853
[Pgs. 849–853 include portions of Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc.
642, and Doc. 643], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 643 and
Doc. 644], views of U. S. Minister and of consul general
at Canton as to U. S. policy, 690–693 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc.
552], 697–698 [Pgs. 697–698 include portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559,
Doc. 560, Doc. 561, and Doc. 562], 703–707 [Pgs. 703–707 include

portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, and Doc. 572], 708
[Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 712 [Pg. 712
includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577], 729 [Pg. 729 includes
portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 652],
867–869 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 654]
Central Government. See Provisional Government,
infra.
Chang Tso-lin (see also Civil war in North China and
Yangtze Valley: Military and naval operations, infra),
685–686 [Pgs. 685–686 include portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546],
716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 583], 763–764 [Pgs. 763–764 include
portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 635],
845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 636], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 641],
856 [Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 646], 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 709],
1081 [Pg. 1081 includes portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838]
Chiang Kai-shek (see also Yangtze Valley: Military and
naval operations, infra), 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc.
541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc.
565], 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 843 and Doc. 844]
Civil war in North China, hostilities between
Kuominchun and Chang–Wu alliance:
Interference with communications by rail and
sea, 593–594 [Pgs. 593–594 include portions of Doc.
424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427], 594 [Pg. 594
includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 596 [Pg. 596
includes portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430],
596–598 [Pgs. 596–598 include portions of Doc. 428,
Doc. 429, Doc. 430, and Doc. 431], 602 [Pg. 602 includes
portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 606 [Pg. 606 includes
portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of
Doc. 447], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 447,
Doc. 448, and Doc. 449], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of
Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451]

Military and naval operations, 591–595 [Pgs.
591–595 include portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425,
Doc. 426, Doc. 427, and Doc. 428], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of
Doc. 430], 599–600 [Pgs. 599–600 include portions of
Doc. 432, Doc. 433, and Doc. 434], 606–607 [Pgs. 606–
607 include portions of Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and
Doc. 443], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 443 and
Doc. 444], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 445 and
Doc. 446], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 446 and
Doc. 447], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 447], 613 [Pg.
613 includes portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449],
615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452]
Operations at Taku:
Chinese 
naval 
expedition:
Departure from Tsingtao and arrival
at Taku, 592–593 [Pgs. 592–593 include
portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, and
Doc. 426], 593–594 [Pgs. 593–594 include
portions of Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and
Doc. 427]; engagements, 594 [Pg. 594
includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427],
595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 427
and Doc. 428], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc.
430]
Firing between Chinese fort and
Japanese destroyers, 599–600 [Pgs.
599–600 include portions of Doc. 432, Doc.
433, and Doc. 434]
Foreign 
powers, 
measures 
for
restoring 
free 
navigation:
International naval demonstration,
595–596 [Pgs. 595–596 include portions of
Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430],
598–599 [Pgs. 598–599 include portions of

Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 600–
602 [Pgs. 600–602 include portions of Doc.
433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, and Doc. 436];
Kuomintang demonstrations against
demands, 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of
Doc. 437 and Doc. 438], 604 [Pg. 604
includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439],
605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 439
and 
Doc. 
440]; representations to
Chinese military and government
authorities, and Chinese assurances
of cooperation, 596–597 [Pgs. 596–597
include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and
Doc. 430], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of
Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]
Mining of channel by Kuominchun,
595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 427
and Doc. 428], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc.
430]
U. 
S. 
naval 
forces,
recommendations as to use, 593 [Pg.
593 includes portions of Doc. 424, Doc. 425,
and Doc. 426], 595–596 [Pgs. 595–596
include portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc.
429, and Doc. 430], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of
Doc. 431], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 435];
U. S. attitude, 596 [Pg. 596 includes
portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430],
603–604 [Pgs. 603–604 include portions of
Doc. 437, Doc. 438, and Doc. 439]
Peking: 
Measures 
to 
insure 
safety,
suggestions, 605–606 [Pgs. 605–606 include portions
of Doc. 439, Doc. 440, and Doc. 441], 607 [Pg. 607
includes portions of Doc. 442 and Doc. 443]; military

operations in and around, 606 [Pg. 606 includes
portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 607 [Pg. 607 includes
portions of Doc. 442 and Doc. 443], 608–609 [Pgs. 608–
609 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445],
610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446],
611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447],
612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 447], 613 [Pg. 613 includes
portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc. 449], 614 [Pg.
614 includes portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451],
615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452],
842–843 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 635]
Press reports, suppression of, 608 [Pg. 608
includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 610 [Pg. 610
includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]
Termination of hostilities, proposals, 604 [Pg.
604 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 606 [Pg.
606 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 607 [Pg.
607 includes portions of Doc. 442 and Doc. 443], 616 [Pg.
616 is part of Doc. 453]
Claims against Chinese Government, right of American
citizens to bring suits in Chinese courts, 1099–1100 [Pgs.
1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]
Commercial interests of United States:
Federal Telegraph Co. See under Radio
communications, infra.
Radio Corporation of America. See Radio
communications, infra.
Representation at Special Conference on
Chinese Customs Tariff, 826 [Pg. 826 is part of
Doc. 635]

Standard Oil Co. See Standard Oil Co., infra.
Unfulfilled liabilities of Chinese Government
with respect to, 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 735]
Customs service at Hankow, disinclination of United
States to intervene to prevent paralysis by strike, 964–
966 [Pgs. 964–966 include portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743,
and Doc. 744]
Customs tariff. See Special Conference on the Chinese
Customs Tariff, infra.
Extraterritoriality:
Commission on extraterritoriality provided
for by Washington Conference resolution:
Activities and meetings, 967–968
[Pgs. 967–968 include portions of Doc. 744,
Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 971–
972 [Pgs. 971–972 include portions of Doc.
749, Doc. 750, and Doc. 751], 975–978
[Pgs. 975–978 include portions of Doc. 751,
Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754]
Arrangements for convening, 966–
967 [Pgs. 966–967 include portions of Doc.
742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745]
Chinese 
memoranda 
concerning
extraterritorial practices, 970 [Pg. 970
includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749],
977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 752
and Doc. 753]; concerning taxation,
978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 753
and Doc. 754]

Powers and scope of Commission,
968–971 [Pgs. 968–971 include portions of
Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc.
749, Doc. 750, and Doc. 751], 977 [Pg. 977
includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753]
Remarks of President Coolidge
concerning work of, XXVIII [Pg. XXVIII is
part of Message of the president of the United
States to Congress, December 7, 1926]
Report of Commission:
Discussion 
concerning
contents, 977–978 
[Pgs.
977–978 include portions of Doc.
752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754]
Publication, question of,
982–984 [Pgs. 982–984 include
portions of Doc. 755, Doc. 756,
Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, and
Doc. 760]
Recommendations 
of
American Commissioner
as to general purport,
972–975 [Pg. 972 is part of
Doc. 
751]; 
views 
of
Secretary of State, 978–
979 
[Pgs. 
978–979 
include
portions of Doc. 753, Doc. 754,
and Doc. 755]
Summary of report signed
Sept. 16, 979–982 [Pgs.
979–982 include portions of Doc.
754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756]

Text of recommendations,
981–982 [Pgs. 981–982 include
portions of Doc. 755 and Doc.
756]; U. S. policy toward
putting recommendations
into effect, 922 [Pg. 922 is
part of Doc. 714], 933 [Pg. 933
is part of Doc. 718], 939–940
[Pgs. 939–940 include portions of
Doc. 723 and Doc. 724]
Résumé of work of Commission,
932–933 [Pg. 932 is part of Doc. 718]
Statement of Chinese delegate
concerning manner in which claims
may be filed against Chinese
Government, 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–
1100 include portions of Doc. 853, Doc. 854,
and Doc. 855]
Tour of investigation, 612–613 [Pgs.
612–613 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc.
448, and Doc. 449], 971–972 [Pgs. 971–972
include portions of Doc. 749, Doc. 750, and
Doc. 751], 975–976 [Pgs. 975–976 include
portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752], 978 [Pg.
978 includes portions of Doc. 753 and Doc.
754]
Surrender of extraterritorial rights, aim of
Kuomintang to force, 691–692 [Pg. 691 is part of
Doc. 552]
Federal 
Telegraph 
Co. 
See 
under 
Radio
communications, infra.

Feng Yu-hsiang, 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 423], 591n [Pg. 591
is part of Doc. 423], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 423 and
Doc. 424], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522],
679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 538], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 583]
Forced levies by Chinese militarists upon American
business, question of right of protest, 731–733 [Pgs. 731–
733 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and Doc.
606]
Foreign powers (see also Soviet influence, infra; also
Great Britain: Relations with China):
Antiforeign disturbances. See Antiforeign
attitude and demonstrations, supra.
Cantonese policy of dealing separately with,
684–685 [Pgs. 684–685 include portions of Doc. 544,
Doc. 545, and Doc. 546]
Extraterritoriality. 
See 
Extraterritoriality,
supra.
International military and naval forces:
Action of naval forces in case of
mining of port of Tientsin, 595–596
[Pgs. 595–596 include portions of Doc. 427,
Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 598–
599 [Pgs. 598–599 include portions of Doc.
431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 600–602
[Pgs. 600–602 include portions of Doc. 433,
Doc. 434, Doc. 435, and Doc. 436]
British 
proposal 
to 
use 
in
preventing 
diversion 
of 
salt
revenues previously pledged as
security for certain loans, 950–951

[Pgs. 950–951 include portions of Doc. 729,
Doc. 730, and Doc. 731], 952–953 [Pgs.
952–953 include portions of Doc. 732, Doc.
733, and Doc. 734]
Cooperation of volunteer forces and
naval units during Yangtze Valley
invasion, 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of
Doc. 464, Doc. 465, and Doc. 466], 623 [Pg.
623 includes portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468,
and Doc. 469], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions
of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 631
[Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc.
483, and Doc. 484], 633 [Pg. 633 includes
portions of Doc. 485, Doc. 486, and Doc. 487],
642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 495
and Doc. 496], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions
of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503], 649
[Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 509 and
Doc. 510], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of
Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 651 [Pg.
651 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc.
514], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc.
514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 656–657
[Pgs. 656–657 include portions of Doc. 516,
Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, and Doc. 520],
657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 518,
Doc. 519, and Doc. 520], 658 [Pg. 658
includes portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522],
662–664 [Pgs. 662–664 include portions of
Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and
Doc. 532]
Firing between Chinese fort and
Japanese destroyers at Taku, 599–
600 [Pgs. 599–600 include portions of Doc.
432, Doc. 433, and Doc. 434]; upon French

naval forces by Cantonese, 625 [Pg.
625 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc.
472], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc.
484 and Doc. 485], 649 [Pg. 649 includes
portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510]
Recommendations of U. S. Minister
for 
simultaneous 
action 
in
withdrawing military forces from
Tientsin, 736–742 [Pgs. 736–742 include
portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611]
Use in support of protest against
levy of taxes in conflict with treaty
provisions, question of, 866 [Pg. 866
includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654],
867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 654], 868 [Pg.
868 is part of Doc. 654], 869 [Pg. 869 is part
of Doc. 654], 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions
of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656]
Use of landing force to avert acts of
violence at Hankow, attitude of
powers toward proposal, 965 [Pg. 965
is part of Doc. 742]
Policy in China (see also Recognition, infra):
Italian inquiry concerning U. S.
attitude toward cooperation with
Great Britain in firmer policy, 630–
631 [Pgs. 630–631 include portions of Doc.
481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484]
Observations of—
U. S. consul general at
Canton 
concerning

weakness, 690–693 [Pg.
690 is part of Doc. 552]
U. S. Minister concerning
British 
and 
Japanese
policy, 680–681 [Pgs. 680–
681 include portions of Doc. 538
and Doc. 539]; concerning
joint action with British
and Japanese in curbing
strikes, 725 [Pg. 725 is part of
Doc. 
592]; 
concerning
release of surplus customs
revenues, 953–957 [Pgs.
953–957 include portions of Doc.
733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735]
Portuguese inquiry concerning U.
S. attitude toward joint action for
protection, 639–640 
[Pgs. 
639–640
include portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc.
492, and Doc. 493]
Protests against measures diverting revenues
from payment of foreign loans, 940–949 [Pgs.
940–949 include portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725,
Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, and Doc. 729], 960–961
[Pgs. 960–961 include portions of Doc. 737 and Doc. 738],
962–964 [Pgs. 962–964 include portions of Doc. 738,
Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, and Doc. 742]
Radio communications, attitude of Great
Britain and Japan toward American interest
in. See Radio communications, infra.
Recognition of factions claiming to act with
authority for China:

Inquiry of Italy, 683–684 [Pgs. 683–
684 include portions of Doc. 541, Doc. 542,
Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]
Views of Denmark, 680 [Pg. 680
includes portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539];
Great Britain, 661 [Pg. 661 includes
portions of Doc. 525, Doc. 526, and Doc. 527],
664–665 [Pgs. 664–665 include portions of
Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532], 667 [Pg.
667 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc.
534], 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc.
538 and Doc. 539], 684 [Pg. 684 includes
portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 854–
855 [Pgs. 854–855 include portions of Doc.
643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646];
Japan, 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of
Doc. 525, Doc. 526, and Doc. 527], 680 [Pg.
680 includes portions of Doc. 538 and Doc.
539]; Netherlands, 680 [Pg. 680 includes
portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539]
Senior Minister:
Instructions 
to 
senior 
consul,
Hankow, 
concerning 
strike
measures, 965 [Pg. 965 is part of Doc.
742]; to senior consul, Tientsin,
concerning action against mining of
port, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 430]
Note protesting Peking air raids,
608–609 [Pgs. 608–609 include portions of
Doc. 
443, 
Doc. 
444, 
and 
Doc. 
445];
protesting 
mining 
of 
port 
of
Tientsin, 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of
Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430]

Statement at Special Conference on
Chinese Customs Tariff concerning
agenda of Conference, 769 [Pg. 769 is
part of Doc. 635], 780–781 [Pg. 780 is part
of Doc. 635]
Shanghai Mixed Court, rendition of. See
Shanghai Mixed Court, infra.
Special Conference on the Chinese Customs
Tariff, negotiations and views of Great
Britain, Japan, and other powers, 678 [Pg. 678 is
part of Doc. 538], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 538],
743–744 [Pgs. 743–744 include portions of Doc. 612,
Doc. 613, Doc. 614, and Doc. 615], 745 [Pg. 745 includes
portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, and Doc. 618],
745–747 [Pgs. 745–747 include portions of Doc. 615,
Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, and Doc. 619], 748 [Pg. 748
is part of Doc. 620], 749–752 [Pgs. 749–752 include
portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623],
753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 624], 754–763 [Pgs. 754–
763 include portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc.
628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, and Doc. 632], 765
[Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 632], 769–771 [Pg. 769 is part of
Doc. 635], 771–776 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 635], 777
[Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 635], 778–779 [Pg. 778 is part of
Doc. 635], 780–823 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 635], 824–
840 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 635], 854–855 [Pgs. 854–
855 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and
Doc. 646], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 647], 861–863
[Pgs. 861–863 include portions of Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc.
651, and Doc. 652]
Taxation. 
See 
Taxation: 
Imposition 
of
consumption and production taxes, infra.
Treaty relations of China with (see also
Extraterritoriality, 
supra; 
also 
Special

Conference and Taxation: Imposition of
consumption and production taxes, infra):
Assumption of right to abrogate
treaties 
with 
Belgium, 
France,
Japan, and other powers, 984–1001
[Pgs. 984–1001 include portions of Doc. 758,
Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc.
763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767,
Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc.
772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774]
Attitude of Chang Tso-lin toward
revision of treaties, 686 [Pg. 686 is part
of Doc. 546]
Protests by the powers of violation
of 1901 protocol, 596–597 [Pgs. 596–
597 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429,
and Doc. 430]
Question of missionary privilege
clauses, 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of
Doc. 550 and Doc. 551]
Representations 
and 
agitation
against adherence of Germany and
other 
nonsignatory 
powers 
to
Washington treaty of principles and
policy concerning China, 1002–
1003 [Pgs. 1002–1003 include portions of
Doc. 774, Doc. 775, and Doc. 776], 1004–
1005 [Pgs. 1004–1005 include portions of
Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778], 1007
[Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 778 and
Doc. 779], 1010–1011 [Pgs. 1010–1011
include portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783],
1015–1016 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 788],

1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 793
and Doc. 794]; U. S. suggestion that
protests be withdrawn, and Chinese
refusal, 1015 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc.
788], 1017–1018 [Pgs. 1017–1018 include
portions of Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and
Doc. 791], 1022 [Pg. 1022 includes portions
of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792]
Kuominchun (see also Civil war, supra), 658 [Pg. 658
includes portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522], 667 [Pg. 667 includes
portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 679–680 [Pgs. 679–680 include
portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 632],
848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 639]
Kuomintang activities (see also Yangtze Valley, infra),
603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438], 604 [Pg.
604 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 605 [Pg. 605 includes
portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of
Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544], 691–692 [Pg. 691 is
part of Doc. 552], 703–705 [Pgs. 703–705 include portions of Doc.
568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions
of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604], 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of
Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 654]
Loans:
Customs revenues, relation to:
Forced loans for military purposes,
959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 735
and Doc. 736]
Loans to be secured by revenues
already 
pledged: 
Information
concerning, 944–945 [Pgs. 944–945
include portions of Doc. 724 and Doc. 725],
962 [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 738,

Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741]; protests
and replies, 944–947 [Pgs. 944–947
include portions of Doc. 724, Doc. 725, and
Doc. 726], 957–959 [Pgs. 957–959 include
portions of Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736],
961–962 [Pgs. 961–962 include portions of
Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and
Doc. 741], 962–964 [Pgs. 962–964 include
portions of Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc.
741, and Doc. 742]
Release 
of 
customs 
revenues,
question of: Inquiry of American
Group concerning policy, 948–950
[Pgs. 948–950 include portions of Doc. 727,
Doc. 
728, 
Doc. 
729, 
and 
Doc. 
730];
observations of U. S. Minister
concerning 
release 
of 
surplus
revenues, 953–957 
[Pgs. 
953–957
include portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and
Doc. 735]; possibility of utilization in
service of Hukuang Railway loan,
942 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 724], 943 [Pg.
943 is part of Doc. 724], 944 [Pg. 944
includes portions of Doc. 724 and Doc. 725],
948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 727
and Doc. 728], 960–961 [Pgs. 960–961
include portions of Doc. 737 and Doc. 738]
Hukuang Railway loan, default in bond
payment: Interest on drawn bonds, Chinese
liability for, 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 732
and Doc. 733]; representations for payment, and
replies, 940–944 [Pgs. 940–944 include portions of
Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 948 [Pg. 948 includes
portions of Doc. 727 and Doc. 728], 960–961 [Pgs. 960–
961 include portions of Doc. 737 and Doc. 738]

Interest on drawn bonds, Chinese liability for
payment of, 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 732
and Doc. 733]
Salt revenues as security for certain loans,
proposal to use international forces to prevent
diversion, 950–951 [Pgs. 950–951 include portions of
Doc. 729, Doc. 730, and Doc. 731], 952–953 [Pgs. 952–
953 include portions of Doc. 732, Doc. 733, and Doc. 734]
Missionaries. See Protection of American missionary
interests and U. S. citizens, infra.
Peking. See Provisional Government and Peking
regime, infra, and under Civil war in North China,
supra.
Protection of American missionary interests endangered
by anti-foreign movement in South China:
American Association of South China, appeal
for U. S. protection and advice, 705 [Pg. 705
includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571], 706 [Pg. 706
is part of Doc. 571]
Attacks at Canton, 698–699 [Pgs. 698–699 include
portions of Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 700 [Pg.
700 includes portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565],
701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 565], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of
Doc. 570]; at Hainan, 694–697 [Pgs. 694–697 include
portions of Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc.
557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc. 561], 697–
698 [Pgs. 697–698 include portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559,
Doc. 560, Doc. 561, and Doc. 562], 699 [Pg. 699 includes
portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 700 [Pg. 700 includes
portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 702 [Pg.
702 includes portions of Doc. 566 and Doc. 567], 710 [Pg.
710 is part of Doc. 575], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 575];

at Kweilin, 700–701 [Pgs. 700–701 include portions
of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 702 [Pg. 702
includes portions of Doc. 566 and Doc. 567], 703 [Pg. 703
includes portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, and Doc. 570]; at
Wuchow, 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 563,
Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of
Doc. 566 and Doc. 567], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 570],
712–713 [Pgs. 712–713 include portions of Doc. 576,
Doc. 577, Doc. 578, and Doc. 579], 714 [Pg. 714 includes
portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581]; at Waichow, 709
[Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc.
575], 710–711 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 575]
Consultations in South China of U. S.
Legation representative, 707–709 [Pgs. 707–709
include portions of Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574,
and Doc. 575], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 576
and Doc. 577]
Representations of U. S. Minister and consul
general at Canton, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of
Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of
Doc. 556, Doc. 557, and Doc. 558], 698 [Pg. 698 includes
portions of Doc. 561 and Doc. 562], 709–711 [Pgs. 709–
711 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575],
713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579]
U. S. naval forces: Recommendations and
reports as to use, 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of
Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of
Doc. 556, Doc. 557, and Doc. 558], 699 [Pg. 699 includes
portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of
Doc. 565], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 566 and
Doc. 567], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 571], 709 [Pg.
709 includes portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575],
713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579];
U. 
S. 
Minister’s 
opinion 
concerning

reduction, 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 550
and Doc. 551]
U. S. policy, 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc.
550 and Doc. 551], 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc.
563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc.
565], 707–708 [Pgs. 707–708 include portions of Doc.
571, Doc. 572, and Doc. 573], 713 [Pg. 713 includes
portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579]; views of U. S.
Minister and consul general at Canton, 690–
693 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 552], 697–698 [Pgs. 697–
698 include portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc.
561, and Doc. 562], 703–707 [Pgs. 703–707 include
portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, and
Doc. 572], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 576 and
Doc. 577]
Provisional Government and Peking regime (see also
Recognition: Peking regime; and Special Conference,
infra): Mandates of Chief Executive and others, 604 [Pg.
604 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 613–614 [Pgs. 613–
614 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc.
451], 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc.
451], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 453], 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions
of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]; overthrow of Provisional
Government by coup d’état, 609–613 [Pgs. 609–613 include
portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, and Doc.
449], 842–843 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 635]; political
conditions, 591–592 [Pgs. 591–592 include portions of Doc. 423
and Doc. 424], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 424, Doc. 425,
and Doc. 426], 604–606 [Pgs. 604–606 include portions of Doc. 438,
Doc. 439, Doc. 440, and Doc. 441], 607–608 [Pgs. 607–608 include
portions of Doc. 442, Doc. 443, and Doc. 444], 609–613 [Pgs. 609–
613 include portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc.
448, and Doc. 449], 613–614 [Pgs. 613–614 include portions of Doc.
447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451], 614 [Pg. 614
includes portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451], 615–616 [Pgs.

615–616 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 617
[Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 659 [Pg. 659
includes portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523], 841–843 [Pg. 841 is part
of Doc. 635], 847–849 [Pgs. 847–849 include portions of Doc. 638,
Doc. 639, Doc. 640, and Doc. 641], 855–857 [Pgs. 855–857 include
portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646], 1062 [Pg. 1062 includes
portions of Doc. 825, Doc. 826, and Doc. 827], 1081 [Pg. 1081 includes
portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838]; Yen Cabinet, question of de
facto recognition by United States, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of
Doc. 453], 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]
Radio communications:
Federal Telegraph Co. contract (see also U.
S.-Japanese controversy, infra):
British 
views 
concerning
monopolistic character, 1068–1075
[Pgs. 1068–1075 include portions of Doc. 830,
Doc. 831, and Doc. 832]
Cited, 1085–1086 [Pg. 1085 is part of
Doc. 840]
Decision of Chinese Cabinet to
postpone action on contract until
settlement of political situation,
1075–1076 
[Pgs. 
1075–1076 
include
portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832]
Execution by local authorities,
suggestion, 1076–1077 [Pgs. 1076–
1077 include portions of Doc. 832 and Doc.
833]
Recommendation 
of 
Radio
Corporation of America that China
be 
declared 
in 
default 
under

existing contracts, 1059 [Pg. 1059 is
part of Doc. 824], 1065 [Pg. 1065 is part of
Doc. 827]
U. S. representations to China on
behalf of, 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes
portions of Doc. 812 and Doc. 813], 1053
[Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 819], 1060 [Pg.
1060 is part of Doc. 824], 1061–1062 [Pgs.
1061–1062 include portions of Doc. 825, Doc.
826, and Doc. 827], 1066 [Pg. 1066 includes
portions of Doc. 827, Doc. 828, and Doc. 829],
1066–1067 
[Pgs. 
1066–1067 
include
portions of Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, and
Doc. 830], 1075–1076 [Pgs. 1075–1076
include portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832],
1091–1092 
[Pgs. 
1091–1092 
include
portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, and
Doc. 843]; views of U. S. Minister,
1062 [Pg. 1062 includes portions of Doc. 825,
Doc. 826, and Doc. 827], 1063–1064 [Pg.
1063 is part of Doc. 827], 1081 [Pg. 1081
includes portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838]
Japanese claim to 30-year monopoly, 1045–
1046 [Pgs. 1045–1046 include portions of Doc. 810 and
Doc. 811], 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 812
and Doc. 813], 1083–1085 [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc.
840]; insistence on adequacy of Mitsui station,
1059–1060 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 824], 1086 [Pg.
1086 is part of Doc. 840], 1089–1090 [Pg. 1089 is part
of Doc. 840]
Mitsui Co. See U. S.-Japanese controversy,
infra.
Radio Corporation of America. See Federal
Telegraph Co. contract, supra, and U. S.-

Japanese controversy, infra.
U. S.-Japanese controversy regarding Federal
Telegraph and Mitsui contracts:
Compromise by means of U. S.-
Japanese 
Chinese 
discussions,
proposed:
Japanese insistence that
recognition of claim to
monopoly be taken as
basis, 1064–1065 [Pg. 1064
is part of Doc. 827]
Suggestions 
concerning
initiation of negotiations,
1049–1050 [Pgs. 1049–1050
include portions of Doc. 813, Doc.
814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816],
1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc.
824], 1063 [Pg. 1063 is part of
Doc. 827], 1067 [Pg. 1067
includes portions of Doc. 829 and
Doc. 830], 1078–1080 [Pgs.
1078–1080 include portions of
Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and
Doc. 837], 1082 [Pg. 1082
includes portions of Doc. 839 and
Doc. 840], 1088–1089 [Pg.
1088 is part of Doc. 840],
1091–1092 [Pgs. 1091–1092
include portions of Doc. 840, Doc.
841, Doc. 842, and Doc. 843]
Initiation of discussions at Tokyo,
U. S. attitude, 1054 [Pg. 1054 includes
portions of Doc. 820 and Doc. 821]

Japanese proposal for settlement on
basis analogous with consortium
arrangement:
British 
inquiries 
and
views, 1051–1052 
[Pgs.
1051–1052 include portions of
Doc. 816, Doc. 817, and Doc.
818], 1054 [Pg. 1054 includes
portions of Doc. 820 and Doc.
821], 1067–1069 [Pgs. 1067–
1069 include portions of Doc. 829,
Doc. 830, and Doc. 831]
Chinese attitude, 1042–
1043 [Pgs. 1042–1043 include
portions of Doc. 809 and Doc.
810], 1046 [Pg. 1046 is part of
Doc. 811], 1051 [Pg. 1051
includes portions of Doc. 816 and
Doc. 817], 1056 [Pg. 1056 is
part of Doc. 823]
Japanese 
inquiries
concerning U. S. position,
and requests for reply to
proposal, 1040–1042 [Pgs.
1040–1042 include portions of
Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, and
Doc. 810], 1044–1045 [Pgs.
1044–1045 include portions of
Doc. 810 and Doc. 811], 1047
[Pg. 1047 includes portions of
Doc. 812 and Doc. 813], 1055–
1058 [Pgs. 1055–1058 include
portions of Doc. 822, Doc. 823,
and Doc. 824], 1065 [Pg. 1065

is part of Doc. 827], 1078 [Pg.
1078 includes portions of Doc.
834 and Doc. 835], 1080–
1081 [Pgs. 1080–1081 include
portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836,
Doc. 837, and Doc. 838]
Text, 1087 [Pg. 1087 is part of
Doc. 840]
U. S. position, and text of
reply, 1045 [Pg. 1045 includes
portions of Doc. 810 and Doc.
811], 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes
portions of Doc. 813, Doc. 814,
and Doc. 815], 1056–1058
[Pgs. 1056–1058 include portions
of Doc. 823 and Doc. 824],
1058–1059 [Pgs. 1058–1059
include portions of Doc. 823 and
Doc. 824], 1065–1066 [Pgs.
1065–1066 include portions of
Doc. 827, Doc. 828, and Doc.
829], 1081 [Pg. 1081 includes
portions of Doc. 837 and Doc.
838], 1082–1092 [Pgs. 1082–
1092 include portions of Doc. 839,
Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, and
Doc. 843]
Views 
of 
American
interests, 1090–1091 [Pgs.
1090–1091 include portions of
Doc. 840 and Doc. 841]; of
Radio 
Corporation 
of
America representatives,
1042 
[Pg. 
1042 
includes

portions of Doc. 809 and Doc.
810], 1045–1046 [Pgs. 1045–
1046 include portions of Doc. 810
and Doc. 811], 1052 [Pg. 1052
includes portions of Doc. 817 and
Doc. 818]; of U. S. Minister,
1042–1045 [Pgs. 1042–1045
include portions of Doc. 809, Doc.
810, and Doc. 811], 1047 [Pg.
1047 includes portions of Doc.
812 and Doc. 813]
Résumé of Japanese position, 1053
[Pg. 1053 is part of Doc. 819]; of U. S.
position, 1058–1060 [Pgs. 1058–1060
include portions of Doc. 823 and Doc. 824]
Suggestion of Radio Corporation of
America for joint operation by
American and Japanese units, 1044
[Pg. 1044 is part of Doc. 810], 1045 [Pg.
1045 includes portions of Doc. 810 and Doc.
811], 1046 [Pg. 1046 is part of Doc. 811],
1047–1050 
[Pgs. 
1047–1050 
include
portions of Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc.
815, and Doc. 816], 1051 [Pg. 1051 includes
portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1052
[Pg. 1052 includes portions of Doc. 817 and
Doc. 818], 1057–1058 [Pgs. 1057–1058
include portions of Doc. 823 and Doc. 824],
1089 [Pg. 1089 is part of Doc. 840], 1091
[Pg. 1091 includes portions of Doc. 840 and
Doc. 841]
Suggestion of solution by joint
cooperation of Japanese, British,
French, 
and 
American 
radio

interests, 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions
of Doc. 809 and Doc. 810], 1059 [Pg. 1059 is
part of Doc. 824], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of
Doc. 824], 1061–1062 [Pgs. 1061–1062
include portions of Doc. 825, Doc. 826, and
Doc. 827], 1063–1064 [Pg. 1063 is part of
Doc. 827], 1065 [Pg. 1065 is part of Doc.
827], 1066 [Pg. 1066 includes portions of
Doc. 827, Doc. 828, and Doc. 829]
Reallocation of customs funds among custodian banks,
U. S. inquiry and U. S. Minister’s reply, 860–861 [Pgs.
860–861 include portions of Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, and Doc. 650]
Recognition of factions claiming to act with authority
for China, question of:
Canton regime:
British attitude, 664–665 [Pgs. 664–
665 include portions of Doc. 530, Doc. 531,
and Doc. 532], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions
of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 684 [Pg. 684
includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545];
views of U. S. Minister in China,
665–666 [Pgs. 665–666 include portions of
Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]
Certificates of identity, question of
signature, 667–670 
[Pgs. 
667–670
include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc.
535, Doc. 536, and Doc. 537], 683 [Pg. 683
includes portions of Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc.
543, and Doc. 544]
Diplomatic 
correspondence,
question of address, 667 [Pg. 667
includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534],

687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 547], 693 [Pg.
693 is part of Doc. 552]
Italian inquiry concerning U. S.
attitude, 684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of
Doc. 544 and Doc. 545]
Statements of Eugene Chen, 669–
670 [Pgs. 669–670 include portions of Doc.
536 and Doc. 537], 683 [Pg. 683 includes
portions of Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and
Doc. 544], 684–685 [Pgs. 684–685 include
portions of Doc. 544, Doc. 545, and Doc. 546],
687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 547]
Views of U. S. Minister as to
political entity, 665 [Pg. 665 is part of
Doc. 532]
Peking regime:
Efforts 
of 
regime 
to 
obtain
recognition, 847–849 [Pgs. 847–849
include portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc.
640, and Doc. 641]
Political conditions, 666–667 [Pgs.
666–667 include portions of Doc. 532, Doc.
533, and Doc. 534], 670–671 [Pgs. 670–671
include portions of Doc. 536, Doc. 537, and
Doc. 538], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of
Doc. 548 and Doc. 549]
Views of U. S. Minister, 671–681
[Pgs. 671–681 include portions of Doc. 537,
Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 712 [Pg. 712
includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577];

of U. S. Secretary of State, 682 [Pg.
682 is part of Doc. 540]
Reform government, proposal of Chang Tso-
lin for establishment at Peking, 685–686 [Pgs.
685–686 include portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]
U. S. policy of noncommittal, 684 [Pg. 684
includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 688 [Pg. 688
includes portions of Doc. 548 and Doc. 549], 848–849
[Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 639, Doc. 640, and
Doc. 641], 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 644,
Doc. 645, and Doc. 646], 933–934 [Pgs. 933–934 include
portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719], 937 [Pg. 937 includes
portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723]
Shanghai, discussion of proposed defensive measures
during Yangtze Valley invasion, 662–663 [Pgs. 662–663
include portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529]
Shanghai Mixed Court, rendition to Kiangsu provincial
government:
Agreement for rendition:
Draft: Signature, 1034 [Pg. 1034
includes portions of Doc. 802, Doc. 803, and
Doc. 804]; terms, 1031–1032 [Pgs.
1031–1032 include portions of Doc. 798, Doc.
799, and Doc. 800]
Exchange of notes giving effect to,
1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 802,
Doc. 803, and Doc. 804], 1039 [Pg. 1039 is
part of Doc. 806], 1040 [Pg. 1040 includes
portions of Doc. 807, Doc. 808, and Doc. 809]

Italian and other opposition to
agreement, 1033–1034 [Pgs. 1033–
1034 include portions of Doc. 801, Doc. 802,
Doc. 803, and Doc. 804], 1034–1035 [Pgs.
1034–1035 include portions of Doc. 802, Doc.
803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805], 1039–1040
[Pgs. 1039–1040 include portions of Doc. 806,
Doc. 807, Doc. 808, and Doc. 809]
Negotiations of commissions, 673–
674 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 538], 1029–
1032 [Pgs. 1029–1032 include portions of
Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, and Doc. 800]
Text, 1035–1038 [Pgs. 1035–1038 include
portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805]
U. S. approval, 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes
portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800]
Chinese proposal for abolition of Court,
1026–1027 [Pgs. 1026–1027 include portions of Doc.
795 and Doc. 796], 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of
Doc. 797 and Doc. 798]
Origin of Court, discussion, 1023–1025 [Pgs.
1023–1025 include portions of Doc. 793 and Doc. 794],
1027–1028 [Pgs. 1027–1028 include portions of Doc.
795 and Doc. 796]
Sino-Belgian treaty of Nov. 2, 1865, abrogation by
China:
Assumption by China of right to abrogate
treaties with other powers, 984 [Pg. 984 includes
portions of Doc. 758, Doc. 759, and Doc. 760], 985–986
[Pgs. 985–986 include portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and
Doc. 762]

Dispute concerning China’s right to abrogate,
submission by Belgium to Permanent Court
of International Justice, 984–985 [Pgs. 984–985
include portions of Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, and Doc.
761], 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 761 and Doc.
762], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 763], 989 [Pg. 989 is
part of Doc. 763], 991 [Pg. 991 includes portions of Doc.
766, Doc. 767, and Doc. 768], 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc.
769], 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 772, Doc.
773, and Doc. 774], 1001n [Pg. 1001 includes portions of
Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774]
Modus vivendi to cover interim period,
proposed:
Belgian 
appeal 
to 
Washington
Conference powers for support in
obtaining, 985 [Pg. 985 includes portions
of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 986–989 [Pgs.
986–989 include portions of Doc. 761, Doc.
762, and Doc. 763], 990 [Pg. 990 includes
portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, and Doc. 765];
U. S. attitude, 991 [Pg. 991 includes
portions of Doc. 766, Doc. 767, and Doc. 768]
Chinese draft, 990 [Pg. 990 includes
portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, and Doc. 765]
Chinese unwillingness to proceed
with negotiations, 984–985 [Pgs. 984–
985 include portions of Doc. 758, Doc. 759,
Doc. 760, and Doc. 761]
Exchanges 
of 
correspondence
between 
Belgian 
and 
Chinese
Governments, 989–990 [Pgs. 989–990
include portions of Doc. 763, Doc. 764, and

Doc. 765], 992–995 [Pgs. 992–995 include
portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, and Doc. 770]
Notification, 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc.
758, Doc. 759, and Doc. 760]
Presidential order canceling treaty and calling
for new treaty, 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc.
768 and Doc. 769], 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc.
769 and Doc. 770]
Views of U. S. Minister and Secretary of
State concerning China’s repudiation of treaty
obligations, 995–1001 [Pgs. 995–1001 include
portions of Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc.
773, and Doc. 774]
Soviet Ambassador, attitude of United States toward
demand of Chinese Government for recall, 1097–1099
[Pgs. 1097–1099 include portions of Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc.
853, and Doc. 854]
Soviet influence, 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 532 and
Doc. 533], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534],
679–680 [Pgs. 679–680 include portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539],
690–691 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 552], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc.
552], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 561 and Doc. 562], 701
[Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 565], 715–718 [Pgs. 715–718 include portions
of Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583], 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 606],
764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 632], 1000 [Pg. 1000 is part of Doc. 772]
Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff:
Adjournment 
or 
suspension 
(see 
also
Resumption of work, infra), 745–746 [Pgs. 745–
746 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, and
Doc. 618], 747–749 [Pgs. 747–749 include portions of
Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621], 754 [Pg. 754

includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 755–757
[Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 627], 760–761 [Pgs. 760–761
include portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631], 762–763
[Pgs. 762–763 include portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632],
766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 632, Doc. 633, and
Doc. 634], 839–840 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 635], 841
[Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 635]
Agenda, modification, 769–771 [Pg. 769 is part of
Doc. 635], 780–785 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 635];
Chinese attitude, 769–771 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc.
635], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 635], 782 [Pg. 782 is
part of Doc. 635], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 635],
784–785 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 635]
Attitude of Provisional Government, 612 [Pg.
612 is part of Doc. 447], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of
Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of
Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 763–764 [Pgs. 763–764 include
portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of
Doc. 632], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 636,
Doc. 637, and Doc. 638], 847–848 [Pgs. 847–848 include
portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 855–856 [Pgs. 855–
856 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]
Board of Reference authorized by Washington
Conference resolution, 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc.
635], 770–771 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 635]
Chinese delegation, changes in personnel, 612
[Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 447], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc.
635], 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 641, Doc.
642, and Doc. 643]
Committees, reports of meetings:
Program and procedure, 769–771
[Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 635]

Provisional measures, 776–787 [Pg.
776 is part of Doc. 635], 789–793 [Pg. 789
is part of Doc. 635], 799–800 [Pg. 799 is
part of Doc. 635], 801–806 [Pg. 801 is part
of Doc. 635]
Subcommittee 
of
committee II, 744 [Pg. 744
includes portions of Doc. 613,
Doc. 614, and Doc. 615], 787–
789 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 635]
Subcommittee on interim
surtaxes, 806–812 [Pg. 806
is part of Doc. 635], 815–822
[Pg. 815 is part of Doc. 635]; on
purposes, 792–793 [Pg. 792
is part of Doc. 635]; on rates
of surtaxes, 797–799 [Pg.
797 is part of Doc. 635], 800–
801 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 635]
Tariff autonomy, 771–776 [Pg. 771 is
part of Doc. 635]
Technical committee on likin, 793–
796 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 635]; on other
purposes, 796–797 [Pg. 796 is part of
Doc. 635]; to draw up a list of
luxuries, 813–815 [Pg. 813 is part of
Doc. 635], 822–823 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc.
635]
Custodian banks, provisions relating to, 751
[Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 622], 758 [Pg. 758 includes
portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 760 [Pg. 760 includes
portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of
Doc. 635], 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 635], 816–817

[Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 635], 818n [Pg. 818 is part of Doc.
635], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 635], 834–835 [Pg.
834 is part of Doc. 635], 860–861 [Pgs. 860–861 include
portions of Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, and Doc. 650]
Discussions and negotiations concerning—
Abolition of likin, 757 [Pg. 757 is part
of Doc. 627], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc.
635], 772–774 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc.
635], 775–776 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc.
635], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 635], 778
[Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 635], 780 [Pg. 780 is
part of Doc. 635], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of
Doc. 635], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 635],
784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 635], 786–789
[Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 635], 792–796 [Pg.
792 is part of Doc. 635], 800 [Pg. 800 is part
of Doc. 635], 824–826 [Pg. 824 is part of
Doc. 635], 861–863 [Pgs. 861–863 include
portions of Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, and
Doc. 652]
Debt consolidation, 749–750 [Pgs.
749–750 include portions of Doc. 620, Doc.
621, and Doc. 622], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of
Doc. 623], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 627],
756–757 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 627],
758–760 [Pgs. 758–760 include portions of
Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631],
778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 635], 780 [Pg.
780 is part of Doc. 635], 792–793 [Pg. 792
is part of Doc. 635], 796–797 [Pg. 796 is
part of Doc. 635], 829–833 [Pg. 829 is part
of Doc. 635], 861–863 [Pgs. 861–863
include portions of Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc.
651, and Doc. 652]

Increase 
in 
customs 
revenues,
proposed treaty, 745–746 [Pgs. 745–
746 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616,
Doc. 617, and Doc. 618], 776 [Pg. 776 is part
of Doc. 635], 777–779 [Pg. 777 is part of
Doc. 635], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 635]
Levy and utilization of surtaxes,
question of, 743–745 [Pgs. 743–745
include portions of Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc.
614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, and Doc.
618], 746–747 [Pgs. 746–747 include
portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 755 [Pg.
755 is part of Doc. 627], 760–762 [Pgs.
760–762 include portions of Doc. 630 and Doc.
631], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 635], 770
[Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 635], 775 [Pg. 775 is
part of Doc. 635], 776–793 [Pg. 776 is part
of Doc. 635], 796–823 [Pg. 796 is part of
Doc. 635], 826–828 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc.
635], 833–840 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc.
635], 856 [Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 646],
859–860 [Pgs. 859–860 include portions of
Doc. 647, Doc. 648, and Doc. 649], 861–
863 [Pgs. 861–863 include portions of Doc.
649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, and Doc. 652]
Tariff autonomy, 749 [Pg. 749 includes
portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621], 767–
768 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 635], 771–776
[Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 635], 776–777 [Pg.
776 is part of Doc. 635], 783–784 [Pg. 783
is part of Doc. 635], 785 [Pg. 785 is part of
Doc. 635], 786–790 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc.
635], 799–800 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc.
635], 824–826 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 635]

Draft agreement to implement Washington
customs tariff treaty (see also Resolution on
interim surtaxes, infra), 750–751 [Pgs. 750–751
include portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 753–754
[Pgs. 753–754 include portions of Doc. 624, Doc. 625, and
Doc. 626], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 628 and
Doc. 629], 760–766 [Pgs. 760–766 include portions of
Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, and Doc. 634],
782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 635], 833–840 [Pg. 833 is
part of Doc. 635]; resolution respecting custodian
banks, 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 622], 758 [Pg. 758
includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 760 [Pg. 760
includes portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631], 834–835
[Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 635]
Press 
statements 
and 
correspondence
concerning Cantonese opposition, 844–846
[Pgs. 844–846 include portions of Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc.
637, and Doc. 638], 846–847 [Pgs. 846–847 include
portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, and Doc. 639],
848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 639], 849–850 [Pgs. 849–
850 include portions of Doc. 639, Doc. 640, and Doc. 641],
851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 641], 854 [Pg. 854 includes
portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644]; delay in
negotiations, 762–763 
[Pgs. 
762–763 
include
portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632]; willingness of
powers to resume proceedings, 839 [Pg. 839 is
part of Doc. 635]
Records, Cantonese request for, 881–882 [Pgs.
881–882 include portions of Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671,
Doc. 672, and Doc. 673]
Remarks of President Coolidge concerning
work of, XXVIII [Pg. XXVIII is part of Message of the
president of the United States to Congress, December 7,
1926]

Report of proceedings, Oct. 26, 1925–July 8,
1926, 767–844 [Pgs. 767–844 include portions of Doc.
635 and Doc. 636]; of informal meetings of
delegates and technical advisers, 823–841 [Pg.
823 is part of Doc. 635]
Resolution on interim surtaxes: Appointment
and work of drafting committee, 806–812 [Pg.
806 is part of Doc. 635], 815–822 [Pg. 815 is part of
Doc. 635], 833–834 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 635];
provision relating to custodian banks, 809 [Pg.
809 is part of Doc. 635], 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 635],
816–817 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 635], 818n [Pg. 818 is
part of Doc. 635], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 635];
work of technical committee to draw up a list
of luxuries, 813–815 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 635],
822–823 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 635]
Resumption of work:
Chinese efforts for, 846 [Pg. 846
includes portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and
Doc. 638], 847–848 [Pgs. 847–848 include
portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 855–
856 [Pgs. 855–856 include portions of Doc.
644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]
Attitude 
of 
foreign
powers, 846 [Pg. 846 includes
portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637,
and Doc. 638], 855–856 [Pgs.
855–856 include portions of Doc.
644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]; of
United States, 855–858
[Pgs. 855–858 include portions of
Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc.
646]

Declaration of Kuomintang, 853 [Pg.
853 includes portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642,
and Doc. 643]
Japanese suggestion, 936 [Pg. 936
includes portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721]
Opposition and note of Canton
regime, 844–846 [Pgs. 844–846 include
portions of Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and
Doc. 638], 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 639],
849–853 [Pgs. 849–853 include portions of
Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and
Doc. 643], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of
Doc. 643 and Doc. 644]
British attitude, 854–855
[Pgs. 854–855 include portions of
Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and
Doc. 646]
U. S. attitude and reply,
846–847 [Pgs. 846–847 include
portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637,
Doc. 638, and Doc. 639], 848–
849 
[Pgs. 
848–849 
include
portions of Doc. 639, Doc. 640,
and Doc. 641], 855 [Pg. 855
includes portions of Doc. 644,
Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]
Suggestions of U. S. Minister for putting
conference agreements into effect, 856–858
[Pg. 856 is part of Doc. 646]; attitude of Secretary of
State, 859–860 [Pgs. 859–860 include portions of Doc.
647, Doc. 648, and Doc. 649]

U. S. proposals, and views concerning
negotiations, 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 540], 743–
744 [Pgs. 743–744 include portions of Doc. 612, Doc. 613,
Doc. 614, and Doc. 615], 744–745 [Pgs. 744–745 include
portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc.
617, and Doc. 618], 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc.
615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, and Doc. 618], 746 [Pg. 746 is
part of Doc. 618], 747–749 [Pgs. 747–749 include
portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621],
752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 623], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of
Doc. 624], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 625 and
Doc. 626], 758–759 [Pgs. 758–759 include portions of
Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630], 760 [Pg. 760 includes
portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of
Doc. 631], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 631], 763 [Pg.
763 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 764–
766 [Pgs. 764–766 include portions of Doc. 632, Doc. 633,
and Doc. 634], 770–771 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 635],
772–773 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 635], 775 [Pg. 775 is
part of Doc. 635], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 635],
777–779 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 635], 781 [Pg. 781 is
part of Doc. 635], 781–784 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 635],
785 [Pg. 785 is part of Doc. 635], 786–787 [Pg. 786 is
part of Doc. 635], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 635], 789
[Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 635], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc.
635], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 635], 795 [Pg. 795 is
part of Doc. 635], 797–798 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 635],
802–803 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 635], 803 [Pg. 803 is
part of Doc. 635], 806–811 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 635],
813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 635], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of
Doc. 635], 818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 635], 820 [Pg.
820 is part of Doc. 635], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 635],
822–823 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 635], 825–826 [Pg.
825 is part of Doc. 635], 827–828 [Pg. 827 is part of
Doc. 635], 829–830 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 635], 831–
832 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 635], 833–840 [Pg. 833 is
part of Doc. 635]

Views of U. S. Minister concerning failure of
Conference to implement Washington treaty,
677–679 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 538]
Standard Oil Co.: Attack by Chinese on vessels of, 641
[Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 660 [Pg. 660
includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]; disapproval
by Department of State of proposed grant of oil
monopoly by Canton government, 1092–1097 [Pgs. 1092–
1097 include portions of Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc.
845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, and Doc. 851];
forced levies by Chinese militarists upon selling agents,
732–733 [Pgs. 732–733 include portions of Doc. 604, Doc. 605, and
Doc. 606]; protest against taxation levied in Shantung,
878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and
Doc. 664]; request for convoy from Hongkong to
Wuchow, 719–721 [Pgs. 719–721 include portions of Doc. 583,
Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, and Doc. 587]; strikes of employees
at Hankow and Swatow, 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc.
523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc.
596 and Doc. 597]
Strikes. See Boycotts and strikes, supra.
Taxation:
Exemption of foreigners, question of, 800 [Pg.
800 is part of Doc. 635]
Forced levies by Chinese militarists upon
American business, 731–733 [Pgs. 731–733
include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605,
and Doc. 606]
Imposition of consumption and production
taxes in conflict with treaty provisions:

Attitude and views of France, 879–
880 [Pgs. 879–880 include portions of Doc.
664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668,
and Doc. 669], 891 [Pg. 891 includes portions
of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684], 893 [Pg. 893
includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687],
898 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 692]; Great
Britain, 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 652],
867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 654], 870 [Pg.
870 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc.
655], 875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc.
658 and Doc. 659], 877 [Pg. 877 includes
portions of Doc. 659, Doc. 660, and Doc. 661],
878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 661,
Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664], 879–
880 [Pgs. 879–880 include portions of Doc.
664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668,
and Doc. 669], 883–885 [Pgs. 883–885
include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and
Doc. 675], 888–889 [Pg. 888 is part of Doc.
681], 891 [Pg. 891 includes portions of Doc.
683 and Doc. 684], 893 [Pg. 893 includes
portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 896 [Pg.
896 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc.
691], 902–903 [Pgs. 902–903 include
portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695], 904–
906 [Pgs. 904–906 include portions of Doc.
695 and Doc. 696], 911 [Pg. 911 includes
portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705],
918–929 [Pgs. 918–929 include portions of
Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc.
714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 930
[Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 717 and
Doc. 718]; Japan, 870 [Pg. 870 includes
portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], 875–
876 [Pgs. 875–876 include portions of Doc.
658 and Doc. 659], 877–878 [Pgs. 877–878

include portions of Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc.
661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664], 878
[Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 661, Doc.
662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664], 889 [Pg. 889 is
part of Doc. 681], 891 [Pg. 891 includes
portions of Doc. 683 and Doc. 684], 893 [Pg.
893 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc.
687], 904–905 [Pgs. 904–905 include
portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 913–
915 [Pgs. 913–915 include portions of Doc.
708 and Doc. 709], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of
Doc. 709], 921 [Pg. 921 is part of Doc. 713]
British 
proposal 
for 
joint
declaration of liberal policy, 918–
929 [Pgs. 918–929 include portions of Doc.
710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714,
Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 930 [Pg.
930 includes portions of Doc. 717 and Doc.
718]
Cantonese attitude, 930
[Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc.
717 and Doc. 718], 935–936
[Pgs. 935–936 include portions of
Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc.
721]
Japanese attitude, 936 [Pg.
936 includes portions of Doc. 720
and Doc. 721]
U. S. draft reply, 930–934
[Pgs. 930–934 include portions of
Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc.
719], 937–940 [Pgs. 937–940
include portions of Doc. 722, Doc.
723, and Doc. 724]

Collection 
through 
Maritime
Customs Administration, question
of, 864–868 
[Pgs. 
864–868 
include
portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, and Doc. 654],
871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 655
and Doc. 656], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc.
657], 873–875 [Pgs. 873–875 include
portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, and Doc. 659],
878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 661,
Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664], 881 [Pg.
881 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc.
670], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc.
670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, and Doc. 673], 884
[Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 674], 885 [Pg. 885
includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675],
887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 678,
Doc. 679, and Doc. 680], 888 [Pg. 888 is part
of Doc. 681], 889 [Pg. 889 is part of Doc.
681], 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc.
686 and Doc. 687], 902–904 [Pgs. 902–904
include portions of Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and
Doc. 696], 907 [Pg. 907 includes portions of
Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 908 [Pg. 908
includes portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc.
700, and Doc. 701], 908–910 [Pgs. 908–910
include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc.
700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702], 911–912
[Pgs. 911–912 include portions of Doc. 703,
Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707]
Cooperation 
of 
powers 
in
protesting, 872–873 
[Pgs. 
872–873
include portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658],
875–876 [Pgs. 875–876 include portions of
Doc. 658 and Doc. 659], 877–878 [Pgs.
877–878 include portions of Doc. 659, Doc.
660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc.

664], 878–880 [Pgs. 878–880 include
portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc.
664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668,
and Doc. 669], 882–885 [Pgs. 882–885
include portions of Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc.
672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and Doc. 675], 886
[Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 675, Doc.
676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 887 [Pg. 887
includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and
Doc. 680], 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of
Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 895 [Pg.
895 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc.
690], 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc.
690 and Doc. 691]
British draft formula, and
U. S. unwillingness to
accept, 883–886 [Pgs. 883–
886 include portions of Doc. 673,
Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676,
Doc. 677, and Doc. 678]
Chinese reply to protest,
900–901 [Pg. 900 is part of
Doc. 693]
Implementation 
of 
Washington
surtaxes, proposals and views, 903
[Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 695], 905 [Pg. 905 is
part of Doc. 696], 906 [Pg. 906 is part of
Doc. 696], 909–910 [Pgs. 909–910 include
portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702], 911–
914 [Pgs. 911–914 include portions of Doc.
703, Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707,
Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 916–919 [Pgs.
916–919 include portions of Doc. 709, Doc.
710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 928–

929 [Pgs. 928–929 include portions of Doc.
715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 935–936
[Pgs. 935–936 include portions of Doc. 719,
Doc. 720, and Doc. 721]
Instructions 
concerning 
U. 
S.
policy, 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of
Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 879 [Pg. 879
includes portions of Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and
Doc. 666], 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of
Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669],
882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 670,
Doc. 671, Doc. 672, and Doc. 673], 885–
886 [Pgs. 885–886 include portions of Doc.
674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc.
678], 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc.
675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 887
[Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc.
679, and Doc. 680], 890 [Pg. 890 includes
portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 895–
896 [Pgs. 895–896 include portions of Doc.
689, Doc. 690, and Doc. 691], 902 [Pg. 902
includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc. 695],
907 [Pg. 907 includes portions of Doc. 697
and Doc. 698], 908–910 [Pgs. 908–910
include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc.
700, Doc. 701, and Doc. 702], 911 [Pg. 911
includes portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and
Doc. 705], 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of
Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 913–
914 [Pgs. 913–914 include portions of Doc.
708 and Doc. 709], 918 [Pg. 918 includes
portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 919 [Pg.
919 includes portions of Doc. 712 and Doc.
713], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 714], 937
[Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 722 and
Doc. 723]

Mandate 
of 
Canton 
regime
imposing taxes, 872–875 [Pgs. 872–
875 include portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658,
and Doc. 659]; notification requesting
compliance of foreign merchants,
881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 669
and Doc. 670]
Reports and views of U. S.
representatives, 863–871 [Pgs. 863–
871 include portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652,
Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656],
872–877 [Pgs. 872–877 include portions of
Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, and
Doc. 661], 877–879 [Pgs. 877–879 include
portions of Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc.
662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc.
666], 879–880 [Pgs. 879–880 include
portions of Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc.
667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 880–882
[Pgs. 880–882 include portions of Doc. 666,
Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc.
671, Doc. 672, and Doc. 673], 882–885
[Pgs. 882–885 include portions of Doc. 670,
Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and
Doc. 675], 886–887 [Pgs. 886–887 include
portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc.
678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680], 888–889 [Pg.
888 is part of Doc. 681], 890–895 [Pgs.
890–895 include portions of Doc. 682, Doc.
683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687,
Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 896–
901 [Pgs. 896–901 include portions of Doc.
690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693],
902–906 [Pgs. 902–906 include portions of
Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696], 907–
908 [Pgs. 907–908 include portions of Doc.

697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and Doc.
701], 910–911 [Pgs. 910–911 include
portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc.
704, and Doc. 705], 911–912 [Pgs. 911–912
include portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, Doc.
705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 912 [Pg. 912
includes portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and
Doc. 707], 914–917 [Pgs. 914–917 include
portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 918 [Pg.
918 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc.
711], 919–921 [Pgs. 919–921 include
portions of Doc. 712 and Doc. 713], 929–
930 [Pgs. 929–930 include portions of Doc.
715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, and Doc. 718],
934–935 [Pgs. 934–935 include portions of
Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720], 937–
940 [Pgs. 937–940 include portions of Doc.
722, Doc. 723, and Doc. 724]
Resumption of oil sales by Standard
Oil Co., subject to internal revenue
tax, 1095–1097 [Pgs. 1095–1097 include
portions of Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc.
848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, and Doc. 851]
Statement of Secretary of State,
proposed, 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc.
714], 929–930 [Pgs. 929–930 include
portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, and
Doc. 718]
U. S. naval forces, question of
protection of U. S. merchantmen
from interference, 897 [Pg. 897 includes
portions of Doc. 691 and Doc. 692], 898–
899 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 692], 902 [Pg.
902 includes portions of Doc. 694 and Doc.

695], 907–908 [Pgs. 907–908 include
portions of Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc.
700, and Doc. 701], 908 [Pg. 908 includes
portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, and
Doc. 701]
U. S. protest, and Chinese reply,
895 [Pg. 895 includes portions of Doc. 689
and Doc. 690], 896–897 [Pgs. 896–897
include portions of Doc. 690, Doc. 691, and
Doc. 692], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 693]
Visit and search regulations of
Cantonese, and protests of foreign
consular representatives, 887 [Pg. 887
includes portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and
Doc. 680], 888–892 [Pgs. 888–892 include
portions of Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc.
684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 893–895
[Pgs. 893–895 include portions of Doc. 686,
Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690],
895–896 [Pgs. 895–896 include portions of
Doc. 689, Doc. 690, and Doc. 691], 897–
899 [Pgs. 897–899 include portions of Doc.
691 and Doc. 692]
Washington Conference surtaxes. See Special
Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff,
supra.
Tientsin (see also Civil war: Operations at Taku, supra):
Recommendation of U. S. Minister for
withdrawal of U. S. troops, 736–742 [Pgs. 736–
742 include portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611];
transmittal 
of 
recommendation 
to 
War
Department, 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc.
612 and Doc. 613]

Strikes in rug factories, 715–719 [Pgs. 715–719
include portions of Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, and Doc.
584]
Treaty 
relations 
with 
foreign 
powers. 
See
Extraterritoriality, 
Sino-Belgian 
treaty, 
Special
Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff, and
Taxation, supra; also under Foreign powers, supra.
U. S. citizens: Protection of lives and property (see also
Boycotts and strikes and Protection of American
missionary interests, supra), XXVII [Pg. XXVII is part of Message
of the president of the United States to Congress, December 7, 1926],
595–596 [Pgs. 595–596 include portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc.
429, and Doc. 430], 603–604 [Pgs. 603–604 include portions of Doc.
437, Doc. 438, and Doc. 439], 608–609 [Pgs. 608–609 include
portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 620–621 [Pgs. 620–
621 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464],
621–622 [Pgs. 621–622 include portions of Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc.
465, and Doc. 466], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc.
483, and Doc. 484], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 484 and
Doc. 485], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 487], 643–644 [Pgs. 643–
644 include portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc.
501], 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500,
and Doc. 501], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502,
and Doc. 503], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504,
and Doc. 505], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 506], 648 [Pg. 648
includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 651–656 [Pgs. 651–656
include portions of Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517,
and Doc. 518], 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524,
and Doc. 525], 662–663 [Pgs. 662–663 include portions of Doc. 528
and Doc. 529], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 538]; right to bring
suits in Chinese courts against Government of China,
1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 853, Doc. 854,
and Doc. 855]; status of persons of Chinese race in China
claiming American citizenship, 1100–1103 [Pgs. 1100–1103

include portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, Doc. 857, and Doc.
858]
U S. commercial interests. See Commercial interests of
United States, supra.
U. S. merchantmen. See under Yangtze Valley, infra.
U. S. military forces, question of withdrawal from
Tientsin, 736–742 [Pgs. 736–742 include portions of Doc. 610 and
Doc. 611]
U. S. naval forces (see also, supra, under Boycotts and
strikes at Canton, and Civil war in North China:
Operations at Taku; also under Protection of American
missionary 
interests; 
Taxation: 
Imposition 
of
consumption and production taxes; and Yangtze Valley,
infra), XXVII [Pg. XXVII is part of Message of the president of the United
States to Congress, December 7, 1926]
Washington Conference:
Nine-power treaties relating to China:
Customs tariff treaty. See Special
Conference 
on 
the 
Chinese
Customs 
Tariff 
and 
Taxation:
Imposition of consumption and
production taxes, supra.
General treaty of principles and
policy:
Adherence of Germany,
subject 
to 
ratification,
1001–1002 [Pgs. 1001–1002
include portions of Doc. 772, Doc.
773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775],

1003–1004 [Pgs. 1003–1004
include portions of Doc. 775, Doc.
776, and Doc. 777], 1014 [Pg.
1014 is part of Doc. 787], 1018
[Pg. 1018 includes portions of
Doc. 790 and Doc. 791]
Chinese 
representations
and 
agitation 
against
adherence of Germany
and other nonsignatory
powers, 1002–1003 [Pgs.
1002–1003 include portions of
Doc. 774, Doc. 775, and Doc.
776], 1004–1005 [Pgs. 1004–
1005 include portions of Doc. 776,
Doc. 777, and Doc. 778], 1007
[Pg. 1007 includes portions of
Doc. 778 and Doc. 779], 1010–
1011 [Pgs. 1010–1011 include
portions of Doc. 782 and Doc.
783], 1015–1016 [Pg. 1015 is
part of Doc. 788], 1023 [Pg.
1023 includes portions of Doc.
793 and Doc. 794]; U. S.
suggestion that protests
be 
withdrawn, 
and
Chinese refusal, 1015 [Pg.
1015 is part of Doc. 788],
1017–1018 [Pgs. 1017–1018
include portions of Doc. 788, Doc.
789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791],
1022 
[Pg. 
1022 
includes
portions of Doc. 791 and Doc.
792]

Cited, 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part
of Doc. 840]
U. 
S. 
statements
concerning invitations to
adhere, 1002–1003 [Pgs.
1002–1003 include portions of
Doc. 774, Doc. 775, and Doc.
776], 1005–1007 [Pgs. 1005–
1007 include portions of Doc. 777,
Doc. 778, and Doc. 779], 1008–
1010 [Pgs. 1008–1010 include
portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781,
Doc. 782, and Doc. 783], 1012–
1013 [Pgs. 1012–1013 include
portions of Doc. 784, Doc. 785,
and Doc. 786], 1017 [Pg. 1017
includes portions of Doc. 788,
Doc. 789, and Doc. 790], 1018–
1022 [Pgs. 1018–1022 include
portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791,
and Doc. 792]
Resolutions providing for—
Board of Reference, 769 [Pg. 769 is
part of Doc. 635], 770–771 [Pg. 770 is part
of Doc. 635]
Commission on Extraterritoriality.
See under Extraterritoriality, supra.
Wu Pei-fu (see also Civil war in North China, supra,
and Yangtze Valley: Military and naval operations,
infra), 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 583], 763–764 [Pgs. 763–764
include portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc.
635], 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 636], 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions

of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 641], 1081
[Pg. 1081 includes portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838]
Yangtze Valley, invasion by Southern Nationalist
(Cantonese) forces under Chiang Kai-shek:
Canton regime: Confidence in success of
campaign, 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 641];
removal of capital to Hankow-Wuchang area,
650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and
Doc. 513], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 518,
Doc. 519, and Doc. 520], 659–660 [Pgs. 659–660 include
portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525],
661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 525, Doc. 526, and
Doc. 527]; U. S. relations with, 629 [Pg. 629
includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 634 [Pg. 634
is part of Doc. 487], 659–660 [Pgs. 659–660 include
portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525]
Chinese civilian population, 645 [Pg. 645 includes
portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503], 646 [Pg.
646 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]
Detention 
of 
British 
merchantmen 
at
Wanhsien, 624–625 [Pgs. 624–625 include portions of
Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, and Doc. 472], 627 [Pg. 627
includes portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477],
630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482],
630–631 [Pgs. 630–631 include portions of Doc. 481,
Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 631 [Pg. 631 includes
portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 632 [Pg.
632 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 633 [Pg.
633 includes portions of Doc. 485, Doc. 486, and Doc. 487],
639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and
Doc. 492]
Evacuation 
of 
foreigners 
from 
Sianfu,
question of, 643–644 [Pgs. 643–644 include portions

of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501],
644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc.
500, and Doc. 501], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc.
507 and Doc. 508]
Firing on foreign vessels, 624–625 [Pgs. 624–
625 include portions of Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, and
Doc. 472], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 475,
Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of
Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 632 [Pg. 632 includes
portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 633 [Pg. 633 includes
portions of Doc. 485, Doc. 486, and Doc. 487], 641 [Pg.
641 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 642 [Pg.
642 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 644 [Pg.
644 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and
Doc. 501], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 507 and
Doc. 508], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 509 and
Doc. 510]
Foreign volunteer forces and naval units, 622
[Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, and Doc.
466], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 467, Doc.
468, and Doc. 469], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc.
475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 631 [Pg. 631 includes
portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 633 [Pg.
633 includes portions of Doc. 485, Doc. 486, and Doc. 487],
642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496],
645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and
Doc. 503], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 509 and
Doc. 510], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 511,
Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of
Doc. 513 and Doc. 514], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of
Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 656–657 [Pgs. 656–
657 include portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc.
519, and Doc. 520], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc.
518, Doc. 519, and Doc. 520], 658 [Pg. 658 includes
portions of Doc. 521 and Doc. 522], 662–664 [Pgs. 662–

664 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc.
531, and Doc. 532]
Military and naval operations, 618–623 [Pgs.
618–623 include portions of Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458,
Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc.
464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc.
469], 623–625 [Pgs. 623–625 include portions of Doc.
467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, and Doc.
472], 626–627 [Pgs. 626–627 include portions of Doc.
473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 629
[Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 631
[Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc.
484], 632–633 [Pgs. 632–633 include portions of Doc.
484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, and Doc. 487], 634 [Pg. 634 is
part of Doc. 487], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc.
490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 640–641 [Pgs. 640–641
include portions of Doc. 492, Doc. 493, and Doc. 494], 642
[Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 644
[Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500,
and Doc. 501], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions
of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc.
503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 646–648 [Pgs. 646–648
include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506,
Doc. 507, and Doc. 508], 649–651 [Pgs. 649–651 include
portions of Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc.
513, and Doc. 514], 655–656 [Pgs. 655–656 include
portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and
Doc. 518], 658–661 [Pgs. 658–661 include portions of
Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc.
526, and Doc. 527]
Mining operations of Cantonese at Swatow
Bay, 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 473, Doc.
474, and Doc. 475], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc.
477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479]; on rivers between
Changsha and Hankow, 620 [Pg. 620 includes

portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 642 [Pg.
642 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496]
Regulations of Cantonese authorities affecting
foreign vessels at Swatow Bay, 626–627 [Pgs.
626–627 include portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475,
Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 627–628 [Pgs. 627–628 include
portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and
Doc. 479]; on Siang and Yangtze Rivers, 621–
622 [Pgs. 621–622 include portions of Doc. 463, Doc. 464,
Doc. 465, and Doc. 466], 634–640 [Pgs. 634–640 include
portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc.
491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493], 641 [Pg. 641 includes
portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 642 [Pg. 642 includes
portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 643 [Pg. 643 includes
portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498], 644–645 [Pgs. 644–
645 include portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc.
501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503]
Shanghai, discussion of proposed defensive
measures, 662–663 [Pgs. 662–663 include portions of
Doc. 528 and Doc. 529]
U. S. merchantmen: Attacks upon, 641 [Pg. 641
includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 649 [Pg. 649
includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 660 [Pg. 660
includes portions of Doc. 523, Doc. 524, and Doc. 525];
question of compliance with Cantonese
navigation regulations, 634–636 [Pgs. 634–636
include portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488], 636–637
[Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489],
638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490],
640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493],
642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496],
644–645 [Pgs. 644–645 include portions of Doc. 498,
Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503];
suspension of sailings on Yangtze during

disturbed periods, recommendations, 651–655
[Pgs. 651–655 include portions of Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc.
515, and Doc. 516]
U. S. naval forces:
Assistance to British, 626 [Pg. 626
includes portions of Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and
Doc. 475], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of
Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 632 [Pg.
632 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc.
485], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc.
507 and Doc. 508]
Despatch to Foochow, 655–656 [Pgs.
655–656 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc.
515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518], 657
[Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 518, Doc.
519, and Doc. 520]; to Hankow, 620–
621 [Pgs. 620–621 include portions of Doc.
461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464], 622
[Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 464, Doc.
465, and Doc. 466], 623 [Pg. 623 includes
portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469],
624 [Pg. 624 includes portions of Doc. 469,
Doc. 470, and Doc. 471], 641 [Pg. 641
includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494],
655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 514,
Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 656 [Pg. 656
includes portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and
Doc. 518], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of
Doc. 518, Doc. 519, and Doc. 520]; to
Kiukiang, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions
of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 645 [Pg. 645
includes portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and
Doc. 503]

Firing upon, 624 [Pg. 624 includes
portions of Doc. 469, Doc. 470, and Doc. 471],
631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 482,
Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 632 [Pg. 632
includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485],
633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 485,
Doc. 486, and Doc. 487], 640 [Pg. 640
includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493],
644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 498,
Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501]
Regulations 
of 
Cantonese
authorities affecting navigation, 621
[Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 463 and
Doc. 464], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 487],
641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 493
and Doc. 494], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions
of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498], 644–645 [Pgs.
644–645 include portions of Doc. 498, Doc.
499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc.
503], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc.
509 and Doc. 510]; U. S. attitude and
action, 621–622 [Pgs. 621–622 include
portions of Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, and
Doc. 466], 627–628 [Pgs. 627–628 include
portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc.
478, and Doc. 479], 634–639 [Pgs. 634–639
include portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc.
489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 640
[Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 492 and
Doc. 493], 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of
Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 643 [Pg. 643
includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498],
645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 501,
Doc. 502, and Doc. 503]

Use, to prevent performance of
unneutral services, recommendation
of U. S. Minister as to U. S. policy,
652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 514]; to
protect 
integrity 
of 
foreign
settlements, 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc.
528], 663–664 [Pgs. 663–664 include
portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc.
531, and Doc. 532]
Claims: Claims against Chinese Government, right of American
citizens to bring suits in Chinese courts, 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100
include portions of Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855]; liquidation of U. S.
World War claims, XXV [Pg. XXV is part of Message of the president of the United
States to Congress, December 7, 1926]; U. S.-Austrian, 128 [Pg. 128 includes
portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 129–130 [Pgs. 129–130 include portions of
Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 133–135 [Pgs. 133–135 include portions of Doc. 103 and
Doc. 104], 136–140 [Pgs. 136–140 include portions of Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc.
106, Doc. 107, and Doc. 108]; U. S.-German, 125–127 [Pgs. 125–127 include
portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100], 128 [Pg. 128 includes
portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 101 and
Doc. 102], 131–132 [Pgs. 131–132 include portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]; U.
S.-Hungarian, 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 143–
145 [Pgs. 143–145 include portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]
Colombia. See Boundary disputes, Narcotic drugs, and Permanent
Court of International Justice.
Colt Company, interest in securing arms contract with Argentina,
561–562 [Pgs. 561–562 include portions of Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, and Doc.
396], 562–563 [Pgs. 562–563 include portions of Doc. 394, Doc. 395, and Doc.
396]
Commercial treaties and agreements:
Sino-American treaty of peace, amity, and commerce,
1844, 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 840]

U. S.-Bolivia, treaty of friendship, peace, commerce
and navigation, 1858, 564–565 [Pgs. 564–565 include portions
of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 397
and Doc. 398], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc.
399]
U. S.-Brazil: Modus vivendi, Oct. 18, 1923, according
most-favored-nation treatment, 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc.
402], 572–573 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 403]; proposed treaty of
friendship, commerce and consular rights, 569–573 [Pgs.
569–573 include portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]
U. S.-Germany, treaty of friendship, commerce and
consular rights, Dec. 8, 1923, 570–571 [Pg. 570 is part of
Doc. 402]
Commissions, committees, etc.:
Aeronautical commission, work in connection with
aerial navigation convention, 1919, 145–146 [Pgs. 145–146
include portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]
Commission on extraterritoriality in China. See under
China: Extraterritoriality.
Committee of Experts for the Progressive Codification
of International Law, questionnaires, 555–556 [Pgs. 555–
556 include portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]
International commission for air navigation, 148–149
[Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 112], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 112]
International Joint Commission, U. S.-Canada, 582–583
[Pgs. 582–583 include portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]
Joint Board of Engineers, U. S.-Canada, report, 584 [Pg.
584 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 589–590 [Pgs. 589–
590 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]

Military, naval and air subcommittee of Preparatory
Commission for the Disarmament Conference, 56 [Pg. 56
includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 103–104 [Pgs. 103–104
include portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78], 109–114 [Pgs.
109–114 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc.
86], 114–118 [Pgs. 114–118 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc.
86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88]
Mixed Claims Commission, U. S.-Germany, 126 [Pg. 126
is part of Doc. 98], 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99,
and Doc. 100], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc.
101], 141–142 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 109]
Plebiscitary Commission, Tacna-Arica controversy. See
under Tacna-Arica controversy.
Preparatory 
Commission 
for 
the 
Disarmament
Conference. See Preparatory Commission for the
Disarmament Conference.
Reparation Commission, discontinuance of office of
American Unofficial Observer, 120–125 [Pgs. 120–125
include portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95,
Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98]
Shanghai Mixed Court, commissions to draft agreement
for rendition, 1029–1032 [Pgs. 1029–1032 include portions of
Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, and Doc. 800]
Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff. See
China: Special Conference: Committees.
Tripartite Claims Commission, U. S.-Austria and
Hungary, 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101],
129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 101], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 103],
139–140 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 108], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc.
110]

Concessions, contracts, etc. (see also Oil concessions and
monopolies):
Anglo-French loan of 1908 to Chinese Board of Posts
and Communications, cited, 1072 [Pg. 1072 is part of Doc.
831]
Eastern Telegraph Co., text of 1911 agreement with
China, 1072–1075 [Pgs. 1072–1075 include portions of Doc. 831
and Doc. 832]
Federal Telegraph Co. See under China: Radio
communications.
Mitsui Co. See China: Radio communications: U. S.-
Japanese controversy.
Conferences, international:
Bolívar Congress at Panama:
Panaman invitation and U. S. acceptance,
254–255 [Pgs. 254–255 include portions of Doc. 125,
Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc.
131]
Resolutions regarding—
Aggressor state, common action
against, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of
Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 258–259 [Pgs.
258–259 include portions of Doc. 135, Doc.
136, and Doc. 137]
American league of nations, 257
[Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 133 and
Doc. 134], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of
Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Pan American Union, transference
to Panama, 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions
of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]
U. S. policy in Porto Rico, 256 [Pg.
256 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc.
132], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc.
135 and Doc. 136]
Scope, U. S. inquiries and remarks, 255 [Pg.
255 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc.
130, and Doc. 131], 255–256 [Pgs. 255–256 include
portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc.
131, and Doc. 132]; Panaman assurances, 255 [Pg.
255 includes portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc.
130, and Doc. 131]
U. 
S. 
delegation: 
Appointment 
and
instructions, 255–256 [Pgs. 255–256 include portions
of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and
Doc. 132], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 133 and
Doc. 134]; reports, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of
Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include
portions of Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137];
statements, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 133
and Doc. 134], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 136
and Doc. 137]
Conference for conservation of whales, proposed, 556
[Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 390]
Conference of signatories to the protocol of Dec. 16,
1920. See under Permanent Court of International
Justice: U. S. proposal to adhere.
Disarmament. See Preparatory Commission for the
Disarmament Conference.

Naval conference, question of calling, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of
Doc. 48], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 48], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of
Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 86–87 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 72], 104–107
[Pgs. 104–107 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80,
and Doc. 81]
Oil 
pollution 
of 
navigable 
waters, 
preliminary
conference, June 8–16, text of final act, with draft
convention, 238–247 [Pgs. 238–247 include portions of Doc. 119,
Doc. 120, and Doc. 121]
Procedure of international conferences, proposed
international agreement to regulate, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of
Doc. 390]
Sanitary 
conference, 
May 
10, 
for 
revision 
of
international sanitary convention of 1912:
Convention, text signed June 21, 1926, and
procès-verbaux of deposits of ratifications,
177–238 [Pgs. 177–238 include portions of Doc. 115,
Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]
French invitation and U. S. acceptance, 174–
177 [Pgs. 174–177 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113,
Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]
U. S. delegation, 176–177 [Pgs. 176–177 include
portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]
Slavery, proposed conference and U. S. attitude, 248–
249 [Pgs. 248–249 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123,
and Doc. 124]
Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff. See
under China

Washington 
Conference 
of 
1922. 
See 
China:
Washington Conference.
Consular officers. See U. S. consular officers.
Conventions. See Treaties, conventions, etc.
Coolidge, Calvin (see also Tacna-Arica controversy: Arbitrator):
Annual message to Congress, VII–XXIX [Pg. VII is part of Message of the
president of the United States to Congress, December 7, 1926]; message to
Congress, Jan. 4, requesting appropriation for work of
Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference, 42–44
[Pgs. 42–44 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37]; submission to
the Senate of the report and convention relating to air navigation,
152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 112]
Costa Rica. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice; also under Boundary disputes.
Cuba. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of International
Justice.
Customs duties, exemptions of persons belonging to foreign
diplomatic missions in United States, 551–552 [Pgs. 551–552 include
portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]
Customs laws, reservation of U. S. freedom of action, in
connection with aerial navigation convention, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of
Doc. 112], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 112]
Customs tariff (see also China: Special Conference on the
Chinese Customs Tariff), U. S., X–XI [Pg. X is part of Message of the
president of the United States to Congress, December 7, 1926]
Czechoslovakia. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice.

Dawes annuities, agreement regulating distribution of, cited, 141–
142 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 109]
Denmark (see also China: Foreign powers: Special Conference;
Narcotic drugs; and Permanent Court of International Justice),
views concerning recognition of factions claiming to act with
authority for China, 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539]
Diplomatic List of Department of State, 549–550 [Pg. 549 is part of
Doc. 385]
Diplomatic privileges and immunities: International agreement,
proposed, 555–556 [Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390];
personnel of foreign missions in United States, German inquiries
and U. S. replies, 547–552 [Pgs. 547–552 include portions of Doc. 382, Doc.
383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386]
Disarmament Conference. See Preparatory Commission for the
Disarmament Conference.
Dominican Republic. See Permanent Court of International
Justice and under Boundary disputes.
Eastern Telegraph Co., text of 1911 agreement with China, 1072–
1075 [Pgs. 1072–1075 include portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832]
Estonia. See Permanent Court of International Justice.
Expatriation of naturalized U. S. citizens, Departmental rulings
with regard to presumption, 553–555 [Pgs. 553–555 include portions of
Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390]
Exploitation of the products of the sea, proposed international
agreement to regulate, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 390]
Extraterritorial rights, diplomatic privileges and immunities of
persons belonging to foreign missions in United States, German

inquiries and U. S. replies, 547–552 [Pgs. 547–552 include portions of Doc.
382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386]
Extraterritoriality. See under China.
Federal Telegraph Co. See under China: Radio communications:
U. S.-Japanese controversy.
Finland. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of International
Justice.
Fisheries, proposed international regulation, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of
Doc. 390]
Foreigners, responsibility of states for injury to person or
property, proposed international agreement, 555–556 [Pgs. 555–556
include portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]
France (see also China: Foreign powers; Narcotic drugs;
Permanent Court of International Justice; and Preparatory
Commission for the Disarmament Conference), invitation to
United States to attend International Sanitary Conference, 174–
175 [Pgs. 174–175 include portions of Doc. 112, Doc. 113, and Doc. 114]
Germany (see also Alien Property Custodian; China: Washington
Conference: Nine-power treaties: General treaty; and Narcotic
drugs), diplomatic privileges and immunities of persons
belonging to foreign missions in United States, German inquiries
and U. S. replies, 547–552 [Pgs. 547–552 include portions of Doc. 382, Doc.
383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386]
Good offices of United States (see also under Tacna-Arica
controversy): Chungking, China, extension in behalf of British
interests during absence of consul, 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc.
481 and Doc. 482]; Dominican Republic-Haitian boundary dispute,
informal offer, 544–545 [Pgs. 544–545 include portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380,
and Doc. 381]

Great Britain (see also Canada; Narcotic drugs; Permanent Court
of International Justice; and Preparatory Commission for the
Disarmament Conference):
Relations with China (see also China: Foreign powers):
Arms and munitions embargo: Commercial
airplanes, lifting of ban, 735 [Pg. 735 includes
portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609],
736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611];
cooperation 
with 
United 
States 
in
maintenance, 733–735 
[Pgs. 
733–735 
include
portions of Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc.
608, and Doc. 609]
Naval forces of Great Britain: Assistance of
U. S. naval forces, 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of
Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 631 [Pg. 631 includes
portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 632 [Pg.
632 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 648 [Pg.
648 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508];
compliance with navigation regulations of
Cantonese authorities, 637 [Pg. 637 includes
portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 639 [Pg. 639 includes
portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 642 [Pg.
642 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 649 [Pg.
649 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510];
detention 
of 
British 
merchantmen 
at
Wanhsien, 624–625 [Pgs. 624–625 include portions of
Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, and Doc. 472], 627 [Pg. 627
includes portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477],
630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482],
630–631 [Pgs. 630–631 include portions of Doc. 481,
Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 631 [Pg. 631 includes
portions of Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 632 [Pg.
632 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 633 [Pg.
633 includes portions of Doc. 485, Doc. 486, and Doc. 487],

639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and
Doc. 492]; policy with respect to use in curbing
boycott, 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 584 and
Doc. 585], 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 590 and
Doc. 591], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 594,
Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of
Doc. 598 and Doc. 599]
Negotiations for settlement of Chinese
boycott, 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 588 and
Doc. 589], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 594,
Doc. 595, and Doc. 596], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of
Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 730–731 [Pgs. 730–731 include
portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc.
603, and Doc. 604]
Ruling by U. S. Department of State with regard to
presumption of expatriation of naturalized U. S.
citizens, 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]
Great Lakes. See under Canada.
Greece. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of International
Justice.
Guatemala. See Narcotic drugs.
Haiti. See Boundary disputes: Dominican Republic–Haiti;
Narcotic drugs; and Permanent Court of International Justice.
Honduras (see also Narcotic drugs), U. S. representations and
Honduran regrets concerning remarks and resolution of delegate
to Bolívar Congress, 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc.
132], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]
Hughes, Chas. E., consultations by Department of State with Mr.
Hughes concerning Tacna-Arica controversy, 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401
include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 402 [Pg. 402 includes

portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 404–406 [Pgs. 404–406 include portions of
Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287],
434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 451 [Pg. 451 includes
portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 303, Doc.
304, and Doc. 305], 459–461 [Pgs. 459–461 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc.
309, and Doc. 310]
Hungary. See Alien Property Custodian, Narcotic drugs, and
Permanent Court of International Justice.
India. See Permanent Court of International Justice.
Insular possessions of the United States, XXI–XXII [Pg. XXI is part of
Message of the president of the United States to Congress, December 7, 1926]
International law, questionnaires prepared by Committee of
Experts for the Progressive Codification of International Law,
555–556 [Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]
International Sanitary Conference. See Conferences: Sanitary
Conference.
Irish Free State. See Permanent Court of International Justice.
Italy. See China: Foreign powers; Narcotic drugs; and Permanent
Court of International Justice.
Japan. See China: Foreign powers; Narcotic drugs; Permanent
Court of International Justice; and Preparatory Commission for
the Disarmament Conference.
Latvia. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of International
Justice.
League of Nations (see also Permanent Court of International
Justice and Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament
Conference): Aerial navigation convention, U. S. proposed
reservation, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 112], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 112];

Bolivian-Paraguayan boundary dispute, U. S. policy toward
intervention of League, 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364,
and Doc. 365]; questionnaires on international law, opinion of
Department of State, 555–556 [Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 389
and Doc. 390]; slavery, efforts for suppression, and U. S. attitude,
247–249 [Pgs. 247–249 include portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123,
and Doc. 124]
League of nations, American, proposed, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions
of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]
Legislation. See U. S. Congress and U. S. Statutes.
Liberia. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of International
Justice.
Lithuania. See Permanent Court of International Justice.
Loans. See under China.
Luxemburg. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice.
Mexico. See Narcotic drugs.
Mills Bill. See under Alien Property Custodian.
Missionaries. See Protection of American missionary interests
and U. S. citizens under China.
Mitsui Co. See China: Radio communications: U. S.-Japanese
controversy.
Most-favored-nation treatment, proposed treaty between United
States and Brazil, 569–573 [Pgs. 569–573 include portions of Doc. 402 and
Doc. 403]
Munitions. See Arms and munitions.

Narcotic drugs: U. S. acts for control of traffic, 250–253 [Pg. 250 is
part of Doc. 125]; U. S. statement to certain foreign governments
regarding efforts to control production of and traffic in, 250–254
[Pgs. 250–254 include portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]
Nationality, proposed international agreement, 555–556 [Pgs. 555–
556 include portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]
Naval armament limitation. See Preparatory Commission for the
Disarmament Conference.
Naval conference, question of calling, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 48], 54
[Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 48], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51],
86–87 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 72], 104–107 [Pgs. 104–107 include portions of
Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, and Doc. 81]
Naval mission to Brazil (U. S.), renewal of contract signed Nov. 6,
1922, 574–575 [Pgs. 574–575 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406,
and Doc. 407]
Netherlands. See China: Foreign powers; Narcotic drugs; and
Permanent Court of International Justice.
New Zealand. See Permanent Court of International Justice.
Nicaragua, resolution of delegate to Bolívar Congress concerning
transference of seat of Pan American Union to Panama, 258 [Pg.
258 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]
Norway. See China: Foreign powers: Special Conference;
Narcotic drugs; and Permanent Court of International Justice.
Oil concessions and monopolies: Disapproval by Department of
State of proposed grant of oil monopoly by Canton government to
Standard Oil Co., 1092–1097 [Pgs. 1092–1097 include portions of Doc. 841,
Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc.
850, and Doc. 851]; U. S. representations to Bolivia regarding oil
concessions containing clauses discriminating against American

citizens, 564–568 [Pgs. 564–568 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc.
399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401]
Oil pollution of navigable waters, final act of preliminary
conference, June 8–16, text of act and annexed draft convention,
238–247 [Pgs. 238–247 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121]
Opium. See Narcotic drugs.
Pan American Union, proposed transference to Panama, 259 [Pg.
259 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]
Panama. 
See 
Boundary 
disputes: 
Costa 
Rica–Panama;
Conferences: Bolívar Congress; Narcotic drugs; and Permanent
Court of International Justice.
Paraguay (see also Permanent Court of International Justice),
boundary dispute with Bolivia, proposed submission of
controversy to United States for arbitration, 531–534 [Pgs. 531–534
include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367]
Permanent Court of International Justice:
Aerial 
navigation 
convention, 
U. 
S. 
proposed
reservation concerning submission of disputes to Court,
150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 112], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 112]
Status of member (Costa Rica) withdrawing from
League of Nations, U. S. inquiry, 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions
of Doc. 11, Doc. 12, and Doc. 13]; League reply, 10–11 [Pgs. 10–
11 include portions of Doc. 11, Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15]
Submission 
by 
Belgium 
of 
dispute 
concerning
abrogation by China of Sino-Belgian treaty of Nov. 2,
1865, 984–985 [Pgs. 984–985 include portions of Doc. 758, Doc.
759, Doc. 760, and Doc. 761], 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc.
761 and Doc. 762], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 763], 989 [Pg. 989 is
part of Doc. 763], 991 [Pg. 991 includes portions of Doc. 766, Doc. 767,

and Doc. 768], 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 769], 1001 [Pg. 1001
includes portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774], 1001n [Pg.
1001 includes portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774]
U. S. proposal to adhere with reservations to protocol of
Dec. 16, 1920:
Conference 
of 
protocol 
signatories 
for
discussion of Senate reservations:
British proposal for conference, 7
[Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]
Decisions of conference, 31–38 [Pgs.
31–38 include portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33,
and Doc. 34]
Formula 
for 
acceptance 
of
reservations, 25–26 [Pgs. 25–26 include
portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc.
28]; draft protocol, 36–38 [Pgs. 36–38
include portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc.
34]
Invitation to United States to
participate, 8–10 [Pgs. 8–10 include
portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, Doc. 12, and Doc.
13]; U. S. reply, 12–13 [Pgs. 12–13
include portions of Doc. 16, Doc. 17, and Doc.
18]
Position of various governments,
18–24 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 25];
comments concerning, 26–28 [Pgs.
26–28 include portions of Doc. 26, Doc. 27,
Doc. 28, and Doc. 29]

Report of meetings, Sept. 1–3, 17–
25 [Pgs. 17–25 include portions of Doc. 24,
Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]
Inquiries to foreign governments concerning
acceptance of reservations:
Discussion of form of notification,
2–3 [Pgs. 2–3 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc.
2, and Doc. 3]
Texts, 3–4 [Pgs. 3–4 include portions of
Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 11 [Pg.
11 includes portions of Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and
Doc. 15], 29–30 [Pgs. 29–30 include
portions of Doc. 30, Doc. 31, and Doc. 32];
replies, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 6
and Doc. 7], 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc.
7 and Doc. 8], 7–8 [Pgs. 7–8 include portions
of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 11 [Pg. 11
includes portions of Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc.
15], 13–17 [Pgs. 13–17 include portions of
Doc. 16, Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20,
Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, and Doc.
25], 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 26,
Doc. 27, and Doc. 28], 30–39 [Pgs. 30–39
include portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, Doc. 33,
and Doc. 34]
Notification to League, 5–6 [Pgs. 5–6 include
portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8]
Senate resolution, Jan. 27, text, 1–2 [Pgs. 1–2
include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]
Persia. See Permanent Court of International Justice.

Peru (see also Narcotic drugs and Tacna-Arica controversy),
boundary dispute with Colombia, question of ratification of treaty
of Mar. 24, 1922, 534–539 [Pgs. 534–539 include portions of Doc. 366, Doc.
367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375,
Doc. 376, and Doc. 377]
Petroleum concessions and monopolies. See Oil concessions and
monopolies.
Philippine Islands, XXI–XXII [Pg. XXI is part of Message of the president of the
United States to Congress, December 7, 1926]
Piracy, proposed international agreement to regulate, 556 [Pg. 556 is
part of Doc. 390]
Plebiscite. See under Tacna-Arica controversy.
Poland. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of International
Justice.
Porto Rico, resolution of Honduran delegate to Bolívar Congress
concerning U. S. policy, 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc.
132], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]
Portugal. See China: Foreign powers; Narcotic drugs; and
Permanent Court of International Justice.
Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament Conference:
British attitude, 57–59 [Pgs. 57–59 include portions of Doc. 50
and Doc. 51], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65],
108–109 [Pgs. 108–109 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]
Election of officers, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 74,
Doc. 75, and Doc. 76], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 76 and
Doc. 77]
Japanese attitude, 44–45 [Pgs. 44–45 include portions of Doc. 36,
Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 62,

Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 77 and
Doc. 78], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]
League committees, question of participation:
Elimination 
of 
Permanent 
Advisory
Commission, 56 [Pg. 56 includes portions of Doc. 48
and Doc. 49], 103–104 [Pgs. 103–104 include portions of
Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78]
U. S. objections, based on Commission’s
competence to determine its own procedure,
49–50 [Pgs. 49–50 include portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45,
Doc. 46, and Doc. 47], 67–68 [Pgs. 67–68 include
portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 70–
75 [Pgs. 70–75 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc.
61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of
Doc. 72]
Attitude of other powers, 76 [Pg. 76
includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65],
77–78 [Pgs. 77–78 include portions of Doc.
66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 100–
101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc.
73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, and Doc. 76]
Reports 
concerning 
status 
of
committees, and efforts of League
Council to meet U. S. objections,
50–51 [Pgs. 50–51 include portions of Doc.
46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 56 [Pg. 56 includes
portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 60 [Pg. 60
includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53],
63–67 [Pgs. 63–67 include portions of Doc.
54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 68–69
[Pgs. 68–69 include portions of Doc. 57 and
Doc. 58], 79–80 [Pgs. 79–80 include

portions of Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc.
72]
League Council, arrangements and decisions in
connection with work of Commission, 40–42 [Pgs. 40–42
include portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of
Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 63–67 [Pgs. 63–67 include portions of Doc. 54,
Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 82], 119–
120 [Pgs. 119–120 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and
Doc. 91]
Military, naval and air subcommittee, 103–104 [Pgs. 103–
104 include portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78], 109–114 [Pgs.
109–114 include portions of Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc.
86], 114–118 [Pgs. 114–118 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc.
86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88]
Naval conference, question of calling, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of
Doc. 48], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 48], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of
Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 86–87 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 72], 104–107
[Pgs. 104–107 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80,
and Doc. 81]
Postponement, question of, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc.
37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 39], 47–48 [Pgs.
47–48 include portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, and Doc.
44], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, and Doc.
44], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46], 55
[Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 48], 62–63 [Pgs. 62–63 include portions of Doc.
53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 74–75 [Pgs. 74–75 include portions of Doc.
61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc.
64 and Doc. 65], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and
Doc. 68], 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]
Press reports and comments, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of
Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 46
and Doc. 47], 60–63 [Pgs. 60–63 include portions of Doc. 52, Doc. 53,
Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc.

62], 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 77
[Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68], 105–106
[Pgs. 105–106 include portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, and Doc. 80]
U. S. participation:
Appropriation: 
President’s 
message 
to
Congress recommending, 42–44 [Pgs. 42–44
include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 45–46
[Pgs. 45–46 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc.
39]; resolution of Congress, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of
Doc. 39]
Delegation: Appointment and composition,
45–46 [Pgs. 45–46 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38,
and Doc. 39], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 39], 48 [Pg. 48
includes portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, and Doc.
44], 51–52 [Pgs. 51–52 include portions of Doc. 47 and
Doc. 48], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc.
61], 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62],
80–81 [Pgs. 80–81 include portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71,
and Doc. 72]; instructions, 80–100 [Pgs. 80–100
include portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, and
Doc. 74], 112–114 [Pgs. 112–114 include portions of
Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86]; reports, 101–104
[Pgs. 101–104 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76,
Doc. 77, and Doc. 78], 108–111 [Pgs. 108–111 include
portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 114–118 [Pgs. 114–118
include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and
Doc. 88]
Invitation and acceptance, 40–42 [Pgs. 40–42
include portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 48–49 [Pgs. 48–
49 include portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44,
Doc. 45, and Doc. 46]
Policy (see also League committees, supra),
43–44 [Pgs. 43–44 include portions of Doc. 36 and Doc.

37], 52–56 [Pgs. 52–56 include portions of Doc. 48 and
Doc. 49], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc.
51], 78–79 [Pgs. 78–79 include portions of Doc. 68, Doc.
69, and Doc. 70], 81–100 [Pgs. 81–100 include portions
of Doc. 72, Doc. 73, and Doc. 74], 101–103 [Pgs. 101–
103 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc.
77]
Preliminary 
instructions 
to 
U. 
S.
representative, 45–47 [Pgs. 45–47 include portions of
Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, and Doc. 41], 48–49
[Pgs. 48–49 include portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43,
Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46], 49–50 [Pgs. 49–50
include portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47]
Remarks of President Coolidge concerning
work, XXVIII [Pg. XXVIII is part of Message of the president
of the United States to Congress, December 7, 1926]
Statements by American delegate, 101–103
[Pgs. 101–103 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76,
and Doc. 77], 110–114 [Pgs. 110–114 include portions of
Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, and Doc. 86], 114–118 [Pgs.
114–118 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc.
87, and Doc. 88]
Withdrawal of Uruguay, 118–119 [Pgs. 118–119 include
portions of Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90]
Radio communications. See under China.
Radio Corporation of America. See Federal Telegraph Co.
contract and U. S.-Japanese controversy under China: Radio
communications.
Recognition (see also under China), U. S. policy toward Russian
regime, question of, 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 770], 998–999 [Pgs. 998–
999 include portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772]

Reparation Commission, discontinuance of office of the American
Unofficial Observer, 120–125 [Pgs. 120–125 include portions of Doc. 90,
Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98]
Resolutions. 
See 
Tacna-Arica 
controversy: 
Plebiscite:
Termination: U. S. resolution; and U. S. Congress.
Responsibility of states for injury to person or property of
foreigners, proposed international agreement, 555–556 [Pgs. 555–
556 include portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]
Rubber: Proposal to encourage industry in Philippine Islands, XXII
[Pg. XXII is part of Message of the president of the United States to Congress,
December 7, 1926]; proposals to stimulate production in Amazon
Valley, 575–577 [Pgs. 575–577 include portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407,
Doc. 408, Doc. 409, and Doc. 410]
Rumania. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice.
Russia: Recognition, question of U. S. policy, 997 [Pg. 997 is part of
Doc. 770], 998–999 [Pgs. 998–999 include portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772];
Soviet Ambassador, attitude of United States toward demand of
Chinese Government for recall, 1097–1099 [Pgs. 1097–1099 include
portions of Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, and Doc. 854]; ruling of U.
S. Department of State with regard to presumption of expatriation
of naturalized U. S. citizens of Russian origin, 554–555 [Pgs. 554–
555 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390]; Soviet influence in
China, 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533], 667 [Pg. 667
includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 679–680 [Pgs. 679–680 include
portions of Doc. 538 and Doc. 539], 690–691 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 552], 692
[Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 552], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 561 and Doc.
562], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 565], 715–718 [Pgs. 715–718 include portions
of Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583], 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 606], 764 [Pg.
764 is part of Doc. 632], 1000 [Pg. 1000 is part of Doc. 772]
Salvador. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice.

Sanitary Conference. See under Conferences.
Servia. See Yugoslavia.
Siam. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of International
Justice.
Slavery, efforts by League of Nations for suppression, and U. S.
attitude, 247–249 [Pgs. 247–249 include portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc.
122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124]
Spain. See China: Foreign powers: Special Conference; Narcotic
drugs; and Permanent Court of International Justice.
Special Conference on the Chinese Customs Tariff. See under
China.
St. Lawrence waterway project: Report of Joint Board of
Engineers, XV [Pg. XV is part of Message of the president of the United States to
Congress, December 7, 1926], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc.
417], 589–590 [Pgs. 589–590 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422];
remarks of President Coolidge, XV [Pg. XV is part of Message of the president
of the United States to Congress, December 7, 1926]
Standard Oil Co. (see also under China), interests in Bolivia, 564
[Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 397], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 401]
Stimson, Henry L.: Consultations by Department of State with
Mr. Stimson concerning Tacna-Arica controversy, 432 [Pg. 432
includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc.
288 and Doc. 289], 454 [Pg. 454 includes portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc.
305], 459–461 [Pgs. 459–461 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, and Doc.
310]; review of evidence concerning conditions in Tacna-Arica
plebiscitary area, 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and
Doc. 301], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 454 [Pg. 454
includes portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305], 454n [Pg. 454 includes
portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 305]

Sweden. See China: Foreign powers: Special Conference;
Narcotic drugs; and Permanent Court of International Justice.
Switzerland. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice.
Tacna-Arica controversy between Chile and Peru over unfulfilled
provisions of Treaty of Ancón:
Arbitrator:
Appeals by Chile and Peru from decisions of
Plebiscitary 
Commission. 
See 
under
Plebiscitary Commission, infra.
Enlargement of powers, 338 [Pg. 338 includes
portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 340–341 [Pgs. 340–
341 include portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 342 [Pg.
342 is part of Doc. 194], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of
Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]
Inability to invite Bolivia to participate in
negotiations under good offices, 409 [Pg. 409
includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]
Intervention in plebiscitary proceedings,
requests for, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 194], 354
[Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 206], 357 [Pg. 357 includes
portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 378 [Pg. 378 includes
portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]
Orders and decisions: Jan. 15, Opinion and
decision upon appeal from decision of
Plebiscitary Commission of Dec. 9, 1925,
277–281 [Pgs. 277–281 include portions of Doc. 149 and
Doc. 150]; Jan. 28, Order dismissing certain
appeals, 282–283 [Pgs. 282–283 include portions of
Doc. 150, Doc. 151, and Doc. 152]; Feb. 11, Order

allowing certain appeals, 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296
include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157];
Feb. 25, Decision upon certain appeals, 312–
314 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 170]
U. S. insistence on keeping position clear, 261
[Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 138], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc.
138], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 141], 275 [Pg. 275 is
part of Doc. 147], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 153], 318
[Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 174], 350 [Pg. 350 includes
portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of
Doc. 242], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 257], 400–401
[Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and
Doc. 259], 404–405 [Pgs. 404–405 include portions of
Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]
Bolivia. See Good offices and Renewal of good offices,
infra.
Commercial relations of Chile and Peru with United
States, effect of controversy upon, 304–305 [Pgs. 304–305
include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 452–454 [Pgs.
452–454 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc.
305], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]
Good offices of United States (see also Renewal, infra):
Activities and views of Latin American
countries, 261–262 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 138],
263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140],
264–265 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 141], 268 [Pg. 268 is
part of Doc. 143], 269–270 [Pgs. 269–270 include
portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 271–272 [Pg. 271 is
part of Doc. 144], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc.
144, Doc. 145, and Doc. 146], 276 [Pg. 276 includes
portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of
Doc. 176]

Bases of adjustment:
Arica, question of disposition, 408
[Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 265], 427 [Pg. 427
includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281],
428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 282
and Doc. 283], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions
of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 435 [Pg. 435
includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]
Bolivian corridor, 307 [Pg. 307 is part
of Doc. 165], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions
of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 417 [Pg. 417 is
part of Doc. 273], 427–428 [Pgs. 427–428
include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc.
282, and Doc. 283], 431–432 [Pgs. 431–432
include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and
Doc. 287], 434–436 [Pgs. 434–436 include
portions of Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and
Doc. 291], 438–439 [Pgs. 438–439 include
portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295],
441–444 [Pgs. 441–444 include portions of
Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 446 [Pg.
446 is part of Doc. 297], 450–451 [Pgs.
450–451 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc.
300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 455 [Pg. 455 is
part of Doc. 305], 458 [Pg. 458 includes
portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 462–
464 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 311], 467–468
[Pgs. 467–468 include portions of Doc. 314,
Doc. 315, and Doc. 316], 469 [Pg. 469 is part
of Doc. 316], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions
of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]
Cession 
to 
Bolivia 
(see 
also
Bolivian corridor, supra), 372 [Pg.
372 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc.

229], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc.
233 and Doc. 234], 379–380 [Pgs. 379–380
include portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc.
239, and Doc. 240], 384–385 [Pgs. 384–385
include portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc.
245, and Doc. 246], 387–388 [Pgs. 387–388
include portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and
Doc. 249], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of
Doc. 250 and Doc. 251], 408 [Pg. 408 is part
of Doc. 265], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc.
305], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 316]
Division of territory (see also
Bolivian corridor, supra), 271 [Pg.
271 is part of Doc. 144], 302–303 [Pgs.
302–303 include portions of Doc. 160, Doc.
161, and Doc. 162], 307–308 [Pg. 307 is
part of Doc. 165], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of
Doc. 176], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of
Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 373 [Pg.
373 is part of Doc. 230], 389 [Pg. 389 is part
of Doc. 249], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions
of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271], 415
[Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 272], 416–417 [Pgs.
416–417 include portions of Doc. 272 and Doc.
273], 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc.
275 and Doc. 276], 435–437 [Pgs. 435–437
include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc.
291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 446–448
[Pgs. 446–448 include portions of Doc. 297 and
Doc. 298], 470n [Pg. 470 includes portions of
Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 476 [Pg. 476
includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]
Formulas of U. S. Ambassador in
Chile, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of
Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 381 [Pg. 381

includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241],
389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 249], 408 [Pg.
408 is part of Doc. 265], 470n [Pg. 470
includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]
Latin American powers, question of
cooperation in urging settlement,
390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 250
and Doc. 251], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc.
256]
Neutralization of territory:
Acceptance by Peru, 385
[Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc.
244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246],
390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of
Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]
Discussions 
and
suggestions, 298–299 [Pgs.
298–299 include portions of Doc.
158 and Doc. 159], 302–303
[Pgs. 302–303 include portions of
Doc. 160, Doc. 161, and Doc.
162], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of
Doc. 165], 375 [Pg. 375 includes
portions of Doc. 232 and Doc.
233], 376–377 [Pgs. 376–377
include portions of Doc. 233, Doc.
234, and Doc. 235], 381 [Pg.
381 includes portions of Doc. 240
and Doc. 241], 384–385 [Pgs.
384–385 include portions of Doc.
243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc.
246], 416 [Pg. 416 includes
portions of Doc. 272 and Doc.
273], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of

Doc. 273], 445–446 [Pg. 445 is
part of Doc. 297], 446 [Pg. 446
is part of Doc. 297], 455 [Pg.
455 is part of Doc. 305], 469
[Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 316]
Message of Gen. Pershing
to Chilean Commissioner,
and reply, 397 [Pg. 397
includes portions of Doc. 254 and
Doc. 255], 403–404 [Pgs. 403–
404 include portions of Doc. 261,
Doc. 262, and Doc. 263]
Objections 
of 
certain
Chilean officials, 371 [Pg.
371 includes portions of Doc. 226,
Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 372
[Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc.
228 and Doc. 229], 387–388
[Pgs. 387–388 include portions of
Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc.
249]
Press 
statements
concerning authorship of
suggestion, 385–387 [Pgs.
385–387 include portions of Doc.
244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc.
247, and Doc. 248], 388–389
[Pgs. 388–389 include portions of
Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]
Proposals of U. S. Secretary of
State, 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of
Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 373 [Pg. 373 is part
of Doc. 230], 378–379 [Pgs. 378–379
include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc.

237, and Doc. 238], 384–385 [Pgs. 384–385
include portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc.
245, and Doc. 246], 386–387 [Pgs. 386–387
include portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and
Doc. 248], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of
Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 390 [Pg. 390
includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251],
398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 256], 416–417
[Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 272 and
Doc. 273], 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 291],
438–439 [Pgs. 438–439 include portions of
Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 443 [Pg.
443 is part of Doc. 296], 446 [Pg. 446 is part
of Doc. 297], 462–465 [Pgs. 462–465
include portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312];
counterproposals, 375 [Pg. 375 includes
portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 390 [Pg.
390 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc.
251], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc.
254 and Doc. 255], 427–428 [Pgs. 427–428
include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc.
282, and Doc. 283], 431–432 [Pgs. 431–432
include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and
Doc. 287], 434–435 [Pgs. 434–435 include
portions of Doc. 288, Doc. 289, and Doc. 290],
441–444 [Pgs. 441–444 include portions of
Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 451 [Pg.
451 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc.
302], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 316],
470–472 [Pgs. 470–472 include portions of
Doc. 316, Doc. 317, and Doc. 318], 474 [Pg.
474 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc.
320], 475–476 [Pgs. 475–476 include
portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and
Doc. 323]

Suspension 
of 
plebiscitary
proceedings upon acceptance of
bases of adjustment, U. S. proposal,
369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 223
and Doc. 224], 370–372 [Pgs. 370–372
include portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc.
227, Doc. 228, and Doc. 229], 408 [Pg. 408 is
part of Doc. 265]
Bolivia (see also Bases of adjustment, supra,
and Negotiations, infra), direct negotiations
of Chile and Peru concerning port, 269 [Pg. 269
includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 307 [Pg. 307
is part of Doc. 165], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc.
228 and Doc. 229], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc.
238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 385 [Pg. 385 includes
portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 389 [Pg.
389 is part of Doc. 249], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 265],
410–411 [Pgs. 410–411 include portions of Doc. 267,
Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271], 436–437
[Pgs. 436–437 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and
Doc. 293], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 296], 455 [Pg.
455 is part of Doc. 305]
Negotiations (see also Bases of adjustment,
supra):
Appointment of plenipotentiaries,
350–351 [Pgs. 350–351 include portions of
Doc. 199, Doc. 200, and Doc. 201], 351 [Pg.
351 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc.
201], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc.
215 and Doc. 216], 365 [Pg. 365 includes
portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 367 [Pg.
367 includes portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222,
and Doc. 223], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions
of Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and Doc. 228], 372

[Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 228 and
Doc. 229]
Bolivian request for representation,
396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 253], 409–410
[Pgs. 409–410 include portions of Doc. 266,
Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 467–468 [Pgs.
467–468 include portions of Doc. 314, Doc.
315, and Doc. 316]
Chilean opposition, 374–375 [Pgs.
374–375 include portions of Doc. 231, Doc.
232, and Doc. 233], 376–377 [Pgs. 376–377
include portions of Doc. 233, Doc. 234, and
Doc. 235], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 256],
408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 265], 411–416
[Pgs. 411–416 include portions of Doc. 269,
Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273],
418–420 [Pgs. 418–420 include portions of
Doc. 274, Doc. 275, and Doc. 276], 422–
425 [Pgs. 422–425 include portions of Doc.
277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 439–441
[Pgs. 439–441 include portions of Doc. 294,
Doc. 295, and Doc. 296], 456 [Pg. 456
includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306],
468–470 [Pgs. 468–470 include portions of
Doc. 315, Doc. 316, and Doc. 317], 473–
474 [Pgs. 473–474 include portions of Doc.
318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320]; statement of
views of Secretary of State, and
Chilean reply, 444–448 [Pgs. 444–448
include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, and
Doc. 298], 457–459 [Pgs. 457–459 include
portions of Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and
Doc. 309], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of
Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Meetings and minutes, 373 [Pg. 373 is
part of Doc. 230], 374 [Pg. 374 includes
portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 375 [Pg.
375 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc.
233], 378–379 [Pgs. 378–379 include
portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and
Doc. 238], 384–385 [Pgs. 384–385 include
portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and
Doc. 246], 444 [Pg. 444 includes portions of
Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 461 [Pg. 461
includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310],
462–465 [Pgs. 462–465 include portions of
Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 466 [Pg. 466
includes portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and
Doc. 314], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 316],
472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 318], 475 [Pg.
475 includes portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321,
and Doc. 322]
Program of Secretary of State, 369
[Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 223 and
Doc. 224], 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include
portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, and
Doc. 228]; acceptance, 371–372 [Pgs.
371–372 include portions of Doc. 226, Doc.
227, Doc. 228, and Doc. 229]
Suspension 
of 
plebiscitary
proceedings during negotiations,
proposed. See under Plebiscite,
infra.
Withdrawal of Chile, 484–486 [Pgs.
484–486 include portions of Doc. 334, Doc.
335, and Doc. 336]
Offers by United States, and interpretation of
terms, 298–300 [Pgs. 298–300 include portions of Doc.

158, Doc. 159, and Doc. 160], 302–303 [Pgs. 302–303
include portions of Doc. 160, Doc. 161, and Doc. 162], 319
[Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 321
[Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178],
327–328 [Pgs. 327–328 include portions of Doc. 182 and
Doc. 183], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 187 and
Doc. 188], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 212 and
Doc. 213], 362–365 [Pgs. 362–365 include portions of
Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220]
Chilean acceptance and views, 303–
304 [Pgs. 303–304 include portions of Doc.
161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 305–308
[Pgs. 305–308 include portions of Doc. 163,
Doc. 164, and Doc. 165], 310 [Pg. 310
includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168],
329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 183], 332 [Pg.
332 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc.
186], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 194],
344–345 [Pgs. 344–345 include portions of
Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 352–353 [Pgs.
352–353 include portions of Doc. 202, Doc.
203, Doc. 204, and Doc. 205], 355 [Pg. 355
includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208],
358–360 [Pgs. 358–360 include portions of
Doc. 212, Doc. 213, and Doc. 214], 361–
362 [Pgs. 361–362 include portions of Doc.
215, Doc. 216, and Doc. 217]
Peruvian unfavorable responses,
and ultimate acceptance, 316 [Pg. 316
includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172],
317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 173
and Doc. 174], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc.
176], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc.
184 and Doc. 185], 335 [Pg. 335 includes
portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 338–

339 [Pgs. 338–339 include portions of Doc.
191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 348–349
[Pgs. 348–349 include portions of Doc. 197,
Doc. 198, and Doc. 199], 349 [Pg. 349
includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199];
U. S. attitude, 318–319 [Pgs. 318–319
include portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175],
321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 177
and Doc. 178], 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334
include portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]
Preliminary U. S. instructions and
reports, 260–266 [Pgs. 260–266 include
portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc.
141, and Doc. 142], 268–273 [Pgs. 268–273
include portions of Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc.
145, and Doc. 146], 300–302 [Pgs. 300–302
include portions of Doc. 159, Doc. 160, and
Doc. 161]
U. S. refusal to join in guarantees,
311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 168
and Doc. 169], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions
of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 320 [Pg. 320 is
part of Doc. 176], 321 [Pg. 321 includes
portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 334 [Pg.
334 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc.
188]
Origin of good offices suggestion, question
of, 418–420 [Pgs. 418–420 include portions of Doc. 274,
Doc. 275, and Doc. 276], 422–425 [Pgs. 422–425 include
portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 429–430
[Pgs. 429–430 include portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and
Doc. 285], 444–446 [Pgs. 444–446 include portions of
Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of
Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Peruvian views, 271–272 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc.
144], 304–305 [Pgs. 304–305 include portions of Doc.
162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc.
179]
Publication of correspondence, 333 [Pg. 333 is
part of Doc. 187], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc.
189 and Doc. 190], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc.
193 and Doc. 194], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc.
193 and Doc. 194], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc.
204 and Doc. 205], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc.
212 and Doc. 213], 419–420 [Pgs. 419–420 include
portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 422–425 [Pgs. 422–
425 include portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279],
429–430 [Pgs. 429–430 include portions of Doc. 283,
Doc. 284, and Doc. 285]
U. S. policy in event of failure, 357 [Pg. 357
includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 400–401
[Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and
Doc. 259], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 263], 433–434
[Pgs. 433–434 include portions of Doc. 287, Doc. 288, and
Doc. 289], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 295]
Plebiscitary Commission (see also Plebiscite, infra):
Appeals from decisions, 273–274 [Pgs. 273–274
include portions of Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc.
147], 277–281 [Pgs. 277–281 include portions of Doc.
149 and Doc. 150], 282–283 [Pgs. 282–283 include
portions of Doc. 150, Doc. 151, and Doc. 152], 286 [Pg.
286 is part of Doc. 154], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include
portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 301 [Pg.
301 is part of Doc. 160], 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of
Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of
Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of
Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 312–314 [Pg. 312 is part of
Doc. 170], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 171 and

Doc. 172], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 185], 466 [Pg.
466 includes portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314],
479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328],
480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330],
482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and
Doc. 334], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 334]
Jurisdiction and duties, 274 [Pg. 274 includes
portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 279–281 [Pgs. 279–
281 include portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 291 [Pg.
291 is part of Doc. 155], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 155],
297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158],
310–311 [Pgs. 310–311 include portions of Doc. 167,
Doc. 168, and Doc. 169], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of
Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 221],
368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 223], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–
401 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259],
440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 295]
Members:
Chilean, 266n [Pg. 266 includes portions
of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 297 [Pg. 297
includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158],
374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 231
and Doc. 232]
United 
States: 
Absence 
and
resignation of Gen. Pershing, 268
[Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 143], 281–282 [Pgs.
281–282 include portions of Doc. 149, Doc.
150, and Doc. 151]; appointment of Maj.
Gen. 
William 
Lassiter, 
and
preliminary instructions, 274–276
[Pgs. 274–276 include portions of Doc. 146,
Doc. 147, and Doc. 148]; protection and
removal of personnel, 461 [Pg. 461
includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310],

466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 312,
Doc. 313, and Doc. 314], 484 [Pg. 484
includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]
Records, disposition of, 466 [Pg. 466 includes
portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314], 481 [Pg.
481 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 482 [Pg.
482 includes portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334],
484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]
Resolutions. See Plebiscite: Termination,
infra.
Plebiscite to be held in accordance with Arbitrator’s
award:
Arbitral award, Mar. 4, 1925, provisions, 286
[Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 154], 290–291 [Pg. 290 is part of
Doc. 155], 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 159 and
Doc. 160]
Chilean administration of disputed territory
(see also Conditions and prerequisites, infra):
Clashes between Chileans and
Peruvians, 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc.
141], 266–267 [Pgs. 266–267 include
portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 268 [Pg.
268 is part of Doc. 143], 270 [Pg. 270 is part
of Doc. 144], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc.
144], 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc.
144, Doc. 145, and Doc. 146], 283 [Pg. 283
includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152],
284–285 [Pgs. 284–285 include portions of
Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 292–293 [Pg. 292
is part of Doc. 155], 322 [Pg. 322 includes
portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 354 [Pg.
354 is part of Doc. 206], 391 [Pg. 391 is part

of Doc. 251], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc.
251], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc.
291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 448–449
[Pgs. 448–449 include portions of Doc. 297,
Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 450 [Pg. 450
includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and
Doc. 301], 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of
Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]
Jurisdiction, 296–297 [Pgs. 296–297
include portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and
Doc. 158], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of
Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 347–348 [Pgs.
347–348 include portions of Doc. 197 and Doc.
198]
Chile’s preference for, 303–304 [Pgs. 303–304
include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163],
306–307 [Pgs. 306–307 include portions of Doc. 164 and
Doc. 165], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 174], 322–323
[Pgs. 322–323 include portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179],
340–341 [Pgs. 340–341 include portions of Doc. 193 and
Doc. 194], 343–345 [Pgs. 343–345 include portions of
Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 206],
374–375 [Pgs. 374–375 include portions of Doc. 231,
Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of
Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of
Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 256],
404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263],
416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273],
439–441 [Pgs. 439–441 include portions of Doc. 294,
Doc. 295, and Doc. 296], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of
Doc. 
322 
and 
Doc. 
323]; insistence upon
continuance during good offices negotiations,
354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 206], 358 [Pg. 358 includes
portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 359–360 [Pgs. 359–
360 include portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 362–364

[Pgs. 362–364 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc.
218, and Doc. 219], 374–376 [Pgs. 374–376 include
portions of Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, and Doc. 234],
450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and
Doc. 301], 451–452 [Pgs. 451–452 include portions of
Doc. 301, Doc. 302, and Doc. 303], 456 [Pg. 456 includes
portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 468–475 [Pgs. 468–
475 include portions of Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc.
318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322], 475–
477 [Pgs. 475–477 include portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321,
Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324], 477 [Pg. 477 includes
portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 480 [Pg. 480 includes
portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 481–482 [Pgs. 481–
482 include portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and
Doc. 334], 484–485 [Pgs. 484–485 include portions of
Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]
Conditions 
and 
prerequisites 
for 
fair
plebiscite, difficulties involved (see also
Termination, infra):
Demands to be made on Chile, 322
[Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 178 and
Doc. 179], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 183],
346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 196
and Doc. 197], 347–348 [Pgs. 347–348
include portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198],
380–381 [Pgs. 380–381 include portions of
Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, and Doc. 241],
382–383 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 242], 401
[Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 258 and
Doc. 259], 454n [Pg. 454 includes portions of
Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305]
Discussions, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc.
155], 298–299 [Pgs. 298–299 include
portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 315 [Pg.

315 is part of Doc. 171], 317–319 [Pgs.
317–319 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc.
174, and Doc. 175], 321–326 [Pgs. 321–326
include portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc.
179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181], 328–329
[Pgs. 328–329 include portions of Doc. 182 and
Doc. 183], 341–348 [Pgs. 341–348 include
portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc.
197, and Doc. 198], 399–400 [Pgs. 399–400
include portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258],
407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 264], 415–416
[Pgs. 415–416 include portions of Doc. 272 and
Doc. 273], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of
Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 430–431 [Pgs.
430–431 include portions of Doc. 284, Doc.
285, and Doc. 286], 451–452 [Pgs. 451–452
include portions of Doc. 301, Doc. 302, and
Doc. 303]
Peruvian charges against Chile (see
also Peruvian resolutions, infra),
284–285 [Pgs. 284–285 include portions of
Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 317–318 [Pgs.
317–318 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc.
174], 338–339 [Pgs. 338–339 include
portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193],
365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 219
and Doc. 220]
Peruvian resolutions charging Chile
with frustration of plebiscite, 321–
322 [Pgs. 321–322 include portions of Doc.
177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179], 323 [Pg. 323 is
part of Doc. 179], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of
Doc. 180], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of
Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 326 [Pg. 326 is part
of Doc. 181], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions

of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 331 [Pg. 331 is
part of Doc. 185], 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334
include portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188];
336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 190], 337 [Pg.
337 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc.
191], 339–340 [Pgs. 339–340 include
portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194],
341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 194], 344 [Pg.
344 is part of Doc. 195], 345–346 [Pgs.
345–346 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc.
196, and Doc. 197], 349 [Pg. 349 includes
portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 356 [Pg.
356 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc.
210]
Prerequisites resolution of Nov.
1925, 
question 
of 
Chile’s
noncompliance, 382–383 [Pg. 382 is
part of Doc. 242], 390–395 [Pgs. 390–395
include portions of Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and
Doc. 252], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include
portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259],
406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 263], 407 [Pg.
407 is part of Doc. 264], 413 [Pg. 413 is part
of Doc. 272]
Report of Henry L. Stimson, 450
[Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 299, Doc.
300, and Doc. 301], 451 [Pg. 451 includes
portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 454 [Pg.
454 includes portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304,
and Doc. 305], 454n [Pg. 454 includes
portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305],
455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 305]
U. S. Commissioner’s statements,
Chilean 
Senate 
resolution

concerning, 411–414 [Pgs. 411–414
include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc.
271, and Doc. 272]
Election regulations and dates, 273–274 [Pgs.
273–274 include portions of Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146,
and Doc. 147], 277–281 [Pgs. 277–281 include portions
of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 283 [Pg. 283 includes portions
of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296
include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 297
[Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158],
312–314 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 170], 343–344 [Pg.
343 is part of Doc. 195], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 230],
401–402 [Pgs. 401–402 include portions of Doc. 258,
Doc. 259, and Doc. 260], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of
Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 449–450 [Pgs. 449–450 include
portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301],
456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306],
457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307],
465–466 [Pgs. 465–466 include portions of Doc. 311,
Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314], 467 [Pg. 467 includes
portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 468 [Pg. 468 includes
portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]
Frustration by Chile. See Conditions and
prerequisites, supra.
Intervention by the Arbitrator in plebiscitary
proceedings, requests for, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of
Doc. 194], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 206], 357 [Pg.
357 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 378 [Pg.
378 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]
Neutralization of territory during plebiscitary
period, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 144], 285 [Pg. 285
is part of Doc. 153], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc.
198 and Doc. 199], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 206],
377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

Peru’s preference for, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc.
144], 284–285 [Pgs. 284–285 include portions of Doc.
152 and Doc. 153], 296–297 [Pgs. 296–297 include
portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158], 318 [Pg.
318 is part of Doc. 174], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of
Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 338–339 [Pgs. 338–339 include
portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 345 [Pg.
345 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]
Postponement. 
See 
Conditions 
and
prerequisites: Peruvian resolutions, supra,
and under Registration, infra.
Prolongation 
of 
proceedings,
recommendations of U. S. Ambassador in
Chile, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 249], 395 [Pg. 395
includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 452 [Pg. 452
includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 465 [Pg. 465
includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 466–467
[Pgs. 466–467 include portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc.
314, and Doc. 315], 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc.
317 and Doc. 318]; U. S. views, 454–456 [Pgs. 454–
456 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and
Doc. 306], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 318]
Registration:
Abstention of Peruvians, 350 [Pg. 350
includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200],
352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 202,
Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 356 [Pg. 356
includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210],
362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 216
and Doc. 217], 365–369 [Pgs. 365–369
include portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc.
221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224], 370
[Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 225 and
Doc. 226], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of

Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 403 [Pg. 403
includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262],
418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 274
and Doc. 275], 421–422 [Pgs. 421–422
include portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278],
426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of
Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 430–431 [Pgs.
430–431 include portions of Doc. 284, Doc.
285, and Doc. 286]
Chilean voters, 370 [Pg. 370 includes
portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 389 [Pg.
389 is part of Doc. 249], 395 [Pg. 395
includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252],
404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 262
and Doc. 263]
Close of period, May 21, inquiries
and instructions as to situation,
428–429 [Pgs. 428–429 include portions of
Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 432–
433 [Pgs. 432–433 include portions of Doc.
286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288], 437–438
[Pgs. 437–438 include portions of Doc. 291,
Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 440 [Pg.
440 is part of Doc. 295], 449 [Pg. 449
includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]
Extension of period beyond Apr. 30,
357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 210
and Doc. 211], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions
of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 377 [Pg. 377
includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235],
397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 254
and Doc. 255], 402–403 [Pgs. 402–403
include portions of Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc.
261, and Doc. 262], 404–405 [Pgs. 404–405

include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263],
414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 272], 421–422
[Pgs. 421–422 include portions of Doc. 277 and
Doc. 278]
Postponement to Mar. 15, 298 [Pg.
298 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc.
159]; beyond Mar. 15, 309–310 [Pgs.
309–310 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc.
167, and Doc. 168], 311 [Pg. 311 includes
portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 316 [Pg.
316 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc.
172], 321–322 [Pgs. 321–322 include
portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179],
323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 179], 329 [Pg.
329 is part of Doc. 183], 339 [Pg. 339
includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193],
341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 194], 350 [Pg.
350 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc.
200], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc.
202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204]
Return of Peruvians to territory (see
also 
Chilean 
administration:
Clashes between Chileans and
Peruvians, supra), 311 [Pg. 311 includes
portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 317 [Pg.
317 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc.
174], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 194], 343
[Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 195]
U. S. instructions and views as to
continuance, 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325
include portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181],
345–346 [Pgs. 345–346 include portions of
Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 349 [Pg.
349 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc.

199], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc.
207 and Doc. 208], 357 [Pg. 357 includes
portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 358–
359 [Pgs. 358–359 include portions of Doc.
212, Doc. 213, and Doc. 214], 361 [Pg. 361
includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216],
362–365 [Pgs. 362–365 include portions of
Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and
Doc. 220], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of
Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 399 [Pg. 399 is part
of Doc. 257], 404–406 [Pgs. 404–406
include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263],
426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of
Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]
Suspension:
Chilean resolution, suggestion for,
478–479 [Pgs. 478–479 include portions of
Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, and
Doc. 328], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of
Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 480 [Pg. 480
includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]
U.S. proposal for suspension upon
acceptance of bases of adjustment,
369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 223
and Doc. 224], 370–372 [Pgs. 370–372
include portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc.
227, Doc. 228, and Doc. 229], 408 [Pg. 408 is
part of Doc. 265]
U. S. request for suspension during
good offices negotiations, 350–351
[Pgs. 350–351 include portions of Doc. 199,
Doc. 200, and Doc. 201], 352 [Pg. 352
includes portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and
Doc. 204]

Annulment of request to
Peru, suggestion, 356 [Pg.
356 includes portions of Doc. 209
and Doc. 210], 421 [Pg. 421 is
part of Doc. 277]
Chilean refusal, 352–353
[Pgs. 352–353 include portions of
Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, and
Doc. 205], 359–360 [Pgs. 359–
360 include portions of Doc. 213
and Doc. 214], 361–362 [Pgs.
361–362 include portions of Doc.
215, Doc. 216, and Doc. 217]; U.
S. attitude, 355 [Pg. 355
includes portions of Doc. 207 and
Doc. 208], 357 [Pg. 357 includes
portions of Doc. 210 and Doc.
211], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359
include portions of Doc. 212, Doc.
213, and Doc. 214], 362–364
[Pgs. 362–364 include portions of
Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and
Doc. 219], 451 [Pg. 451 includes
portions of Doc. 301 and Doc.
302]
Peruvian acceptance, and
understanding of terms,
354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc.
206], 356 [Pg. 356 includes
portions of Doc. 209 and Doc.
210], 361 [Pg. 361 includes
portions of Doc. 215 and Doc.
216], 362 [Pg. 362 includes
portions of Doc. 216 and Doc.
217], 370 [Pg. 370 includes

portions of Doc. 225 and Doc.
226], 418 [Pg. 418 includes
portions of Doc. 274 and Doc.
275], 421–422 [Pgs. 421–422
include portions of Doc. 277 and
Doc. 278]
Termination:
Advisability, recommendations and
discussions based on presence of
conditions 
unfavorable 
to 
fair
election, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of
Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 286–295 [Pgs.
286–295 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc.
155, and Doc. 156], 299–302 [Pgs. 299–302
include portions of Doc. 159, Doc. 160, and
Doc. 161], 315–316 [Pgs. 315–316 include
portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 330–
332 [Pgs. 330–332 include portions of Doc.
184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186], 333–334
[Pgs. 333–334 include portions of Doc. 187 and
Doc. 188], 335–338 [Pgs. 335–338 include
portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and
Doc. 192], 339–340 [Pgs. 339–340 include
portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194],
345–346 [Pgs. 345–346 include portions of
Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 354 [Pg.
354 is part of Doc. 206], 356–357 [Pgs.
356–357 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc.
210, and Doc. 211], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359
include portions of Doc. 212, Doc. 213, and
Doc. 214], 377–378 [Pgs. 377–378 include
portions of Doc. 234, Doc. 235, and Doc. 236]
Peruvian resolutions charging Chile
with frustration of plebiscite. See

under Conditions and prerequisites,
supra.
U. 
S. 
resolution 
calling 
for
termination:
Chilean attitude, 466 [Pg.
466 includes portions of Doc. 312,
Doc. 313, and Doc. 314], 478
[Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc.
324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326],
479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of
Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 482–
483 
[Pgs. 
482–483 
include
portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333,
and Doc. 334]
Drafts, 433–434 [Pgs. 433–
434 include portions of Doc. 287,
Doc. 288, and Doc. 289], 456–
457 
[Pgs. 
456–457 
include
portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306,
and Doc. 307], 459–460 [Pgs.
459–460 include portions of Doc.
308 and Doc. 309]
Instructions, 433–434 [Pgs.
433–434 include portions of Doc.
287, Doc. 288, and Doc. 289],
459–461 [Pgs. 459–461 include
portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309,
and Doc. 310], 467 [Pg. 467
includes portions of Doc. 314 and
Doc. 315], 472 [Pg. 472 is part
of Doc. 318], 473 [Pg. 473
includes portions of Doc. 318 and
Doc. 319], 475 [Pg. 475 includes
portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321,

and Doc. 322], 478 [Pg. 478
includes portions of Doc. 324,
Doc. 325, and Doc. 326], 479
[Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc.
327 and Doc. 328], 480 [Pg. 480
includes portions of Doc. 329 and
Doc. 330], 481–482 [Pgs. 481–
482 include portions of Doc. 331,
Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc.
334]
Introduction, 
476–477
[Pgs. 476–477 include portions of
Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc.
324], 477–478 [Pgs. 477–478
include portions of Doc. 323, Doc.
324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326]
Passage, 483 [Pg. 483 is part
of 
Doc. 
334]; 
Peruvian
attitude, 491 [Pg. 491 is part
of Doc. 341], 516 [Pg. 516
includes portions of Doc. 355 and
Doc. 356], 522 [Pg. 522 is part
of Doc. 362], 525 [Pg. 525 is
part of Doc. 362], 526 [Pg. 526
is part of Doc. 362], 527 [Pg.
527 is part of Doc. 362]
U. S. policy of maintaining proceedings
unimpaired, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 160], 309–
310 [Pgs. 309–310 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167,
and Doc. 168], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 167
and Doc. 168], 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions
of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions
of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 437–438 [Pgs. 437–438
include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc.

294]; precautions concerning blame for failure,
299–300 [Pgs. 299–300 include portions of Doc. 159 and
Doc. 160], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 171 and
Doc. 172], 318–319 [Pgs. 318–319 include portions of
Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include
portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 328 [Pg. 328 includes
portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]
Withdrawal of parties: Chile’s withdrawal,
possibility of, 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc.
327 and Doc. 328], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc.
331 and Doc. 332]; Peruvian threats, 288–289 [Pg.
288 is part of Doc. 155], 293–294 [Pg. 293 is part of
Doc. 155], 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 158 and
Doc. 159], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 160], 322 [Pg.
322 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 326 [Pg.
326 is part of Doc. 181], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 190],
340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194],
349–350 [Pgs. 349–350 include portions of Doc. 198,
Doc. 199, and Doc. 200], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of
Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]; U. S. procedure in event
of, 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 154], 288–289 [Pg.
288 is part of Doc. 155], 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include
portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 346 [Pg. 346 includes
portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of
Doc. 197], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 263], 480 [Pg.
480 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 482 [Pg.
482 includes portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334]
Public statements and speeches: Chilean, 269–270 [Pgs.
269–270 include portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 372 [Pg. 372
includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 374–375 [Pgs. 374–375
include portions of Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 386 [Pg. 386
includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 429–430 [Pgs. 429–430
include portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285], 468–469 [Pgs.
468–469 include portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 472–473 [Pgs.
472–473 include portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 477 [Pg. 477

includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]; Peruvian, 284 [Pg. 284
includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 296 [Pg. 296 includes
portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of
Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]; U. S. Secretary of State and
representatives, 386–387 [Pgs. 386–387 include portions of Doc.
246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248], 422–425 [Pgs. 422–425 include
portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 483n [Pg. 483 is part of
Doc. 334], 483–484 [Pgs. 483–484 include portions of Doc. 334 and
Doc. 335], 505–509 [Pgs. 505–509 include portions of Doc. 350 and
Doc. 351]
Renewal of good offices of United States:
Chilean inquiry, 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of
Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]
Chilean separate negotiations with Bolivia,
489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and
Doc. 340]
Instructions to U. S. representatives in—
Chile, 486–487 [Pgs. 486–487 include
portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337],
493–494 [Pgs. 493–494 include portions of
Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 504–509 [Pgs.
504–509 include portions of Doc. 348, Doc.
349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351]
Peru, 490–492 [Pgs. 490–492 include
portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 495–
497 [Pgs. 495–497 include portions of Doc.
343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345], 504–509
[Pgs. 504–509 include portions of Doc. 348,
Doc. 349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351]; views of
U. S. Ambassador, 495 [Pg. 495
includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

Negotiations for settlement:
Bases 
of 
adjustment: 
Arica,
question 
of 
disposition, 
and
reservation by Peru, 491 [Pg. 491 is
part of Doc. 341], 494 [Pg. 494 includes
portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 496 [Pg.
496 is part of Doc. 344], 497 [Pg. 497
includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345],
498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 345], 500–502
[Pgs. 500–502 include portions of Doc. 346,
Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 503 [Pg. 503 is part
of Doc. 348], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions
of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350], 508
[Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 350], 527–528 [Pg.
527 is part of Doc. 362], 529 [Pg. 529 is part
of Doc. 362]; Bolivian corridor, 491
[Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 341], 494 [Pg. 494
includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343],
496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 344], 497 [Pg.
497 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc.
345], 498–499 [Pgs. 498–499 include
portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 503 [Pg.
503 is part of Doc. 348], 504 [Pg. 504
includes portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and
Doc. 350]; cession or sale to Bolivia,
488–489 [Pgs. 488–489 include portions of
Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and Doc. 340],
494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 342
and Doc. 343], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions
of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 499–500 [Pgs.
499–500 include portions of Doc. 345, Doc.
346, and Doc. 347], 506–509 [Pgs. 506–509
include portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351],
521–525 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 362],
526–530 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 362];
division of territory, 506 [Pg. 506 is

part of Doc. 350], 523–525 [Pg. 523 is part
of 
Doc. 
362]; 
neutralization 
of
territory, 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of
Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 496–497 [Pgs.
496–497 include portions of Doc. 344 and Doc.
345], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc.
344 and Doc. 345], 504 [Pg. 504 includes
portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350],
525–526 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 362], 527
[Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 362]
Compensation to be paid by Bolivia
in event of acquisition of territory,
question of, 497 [Pg. 497 includes
portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 498–
499 [Pgs. 498–499 include portions of Doc.
345 and Doc. 346], 499–500 [Pgs. 499–500
include portions of Doc. 345, Doc. 346, and
Doc. 347], 507–508 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc.
350], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 362]
Proposal of U. S. Secretary of State,
Nov. 30:
Bolivian 
acceptance,
510–511 [Pgs. 510–511 include
portions of Doc. 352 and Doc.
353]
Chilean 
attitude 
and
acceptance, 509 [Pg. 509
includes portions of Doc. 350 and
Doc. 351], 512–515 [Pgs. 512–
515 include portions of Doc. 354
and Doc. 355]
Interpretation of terms,
518–519 [Pgs. 518–519 include

portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359,
Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]
Latin American countries,
cooperation 
in 
urging
Peruvian acceptance, U.
S. request and replies,
516–518 [Pgs. 516–518 include
portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356,
Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and
Doc. 360], 519–520 [Pgs. 519–
520 include portions of Doc. 360,
Doc. 361, and Doc. 362]
Peruvian rejection, 510
[Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc.
352 and Doc. 353], 515–530
[Pgs. 515–530 include portions of
Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356,
Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359,
Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc.
362]; text, 520–530 [Pgs.
520–530 include portions of Doc.
361 and Doc. 362]
Preliminary draft, 499–
500 
[Pgs. 
499–500 
include
portions of Doc. 345, Doc. 346,
and Doc. 347]
Text, 504–509 [Pgs. 504–509
include portions of Doc. 348, Doc.
349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351]
Solution 
suggested 
by 
U. 
S.
Secretary of State to Peruvian
counsel, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 341],
494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 342

and Doc. 343], 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496
include portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344];
views and counterproposal of Peru,
500–504 [Pgs. 500–504 include portions of
Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and
Doc. 350]
Reports concerning attitude of Chile, 487–
488 [Pgs. 487–488 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337,
and Doc. 338], 489–490 [Pgs. 489–490 include portions
of Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]; of Peru,
489–490 [Pgs. 489–490 include portions of Doc. 338,
Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341], 494 [Pg. 494 includes
portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 497–499 [Pgs. 497–
499 include portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, and Doc. 346]
Settlement outside of plebiscite. See Good offices of
United States, supra.
U. S. policy of keeping way open for ultimate
settlement, 300–302 [Pgs. 300–302 include portions of Doc. 159,
Doc. 160, and Doc. 161], 309–310 [Pgs. 309–310 include portions of
Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of
Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of
Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include portions of
Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 337–338 [Pgs. 337–338 include portions of
Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 345–346 [Pgs. 345–346 include
portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, and Doc. 197], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of
Doc. 197], 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200],
355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 357 [Pg.
357 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 365 [Pg. 365 includes
portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 223],
370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc.
227, and Doc. 228], 375–376 [Pgs. 375–376 include portions of Doc.
232, Doc. 233, and Doc. 234], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 257], 402
[Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 405–406 [Pg.
405 is part of Doc. 263], 466–467 [Pgs. 466–467 include portions of

Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of
Doc. 318], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332],
486–487 [Pgs. 486–487 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and
Doc. 337], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 342]; comments and
recommendations of U. S. Commissioner, 315–316 [Pgs.
315–316 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 325–326 [Pgs.
325–326 include portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 335–337 [Pgs.
335–337 include portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, and Doc. 191], 340
[Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 354 [Pg. 354 is
part of Doc. 206]
Taxation (see also under China): Exemptions of persons
belonging to foreign diplomatic missions in United States, 550–
551 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 385]; relation to question of U. S. war debts,
VIII [Pg. VIII is part of Message of the president of the United States to Congress,
December 7, 1926], IX–X [Pg. IX is part of Message of the president of the United
States to Congress, December 7, 1926], XXIII [Pg. XXIII is part of Message of the
president of the United States to Congress, December 7, 1926]
Territorial waters, proposed international agreement, 555–556
[Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]
Treaties, conventions, etc.:
Aerial navigation convention, Oct. 13, 1919: Draft
letter from President Coolidge to U. S. Senate, 152 [Pg.
152 is part of Doc. 112]; report of Secretary of State
concerning 
negotiation 
of 
convention 
and
recommendations as to ratification, 145–151 [Pgs. 145–151
include portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]; request of President
Roosevelt for return of papers, Jan. 12, 1934, 145n [Pg.
145 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]; submission to
Senate, June 16, 1926, 152n [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 112];
tabulated statement showing action taken by various
countries, 172–174 [Pgs. 172–174 include portions of Doc. 112 and
Doc. 113]; text, with additional protocol and protocols
containing proposed amendments to arts. 5 and 34,
152–171 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 112]

Agreement regulating distribution of the Dawes
annuities, Jan. 14, 1925, cited, 141–142 [Pg. 141 is part of
Doc. 109]
American naval mission to Brazil, exchange of notes
for renewal of contract signed Nov. 6, 1922, 574–575
[Pgs. 574–575 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and
Doc. 407]
Boundary treaties. See Boundary treaties.
Commercial treaties and agreements. See Commercial
treaties and agreements.
Diplomatic and consular relations, proposed treaty
between United States and Afghanistan, 557–560 [Pgs.
557–560 include portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]
Hague opium convention of 1912, U. S. statement to
governments party to convention, 250–254 [Pgs. 250–254
include portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]
International sanitary convention, June 21, revising
1912 convention, text and procès-verbaux of deposits of
ratifications, 177–238 [Pgs. 177–238 include portions of Doc. 115,
Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120]
League of Nations, proposals for various agreements,
555–556 [Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]
Limitation of naval armament, 1922, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of
Doc. 72]
Most-favored-nation 
treatment, 
proposed 
treaty
between United States and Brazil, 569–573 [Pgs. 569–573
include portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

Nine-power treaties relating to China. See under China:
Washington Conference.
Oil pollution of navigable waters, final act of
preliminary 
conference, 
June 
8–16, 
with 
draft
convention, 238–247 [Pgs. 238–247 include portions of Doc. 119,
Doc. 120, and Doc. 121]
Procedure for concluding and drafting treaties,
proposed international agreement to regulate, 556 [Pg.
556 is part of Doc. 390]
Protocol of signature of statute for Permanent Court of
International Justice (1920). See Permanent Court of
International Justice.
Rendition of Shanghai Mixed Court, text of agreement,
1035–1038 [Pgs. 1035–1038 include portions of Doc. 804 and Doc.
805]
Sino-American treaty of peace, amity, and commerce,
1844, 1084 [Pg. 1084 is part of Doc. 840]
Sino-Belgian treaty of Nov. 2, 1865, abrogation by
China, 984–1001 [Pgs. 984–1001 include portions of Doc. 758, Doc.
759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc.
766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc.
773, and Doc. 774]
Slavery convention, international, proposed and drawn
up by League of Nations, 247–248 [Pgs. 247–248 include
portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 249n [Pg. 249
includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]
U. S.-Afghanistan, proposed treaty for establishment of
diplomatic and consular relations, 557–560 [Pgs. 557–560
include portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

U, S.-Austria and Hungary, agreement for establishment
of Tripartite Claims Commission, Nov. 26, 1924, 129
[Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 101]
U. S.-Bolivia, treaty of friendship, navigation and
commerce, 1862, 564–565 [Pgs. 564–565 include portions of
Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 397 and
Doc. 398], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]
U. S.-Brazil: Exchange of notes, July 6, renewing
contract for American naval mission signed Nov. 6,
1922, 574–575 [Pgs. 574–575 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc.
405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407]; modus vivendi, Oct. 18, 1923,
according most-favored-nation treatment, 569 [Pg. 569 is
part of Doc. 402], 572–573 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 403]; proposed
treaty of friendship, commerce and consular rights,
569–573 [Pgs. 569–573 include portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]
U. S.-Germany: Agreement, Aug. 10, 1922, for a mixed
claims commission, 126–127 [Pgs. 126–127 include portions of
Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100]; treaty of friendship,
commerce and consular rights, Dec. 8, 1923, 570–571
[Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 402]
U. S.-Great Britain, boundary waterways treaty, Jan. 11,
1909, 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 583
[Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 416], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc.
417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419]
U. S.-Hungary and Austria, agreement for establishment
of Tripartite Claims Commission, Nov. 26, 1924, 129
[Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 101]
Washington Conference treaties relating to China. See
China: Washington Conference: Nine-power treaties.
Union of South Africa. See Permanent Court of International
Justice.

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. See Russia.
Uruguay (see also Narcotic drugs; Permanent Court of
International Justice; and Tacna-Arica controversy: Good offices),
withdrawal from Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament
Conference, 118–119 [Pgs. 118–119 include portions of Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc.
89, and Doc. 90]
U. S. citizens (see also under China), expatriation of naturalized
citizens, Departmental rulings with regard to presumption, 553–
555 [Pgs. 553–555 include portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390];
U. S. representations to Bolivia regarding oil concessions
containing clauses discriminating against American citizens, 564–
568 [Pgs. 564–568 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and
Doc. 401]
U. S. Congress: Mills Bill and other proposed legislation
providing for return of property held by Alien Property
Custodian, 125n [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98],
127–129 [Pgs. 127–129 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc.
101], 130–134 [Pgs. 130–134 include portions of Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc.
103], 141–142 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 109]; proposed legislation for
Illinois-Mississippi waterway, 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 415
and Doc. 416], 582–584 [Pgs. 582–584 include portions of Doc. 415, Doc. 416, and
Doc. 417], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 417, Doc. 418, and Doc. 419],
586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 419], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 419]; resolution
appropriating funds for work of Preparatory Commission, 46 [Pg.
46 is part of Doc. 39]; Senate resolution, Jan. 27, advising and
consenting, with reservations, to protocol of Permanent Court of
International Justice, 1–2 [Pgs. 1–2 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2];
submission to the Senate of the international convention relating
to the regulation of aerial navigation, Oct. 13, 1919, 145–174 [Pgs.
145–174 include portions of Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113]
U. S. consular officers: Assistance to applicants desiring to return
to vote in plebiscitary territory of Tacna-Arica, question of, 311
[Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions
of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]; authority to regulate sailings of American

vessels during disturbed conditions in China, 651–655 [Pgs. 651–655
include portions of Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]; instruction to,
concerning status of persons of Chinese race in China claiming
American citizenship, 1100–1103 [Pgs. 1100–1103 include portions of Doc.
854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, Doc. 857, and Doc. 858]; personnel of consulates in
China, recommendation of U. S. Minister for bringing up to
normal standard, 697–698 [Pgs. 697–698 include portions of Doc. 558, Doc.
559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, and Doc. 562]
U. S. customs tariff, X–XI [Pg. X is part of Message of the president of the United
States to Congress, December 7, 1926]
U. S. military and naval forces (see also under China), remarks of
President Coolidge concerning relation to national defense, XXIII–XXIV
[Pg. XXIII is part of Message of the president of the United States to Congress,
December 7, 1926]
U. S. Navy Department, agreement to renewal of contract for
American naval mission to Brazil, 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc.
404 and Doc. 405]
U. S. Revenue Acts. See U. S. Statutes.
U. S. Secretary of Commerce, statement proposed to be made
concerning Chilean-Peruvian nitrate trade, 452–454 [Pgs. 452–454
include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305], 456 [Pg. 456
includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc.
309 and Doc. 310]
U. S. Statutes: Acts for control of traffic in narcotic drugs, 250–
253 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 125]; diplomatic privileges and immunities
of persons belonging to foreign missions in United States,
provisions respecting, 548–549 [Pgs. 548–549 include portions of Doc. 384
and Doc. 385], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 385], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 385];
expatriation of U. S. naturalized citizens, rulings by Department
of State with regard to presumption in certain cases, 553–555 [Pgs.
553–555 include portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390]; status of
persons of Chinese race in China claiming American citizenship,

1100–1103 [Pgs. 1100–1103 include portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856,
Doc. 857, and Doc. 858]
U. S. Treasury, policy toward disposition of property held by
Alien Property Custodian, 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 96, Doc.
97, and Doc. 98], 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99,
Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 128–129 [Pgs. 128–129 include portions of Doc. 100 and
Doc. 101], 144–145 [Pgs. 144–145 include portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc.
112]
Venezuela. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice.
War debts of United States, remarks of President Coolidge
concerning retirement, VII [Pg. VII is part of Message of the president of the
United States to Congress, December 7, 1926], IX–X [Pg. IX is part of Message of the
president of the United States to Congress, December 7, 1926], XXII [Pg. XXII is part of
Message of the president of the United States to Congress, December 7, 1926]
Washington Conference of 1922. See under China.
Whales, conservation, proposed international conference to
consider, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 390]
World War foreign debts, agreements for settlement, XXVII [Pg. XXVII
is part of Message of the president of the United States to Congress, December 7, 1926]
Yugoslavia. See Narcotic drugs and Permanent Court of
International Justice.
