February 1951–February 1952 171 specific to discuss with him; but that the reason for the meeting was to afford an opportunity for a frank, informal, friendly exchange of views. 3. Kashani immediately began attacking American policy of “siding with the British” in Iran, being most outspoken in his views. His criticism against the United States appeared to begin with “America’s imposition of Razmara on the Iranian people.” He singled out U.S. Attache´ Gerald Dooher for special condemnation, and recalled Dooher’s interview with him during which the former tried to get him to support Razmara’s candidacy for premiership. Kashani stated that pious American claims to not interfere in internal Iranian affairs were belied by Wiley’s and Dooher’s support of Razmara. He also attacked the United States for its support of the British position in Egypt. 4. [1½ lines not declassified] it is felt that a personal relationship with Kashani over a period of time may serve to give this Station a better insight into the character and significance of this most important Iranian and Middle Eastern political figure. 5. In Attachment 2 is a brief analysis of Kashani as a person as could be gathered in one two-hour conversation. [name not declassified] Attachment 1 Summary of remarks made by Mulla Ayatolla Kashani during conversation [less than 1 line not declassified] on 5 January 1952 1. Iran wants nothing from the United States save to be left alone and to have American influence used to prevent other powers—particularly Great Britain—from interferring in Iranian affairs. If Iran could be left strictly alone and not be molested by foreign powers it could become a rich and populace nation, even without benefit of its oil resources. 2. My desires, towards which my activities are directed are twofold: namely (1) prevention of a third World War in which the Middle East is involved and (2) opposition to the spread of Communism in Iran. In order to realize these aims three steps are necessary. We would like to have the co-operation and support of the United States in carrying out these three steps which I shall describe as follows: A. Aid enabling the small nations with their weak governments to become strong and prosperous and—above all—truly independent. B. Removal of all traces of the old imperialism. To bring this about the United States must use its international power and influence in support of the exploited colonial peoples and specifically to make it clear to
