proclamation shall be issued under this section until such investigation shall have been
made. The commission shall give reasonable public notice of its hearings and shall give
reasonable opportunity to parties interested to be present, to produce evidence, and to
be heard. The commission is authorized to adopt such reasonable procedure, rules, and
regulations as it may deem necessary.
The President, proceeding as hereinbefore provided for in proclaiming rates of duty,
shall, when he determines that it is shown that the differences in costs of production
have changed or no longer exist which led to such proclamation, accordingly as so
shown, modify or terminate the same. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize a transfer of an article from the dutiable list to the free list or from the free
list to the dutiable list, nor a change in form of duty. Whenever it is provided in any
paragraph of Title I of this Act, that the duty or duties shall not exceed a specified ad
valorem rate upon the articles provided for in such paragraph, no rate determined under
the provision of this section upon such articles shall exceed the maximum ad valorem
rate so specified.
(d) For the purposes of this section any coal-tar product provided for in paragraphs 27
or 28 of Title I of this Act shall be considered similar to or competitive with any
imported coal-tar product which accomplishes results substantially equal to those
accomplished by the domestic product when used in substantially the same manner.
(e) The President is authorized to make all needful rules and regulations for carrying
out the provisions of this section.
(f) The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to make such rules and regulations as he
may deem necessary for the entry and declaration of imported articles of the class or
kind of articles upon which the President has made a proclamation under the provisions
of subdivision (b) of this section and for the form of invoice required at time of entry.
The investigations authorized above are in their nature statistical inquiries directed to
the ascertainment of the differences between costs of production in the United States
and in foreign countries, the purpose being to enable the President to put into effect
changes in classification of articles or in rates of duty under the United States Tariff Act
of 1922.
The investigations are not concerned with individual importations, and they do not
involve the imposition of any penalties under the Tariff Act for refusal to disclose
information. Foreign manufacturers, so far as the Tariff Act is concerned, may or may
not disclose their costs of production to Tariff Commission investigators, as they may
see fit.
