Afghanistan
465
163.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, January 12, 1980, 3:30–4:15 p.m.
SUBJECT
Meeting with Agha Shahi
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Warren Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State
David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Graham Claytor, Deputy Secretary of Defense
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of Near Eastern & South Asian Affairs
Arthur W. Hummel, Ambassador to Pakistan
Thomas P. Thornton, National Security Council
Agha Shahi, Foreign Affairs Adviser, Pakistan
Muhammad Sultan Khan, Pakistan Ambassador
General Ghulam Jilani, Pakistan
General Khalid Mahmoud Aref, Pakistan
The President met on Saturday, January 12, with Pakistani Foreign
Affairs Adviser Agha Shahi. The meeting took place in the Cabinet
Room, following meetings that Shahi had had with Dr. Brzezinski and
Secretary Vance.2 Various advisers were present on each side. (S)
The President opened by welcoming Shahi and noting that he had
had a good series of communications with President Zia. President
Carter noted that the Soviet invasion is a major adverse development,
an ominous change in Soviet practice. He was pleased at the support
that he had received from the American people for his responses, and
from nations all around the world. The President recalled that we had
again reaffirmed the validity of the 1959 agreement, and our recognition
of the Durand line as the international boundary between Pakistan and
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Thornton, Country File, Box 96, Pakistan: Presidential Correspondence: 1/80–1/81.
Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the White House Cabinet Room. The full
text of the memorandum of conversation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XIX, South Asia.
2 Shahi and Brzezinski met in Brzezinski’s office immediately preceding this meet-
ing. (Memorandum of conversation, January 12, 3–3:30 p.m.; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Thornton, Country File, Box 95, Pakistan:
1/79–1/80) No record was found of Vance’s meeting with Shahi. News reports indicated
that the two discussed “possible aid and security guarantees.” (Robert B. Cullen, “Vance-
Pakistani Talk on Aid Is Termed ‘Very Constructive,’” Washington Post, January 13, 1980,
p. A20)
