754 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 152. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, August 7, 1980 SUBJECT NSC Weekly Report #149 1. Opinion Foreign Policy and the Elections Foreign policy should offer you the greatest opportunity for the exercise of Presidential leadership, in a manner that could significantly influence the outcome of the elections. Despite the constraints on Presidential power, foreign affairs is the area in which you have the greatest discretion and, thus—at least in theory—the most opportunity for demonstrating effective leadership, for taking dramatic action, and for mobilizing national support. Indeed, I have already heard from a number of well-informed sources that the Republicans are very much concerned that you will stage some sort of a foreign policy coup or undertake some bold initiative, or cut some significant deal in the area of foreign affairs shortly before the elections. Unfortunately, the present international situation simply does not lend itself to some sudden and dramatic stroke—unless we are confronted by a crisis. (In that event, a very strong and firm response, even involving military action, is likely to be quite popular. Moreover, I have confidence in our crisis-management machinery, and I believe that our performance would be good.) But short of that, I cannot offer a prescription for a major Presidential initiative of a type that would have significant electoral effect. Something like Eisenhower’s “I would go to Korea” does not seem to be available, and we must be careful not to initiate some move in the Middle East or regarding the Soviets that will appear contrived. In any case, whatever happens, we need to do much better than we have done so far in making the country understand both the constructive character of your foreign policy and the dangers inherent in Reagan’s approach.2 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 127, Weekly National Security Report: 8–12/80. Secret. The President initialed the top right-hand corner of the memorandum. 2 The Republican National Convention took place in Detroit, Michigan, July 14–17. Delegates nominated Reagan for President and Bush for Vice President. The Democratic National Convention was scheduled to take place in New York August 11–14.
