754
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
152.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 7, 1980
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #149
1. Opinion
Foreign Policy and the Elections
Foreign policy should offer you the greatest opportunity for the
exercise of Presidential leadership, in a manner that could significantly
influence the outcome of the elections. Despite the constraints on Presi-
dential power, foreign affairs is the area in which you have the greatest
discretion and, thus—at least in theory—the most opportunity for dem-
onstrating effective leadership, for taking dramatic action, and for mo-
bilizing national support. Indeed, I have already heard from a number
of well-informed sources that the Republicans are very much con-
cerned that you will stage some sort of a foreign policy coup or under-
take some bold initiative, or cut some significant deal in the area of for-
eign affairs shortly before the elections.
Unfortunately, the present international situation simply does not
lend itself to some sudden and dramatic stroke—unless we are con-
fronted by a crisis. (In that event, a very strong and firm response, even
involving military action, is likely to be quite popular. Moreover, I have
confidence in our crisis-management machinery, and I believe that our
performance would be good.) But short of that, I cannot offer a pre-
scription for a major Presidential initiative of a type that would have
significant electoral effect. Something like Eisenhower’s “I would go to
Korea” does not seem to be available, and we must be careful not to ini-
tiate some move in the Middle East or regarding the Soviets that will
appear contrived.
In any case, whatever happens, we need to do much better than we
have done so far in making the country understand both the construc-
tive character of your foreign policy and the dangers inherent in
Reagan’s approach.2
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 127, Weekly National Security Report: 8–12/80. Se-
cret. The President initialed the top right-hand corner of the memorandum.
2 The Republican National Convention took place in Detroit, Michigan, July 14–17.
Delegates nominated Reagan for President and Bush for Vice President. The Democratic
National Convention was scheduled to take place in New York August 11–14.
