September 18–December 16, 1978
359
The President again said that the Egyptians could put anything
they wanted in a unilateral letter, but that the Israelis would not neces-
sarily say the same thing in their letter. But it is important that both
parties reaffirm clearly their commitment to the framework. El-Erian
noted that it would not be appropriate to refer to the West Bank when
dealing with the Egypt-Israel border, only Gaza was at stake. The Presi-
dent agreed.
The President then informed the Egyptians that the Israeli delega-
tion had agreed to recommend the deletion of the term “terrorism”.
This is subject to Begin’s approval. On page 5, the section on navigation
had been modified to deal with the Egyptian concern that Soviet ships
might try to maneuver in the Gulf of Aqaba. El-Erian said that there
were two problems. Egypt could accept for itself the status of the Strait
of Tiran as an international waterway, but Egypt could not speak for
the other riparian states. Egypt’s position should not appear to commit
them or prejudge the question as it will be dealt with in the law of the
sea conference. He said that the formulation in the revised draft was ac-
ceptable, however, the President said that the Israelis had agreed to this
language.
Turning to page 6, the President discussed the question of arbitra-
tion. The Israelis want to resort to negotiations first. If there are routine
difficulties, there is no need to have a fifth member for arbitration right
away.
Boutros Ghali said that negotiations were already dealt with in the
first paragraph of this article. Arbitration is the fallback position. It
would be unusual to have an arbitration commission of only four
members. El-Erian said that there is need for some umpire in arbitra-
tion. Usually someone appoints the additional member.
The President said that he would like to see disputes normally
solved through negotiations. It should not be normal practice to refer to
a referee. He would prefer that there be a commission of two members
from each party first, then if they agree there is a deadlock they could
invite a fifth member to join them. He would like to see three steps:
normal diplomatic negotiations; the four-member commission; and
then arbitration.
Boutros Ghali said that this was an interesting innovation, but there
was no precedent for it. He would prefer not to spell out the details.
El-Erian referred to Article 33 of the U.N. Charter5 and encouraged that
conciliation be referred to as one step in settling disputes. The President
5 The full text of Article 33, requiring parties in a dispute “likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security” to employ negotiations “or other
peaceful means,” is printed in Yearbook of the United Nations, 1946–47, p. 835.
