International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1161
fore Christmas. Gus Speth, Task Force Chairman, expects the President
to respond “via a major speech or special message.”4
2. State Department Strategy: An in-house task force, chaired by OES
Deputy Assistant Secretary Hoinkes, is planning and coordinating ad-
ditional Department activities. All major Department components are
represented. We are focusing on (a) raising international awareness of
the Report and its implications; (b) beginning a dialogue with other
countries on how to attack the problems; and (c) improving our
in-house capabilities for integrating long-term G–2000 issues into for-
eign policy.
(a) Report Distribution: Copies of the Global 2000 Report have been
sent to virtually all countries and international and regional organiza-
tions through Embassy, AID and ICA channels. We have prepared
Spanish and French versions of the summary volume; and are consid-
ering Arabic. Japan and Brazil are also preparing their own transla-
tions. Unofficial foreign reaction, in the press and from government of-
ficials, has been quite positive; complimentary of the U.S. effort and
supportive of the call for action.
(b) International Forums: State/IO has identified a wide range of in-
ternational fora in which we will publicize Global 2000 and emphasize
our support for and commitment to the alleviation of these problems
(Tab 2).5 Following your speech at the UNGA Special Session,6 we have
raised G–2000 in the ESCAP Committee on Natural Resources; and we
are planning to draw on it extensively in the ongoing UNESCO General
Conference.
4 Although the President did not address Global Future—A Time to Act publicly, he
did reference the Global 2000 Report in his last State of the Union message: “The Global
2000 Report to the President, prepared in response to my 1977 Environment Message, is the
first of its kind. Never before has our government, or any government, taken such a com-
prehensive, long-range look at the interrelated global issues of resources, population, and
environment. The Report’s conclusions are important. They point to a rapid increase in
population and human needs through the year 2000 while at the same time a decline in
the earth’s capacity to meet those needs—unless nations of the world act decisively to
alter current trends.” (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, January 20, 1981,
p. 2972)
5 Attached but not printed is the undated 3-page memorandum entitled “Interna-
tional Fora (United Nations) for Promoting and Publicizing the Global 2000 Report.”
6 Muskie addressed the 11th Special Session of the United Nations General As-
sembly, concerning the New International Economic Order, on August 25. Summarizing
the Global 2000 Report’s conclusions, he asserted: “Global 2000 is not a forecast. It is a pro-
jection of present trends. But it is another chilling reminder that our common future de-
pends on our common success, here and throughout the complex of relations known as
the North-South dialogue. We must work together to raise food production, to diversify
energy sources and to use energy and other resources more efficiently, to protect our
common environment, to restrain population growth, to deal effectively and equitably
with mounting deficits, and to keep an open system of trade.” Muskie’s remarks are
printed in Department of State Bulletin, October 1980, pp. 76–78.
