132
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
of U.S.-Soviet confrontation would be desirable, because it would have
the effect of strengthening U.S. will and accelerating Western arms
programs. In China’s view Gulf oil, from Iran or elsewhere, is important
only in that if it flows south it strengthens the West, but that if it flows
north it both weakens the West and strengthens the USSR.
16. The non-oil LDC’s outside the Middle East will be forced by
their dependence on foreign sources of energy and the general weak-
ness of their economies to view Iran in essentially opportunistic terms.
They will want a maximum flow to keep prices down and their econo-
mies turning over, and they will deal with whoever can provide such
a flow, if anyone can. This means they would prefer the status quo in
the Gulf. If the status quo were disturbed, they would want to see
stability restored by whatever power had the strength to do it, and if
that power were Soviet they would not be overly concerned. In any
case, they would see themselves, accurately, as having little influence
over the course of events.
V. Possible Irans of 1981
17. There are at least six possible outcomes, each with infinite
variations, for the present mess in Iran. In general terms, these are:
—Survival of Khomeini’s primitive Moslem theocracy.
—Replacement of Khomeini, et al., by a radical nationalist regime.
—Replacement of Khomeini by a Soviet-oriented Communist or
strongly Communist-influenced regime.
—Disintegration of Iran into a number of smaller ethnically-based
entities, with or without partition or occupation by neighboring nations.
—Civil war, involving any of a number of combinations of antago-
nists, ethnic, political, and religious.
—Emergence of a right or center-right regime backed by the
military.
18. Any of these outcomes could lead to any other. In fact, by 1981
Iran could have seen all of them. The present state, and the anarchy
into which it seems to be collapsing, is clearly a transitional phase. A
civil war could lead to the emergence of a strong state of the left or
right, to partition, or back to anarchy. The uncertainties are so great
that there seems little purpose in speculating on the likely sequence
of events, although it can be said that a leftist outcome appears the
most probable and a rightist one the least. For the purpose of this
paper, however, the important thing is not to determine what might
produce a particular outcome or assess its probability, but rather to
see how each might affect the U.S. national interests defined above.
[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
VI. Conclusions
39. As long as Iran remains in chaos, it will be a source of political
instability in the Middle East and uncontrollable economic fluctuation
