920  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
of your letter by our Ambassador. Information on other contemplated 
actions would be communicated to the Panamanian Government at the 
appropriate time.
Moreover, I feel it important for us to have a communication setting 
forth your personal interests in our relations with Panama, for should 
Panama [illegible in the original] its allegations of our non-­compliance 
with the 1955 Treaty before the International Court of Justice continue 
in the future, the United States would have a written record of our good 
faith in cooperating with Panama in the efforts to increase its participa-
tion in the [illegible in the original] and [illegible in the original] of the 
Canal Zone.
In order to derive appropriate [illegible in the original] from our 
[illegible in the original] the bar of world public opinion, [illegible in 
the original] what this message, if approved, be released as soon as it 
has been delivered to President de la Guardia. If this is agreeable, the 
Department will instruct Embassy Panama to report delivery so that 
immediate public release may be made by the White House.3
Christian A. Herter
[Enclosure] 
SUGGESTED LETTER TO PRESIDENT DE LA GUARDIA4
Dear Mr. President:
Since receiving your letter of March seventh, I have given careful 
consideration to the course of relations between our two countries. I 
have been particularly encouraged to receive recent information that 
our representatives have been making progress toward reducing points 
of divergence in the application of the Treaty of Mutual Understanding 
and Cooperation of 1955.
The pending issues between our two countries arising in the 
course of implementation of that Treaty have been and are under con-
tinuing study by the responsible officers of this Government, including 
myself. It is clear to me by now that further discussion of the intent 
and meaning of certain aspects of our Treaty undertaking is unlikely 
to bring about full agreement. However, I do not think that this should 
3 According to a typewritten note on the source text, Goodpaster informed offi-
cials of the Executive Secretariat on October 29 that the President had approved without 
change the suggested letter to President de la Guardia. An additional handwritten nota-
tion on the source text indicated that the signed original of this letter had been received 
from the White House on November 2 and had been transmitted.
4 Drafted by Sharp on October 21, approved in draft by Assistant Secretary of State 
Rubottom and Assistant Secretary of the Army Roderick, and approved in substance by 
Ambassador Harrington.
