Options Identified
221
become a “normal” situation. We are really skating on thin ice with
the American public. The Secretary of State said that one action we
could take is to move the Shah to a permanent home. The President
agreed.
Dr. Brzezinski said that there were deployment actions, like posi-
tioning AWACS in Egypt, that also might be undertaken.
The Secretary of State opposed deploying AWACS to Egypt. He
said that we will be pursuing the negotiating track with the Secretary
General, with the PLO and others. He thought that the deployment of
AWACS to Egypt would put a big obstacle into this track. He thought
it would only serve to get the Iranians to rally around Khomeini and
toughen up again just when we were hoping to induce them into a
more accommodating stance. He said it simply did not make sense to
move the AWACS in at this time.
Secretary Brown said that there were considerable difficulties in
Libya at the moment and that the movement of the AWACS to Egypt
could be related to Libya as opposed to the Iranian situation.
Dr. Brzezinski said that we have followed the two-track approach in
this crisis—increasing military preparations and pursuing negotiating
efforts. He said the political negotiations will be going forward and
that the deployment of AWACS will demonstrate that the military
track is moving forward in case negotiations should fail. Secretary
Vance disagreed. He said he thought it would block negotiations. Har-
old Brown recalled that this was what the Secretary of State had thought
if a second carrier were moved into the Arabian Sea.
The President said that he did not agree with the Secretary of State.
He said that the use of American planes in this situation is a real
possibility and we need to prepare for it. He recalled that he had turned
down proposals to deploy a third carrier to the region or to put Marines
into the area. But he thought the reaction to AWACS would be no
worse in Iran than to the two-carrier deployment and that he would
feel better if the AWACS were there in case of a conflict.
The Secretary of Defense said that we could get the AWACS there
in a short period of time. The President responded that he thought he
had decided to do this ten days ago at Camp David. Secretary Vance
responded that he had not been a participant in that decision. Dr.
Brzezinski recalled that the decision had been taken in connection with
the Defense Budget meeting4 and that immediately thereafter, when
the Secretary of State had learned about it, had registered his concern.
4 The meeting at Camp David to discuss the Defense budget took place on November
24 from 10:03 a.m. to 1:10 p.m. (Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary)
