1957  1391
We would appreciate your views on this as soon as possible. There 
is enclosed a draft press release which will give you an idea of the type 
of announcement which is being considered. It is by no means final and 
may undergo many further changes.
Sincerely yours,
Ralph N. Clough
Enclosure
Draft Press Release No. 92
Washington, July 11, 1957
DRAFT PRESS RELEASE
The policy of the United States with reference to Communism in 
China, non-­recognition, no commercial or cultural relations and related 
matters has been recently restated by the Secretary of State in his 
address of June 28, 1957, at San Francisco. In application of this policy, 
there are relevant laws and executive orders, notably the Trading with 
the Enemy Act and determinations there-­under. Generally speaking, it 
is not consistent with United States policy, or lawful, that there be travel 
by Americans to the areas of China now under Communist control.
However, the Secretary of State has determined that, in view of 
the desirability of additional information respecting current conditions 
within China, it may prove consistent with the foreign policy of the 
United States that exceptionally, there be travel by a strictly limited 
number of American news representatives to the China mainland to 
permit direct reporting by them to the American people about condi­
tions in the area under Chinese Communist control.
The Department of State is therefore willing on an experimental 
basis to issue passports not restricted as regards travel to and on the 
mainland of China to not more than ten to fifteen experienced profes­
sional American news representatives. These representatives will be 
designated, not by the Department, but by the major news media—­
newspapers, radio, television and magazines—­as they have in other sit­
uations requiring a limitation of numbers. The Department notes that 
representatives of many news media have already suggested that a rep­
resentative from each of the twelve organizations which maintained full-­
time American correspondents in China at the time of the Communist 
assumption of power be included in the designated correspondents, and 
2 Official Use Only.
