338  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
doesn’t want to see Angola or Cuba or Vietnam or China turn to the 
West; or have Mozambique turn to us for trade; or to see trade between 
us and Eastern Europe build up. If I were Brezhnev, I would hate to see 
these things happen. We have to take advantage of our opportunities 
and it is for this group to see that we do.
Brown: The Soviets are not a likable partner. When they get in, they 
seek to dominate. But if you compare their situation with five years 
ago, they are better off even if they do have the problems the President 
cited. Their influence with India, Pakistan and so forth, depends on 
their military power. They don’t have much in the way of economic 
power. Though the Soviets do have real worries, they do have levers—­
above all the military. In all of the places we have talked about, they 
feel the Soviets are relatively more powerful, vis-­a-­vis the U.S., than 
they were five years ago. There is a certain ambivalence in response: for 
example, it has moved the Europeans to spend more. The Soviets are 
respected and feared, not loved, but they have options. So the Soviets 
may have certain apprehensions but do think they are much better off 
today than they were.
The President: We should enumerate the areas where we think 
we have a problem—­political, trade, or military influence. We should 
approach each country or area as a separate question to be addressed. 
Congress is more aware of the need for peaceful competition with the 
Soviets than ever before. We should plan our political strategy on this 
basis and consult with Congress and get them aboard. For example, 
Mozambique and Angola are good cases for moving. What are others? 
We need to do this on a country-­by-­country basis: where we should 
move, what the problems are, the key Congressional elements to get on 
board, how to win public approval for our efforts. Our strength should 
help us. Brezhnev is vulnerable to competition. We have gotten the 
Allies to go with us. We should explore how we can do this with others.
I want to discuss our military presence abroad. I want to consider 
places where we can make it felt without direct military confrontation. 
I have no feel from Harold Brown or the JCS of the consequences of 
a military base in the Sinai. If at Camp David there is no agreement, 
there will be fear for the future and a U.S. base could be stabilizing. I 
don’t know if we should do it, or how rapid the Soviet reaction would 
be. This is one place for a military presence and there may be others in 
the world. We should publicize our military presence elsewhere in the 
world.
Twelve months of our propaganda against the Cubans in Africa 
has led to worldwide pressure on them to get out. They are moving out 
of Ethiopia and it will be hard for them to stay in Angola.
Our reputation for weakness, vis-­a-­vis the Soviets, is not deserved. 
Many of us are guilty of this. For example, at defense budget time, we
