National Security PolicyŌĆā 511
lines. These techniques reflect the continuity of Soviet attitudes from 
the Stalin through the post-Stalin era, and there is little reason to expect 
their disappearance. Finally, the Soviets have recently laid a good deal 
of public stress on their growing nuclear capabilities, and we think they 
will increasingly use the latent threat of their military strength as an 
instrument of policy.
207. Policy Toward the Underdeveloped AreasŌĆöTrade and Aid. As pre┬Ł
viously suggested, one of the principal characteristics of current Soviet 
policy is its stress on underdeveloped countries, in an effort to estrange 
them from the West and to lay the groundwork for growing Soviet influ┬Ł
ence. In the needs of the new and underdeveloped countries of Asia 
and Africa for help and guidance in industrialization the USSR sees 
opportunities for influencing these states by providing assistance and 
encouraging them to employ Communist techniques. Therefore one of 
its principal weapons has been the so-┬Łcalled ŌĆ£trade and aidŌĆØ campaign, 
of offering both arms and technical and economic aid on liberal credit 
terms. Not only do such efforts serve specific Soviet objectives vis-┬Ła-┬Łvis 
the underdeveloped countries, but they contribute to the desired image 
of the USSR as a respectable and economically advanced member of the 
international community.
208. By mid-1957 the USSR and its satellites had agreed to extend 
some $1.15 billion in economic credits for this purpose, the bulk of 
which will be drawn upon over a period of several years. In addition 
arms of an estimated value of some $350 million had been delivered, 
probably on credit, to Egypt, Syria, Yemen, and Afghanistan. In return 
the Bloc has been willing to accept otherwise largely unsaleable raw 
material surpluses, an appealing feature to underdeveloped countries. 
Bloc trade agreements with Free World nations rose from 113 in effect 
at the end of 1953 to 212 by mid-1957, the largest part of this rise rep┬Ł
resenting trade agreements with underdeveloped countries. Between 
1954 and 1956 Bloc trade with underdeveloped countries rose 70 per┬Ł
cent. Technical assistance, though still small in comparison with that of 
the West, continues to rise; during the first half of 1957, some 2,000 Bloc 
technicians are estimated to have been in 19 underdeveloped countries 
for a month or more, compared to an estimated 1,400 in 1956.
209. The volume of Bloc trade with the underdeveloped areas as a 
whole is still insignificant compared with that of the West, and the tech┬Ł
nical and economic assistance which the Bloc has thus far supplied is 
also relatively very small. Both trade and aid have had a highly signif┬Ł
icant impact, however, partly because they represent a new departure 
in Bloc policy, vigorously followed up, and partly because they have 
tended to be concentrated in certain areas (Egypt, Syria, Afghanistan, 
Yugoslavia) where they loom large in the economies concerned.
