58 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI — Permitted testing. Although our current position seeks to permit the full range of testing under the broad interpretation, Congress has been unwilling to fund testing that exceeds the narrow interpretation. Therefore, while asserting the legality of the broad, we have had no choice but to conduct our program in accordance with the narrow. This situation is unlikely to change; nor is Soviet opposition to testing under the broad interpretation. Before the recent decision, the SDIO said that we did not plan to go beyond the narrow interpretation until FY 96. Additional budget cuts could slip that date further. In our review, we should consider the impact on the SDI program of committing to the narrow interpretation for various periods of time. And given the political sensitivity surrounding the broad/narrow distinction, we should consider alternatives that do not clearly opt for one or the other (e.g., negotiation of performance thresholds; allowing sensors to go unconstrained while limiting “kill mechanisms” to the narrow). — “Other physical principles” (OPP). An esoteric but critical matter that should be resolved soon is the legal issue of whether “hit to kill” weapons such as SDIO’s planned space-­based interceptors or Brilliant Pebbles are based on physical principles other than those utilized at the time of the 1972 ABM Treaty. If they are deemed to be based on then-­existing principles rather than OPP (which many believe), those weapons could not legally be tested in space as fully capable prototypes even under the broad interpretation. Such a finding would make the broad interpretation less useful to us, and would force us to alter how we plan to test such weapons. The legal decision has so far been ducked as too hot to handle. — Length of nonwithdrawal period. Former SDIO Director Abrahamson claims that Brilliant Pebbles could be deployed in about five years. Most estimates for initial deployments of Phase I systems range from FY 98 to well into the next century. Given the uncertainties, it is unlikely we will be able to sort out our position on the length of a nonwithdrawal period for quite some time. — Right to Deploy. We have assumed that exercising an explicit “right to deploy” defenses would be politically much less costly than having to utilize the ABM Treaty’s withdrawal procedure in order to go forward with deployment plans. In practice, the political costs are likely to depend much less on the legal mechanism used than on the public’s perception of the soundness of the decision to deploy. Nonetheless, there is no compelling need to change our position now. Outlook Moscow ministerial. With the D&S review not yet even underway, we cannot expect much new guidance on D&S issues for your use in Moscow. We will probably have to confine ourselves to reiterating basic
