British Government finds itself confronted in the attempt to carry out the undertaking into which it has entered in the Hague Convention “to take measures for the gradual and effective suppression of the use of prepared opium with due regard to the varying circumstances of each country concerned”. The British memorandum explains in detail the nature of these difficulties which arise from the existence of a large illicit traffic in opium in the Far East, and hamper or even nullify the efforts of the Governments concerned to control and restrict the consumption. These difficulties existed already in 1924–25, when the First Geneva Conference was held. Since that Conference they have not diminished, but have actually increased. The memorandum refers specially to the difficulties experienced in Hong-Kong, where the Government of the Colony estimates the consumption of illicit opium to be many times that of the Government monopoly opium. But the difficulties are considerable also in Malaya, and it would appear from the proceedings of the Opium Advisory Committee of the League that other Governments have experienced similar difficulties. The British Government states further that it has proceeded with the measures agreed upon by the Conference of 1924–25, but the present situation appears to it to be such as to call for a fresh examination and review on the spot, especially in view of the fact that under the terms of the Agreement of the First Geneva Conference a further Conference is due to be held not later than next year. The memorandum suggests that it is most desirable that an unbiassed statement of the actual position made by a completely independent Commission appointed by the League, to which is entrusted by the Covenant the supervision of the traffic, should be laid before the world. Such a Commission might further be able, as a result of its enquiries, to make valuable suggestions as to the measures to be adopted in the present circumstances. The enquiry would thus provide the material on which the next Conference would be able to base its work.
