Peru  1105
He agreed. Housing and land reform were the two keys. He hoped 
that our early participation in the Savings & Loan Association, either 
through P. L. 480 or DLF funds, would begin to get housing off the ground.4 
The Government had no funds yet for land reform and grandiose projects 
such as Tinajones must be avoided but the problem was clearly urgent. I 
suggested that the most important single step toward land reform might 
be simplification and decentralization of the process of acquiring title to 
land and that this should cost the Government little if anything. He said 
the housing legislation already covered this for urban areas and the land 
reform legislation next year would cover it for rural areas.
The above is a condensed summary of a leisurely two-­hour talk. 
During it Beltrán referred at least 20 times to the fundamental neces-
sity of balancing the budget. Each time I agreed fully but reverted to 
the importance of the social problem as well. Each time he agreed but 
reverted to the budget.
4 On December 13, 1960, the Development Loan Fund agreed to lend the Mutual 
Savings and Loan Association, Peru, 27.7 million soles ($1 million). For further information, 
see U.S. Agency for International Development, Status of Loan Agreements as of December 31, 
1964, p. 24; and Development Loan Fund, Report of Activities During Calendar Year 1960, p. 3.
PE–36.	
Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in 
Peru (Achilles)1
 
Lima, January 21, 1960.
SUBJECT
Farewell Call on President.
PARTICIPANTS
President Manuel Prado
Theodore C. Achilles
During my farewell call on the President,2 I expressed the pleasure 
I had had in serving in Peru and my optimism as to its future. I had 
had the satisfaction of seeing democracy fully restored under his 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 823.49/1–1960. Confidential. This 
memorandum of ­conversation was sent to the Department of State under cover of des-
patch 435 from Lima, January 21.
2 Ambassador Achilles left Peru and Jack D. Neal assumed charge of the Embassy 
on January 27.
