3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 488 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI In reference to the telephone proposal conveyed by Ambassador Dobrynin on November 16,2 I indicated to him that we would be prepared to proceed on the basis of his proposal, recognizing that the Filatov case3 in principle is an internal Soviet affair and would be resolved by the Soviet side separately; however, how the Filatov case is resolved would affect U.S.-Soviet atmospherics and hence we could not be entirely indifferent to this matter. Therefore, if the Soviet side in the meantime and on its own resolves the Filatov case by commutation, we would be ready to proceed immediately with the proposed exchange.4 If the Soviet side were to carry out the execution, it would doubtless have some effect on the atmosphere of our relations and we would have to reassess the proposed exchange in the light of the circumstances. Dobrynin responded, at least initially, with some heat. He asserted that the Soviet side has gone a long way to accommodate American demands. It has given us Ginzburg,5 it has conceded simultaneity of the releases, and that we were nonetheless insisting on linking the Filatov case, making the exchange conditional on its resolution. He went on to say that in his view the Soviet side would not be prepared to accept this and the whole arrangement could become unstuck. I responded by saying that I hope Dobrynin will convey to his principals not only our response but also the genuinely conciliatory spirit in which it is being conveyed. I added that our main concern is to eliminate extraneous sources of irritation, and that it seems to me in- 2 A memorandum of a Brzezinski-Dobrynin telephone conversation, in which they discussed which Soviet dissidents would be included in the exchange, is in Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 19, U.S.S.R.—Prisoner Exchanges: (8/78–5/79). 3 Anatoli Filatov, a diplomat in the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs, was convicted of having been recruited by the CIA in 1974 and conducting espionage for the United States until his arrest in 1977. On July 14, 1978, he was found guilty and sentenced to death for espionage. Telegram 18874 from Moscow, August 9, transmitted an August 8 letter from Filatov pleading with President Carter for his help: “Three years ago I was enlisted by American intelligence and fulfilled its assignments in the capacity of an agent.” In his accompanying commentary, Toon asserted, “I have been briefed on the Filatov case, and I feel strongly that we owe him nothing. Moreover I have long felt that as a matter of principle when an agent is caught we should simply regard the development as a casualty of the intelligence wars. . . . I would wish to do so if you plan to discuss with Stan Turner.” (Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 19, U.S.S.R—Prisoner Exchanges: Alpha Channel: 7/78–5/79) 4 In September 1980, The New York Times reported that Filatov’s sentence had not been carried out, but had been commuted to 15 years in prison. (Craig R. Whitney, “Spy, Thought Dead, Now Reported Alive,” The New York Times, September 24, 1980, p. A1) 5 Alexandr Ginzburg, who was convicted on July 13, 1978, of anti-Soviet agitation and sentenced to 8 years of hard labor, was released from the Soviet Union on April 27, 1979, along with Eduard Kuznetsov, Mark Dymshits, Valentin Moroz, and Georgy Vins. In exchange, the Woodbridge Two, Rudolf Chernyayev and Valdik Enger, were released and returned to the Soviet Union.
