advances are made, it is proper that your Government should agree not to
take any action by way of legislation, concessions, or agreements which
might put any of the Allied or Associated Powers or their nationals in a more
favorable position than the United States government or its nationals, or
which will discriminate against the nationals of the United States.
“I shall be glad to hear from you, so that I may communicate your reply to
the Secretary of the Treasury.”
The reply from Mr. Beneš, dated June 26, 1919, was as follows:7
“I beg you to excuse my involuntary delay in replying to you. I sent your
letter to Prague, for the information of my colleagues of the Cabinet,
especially the Minister of Commerce, and received no immediate reply.
“For my part, I can assure you that our Government wholly shares your point
of view on the question of which you spoke in your letter of May 19, 1919.
The Czechoslovak Government recognizes with the utmost satisfaction the
great services, both financial and economic, rendered it by the Government
of the United States. It has no intention whatever of favoring one of our
Allies to the detriment of another or of taking measures vis-à-vis one which
could be unfavorable to another. It intends to continue the same policy—in
the field of economics and finance—that it practiced during the war, namely,
of having the same general attitude toward all our allies.
“Please accept, Sir, the expression of my highest sentiments.”
In view of the understanding set forth in the above correspondence regarding the
treatment to be accorded to the advances made by the Government of the United States
to the Government of Czechoslovakia, it is with no little surprise that the Government
of the United States has learned that the Government of Czechoslovakia, although it
has made no corresponding proposal to the Government of the United States, has
agreed to repay to the Governments of Denmark, France, Great Britain, Holland,
Norway, Sweden and Switzerland within five years, with interest at five per cent., the
relief indebtedness of Czechoslovakia to those Governments. My Government is also
informed that the Government of Czechoslovakia has agreed to pay separately to each
of the above-mentioned Governments the amount of interest, if any, calculated at the
rate of six per cent, per annum and accumulated semi-annually, which on January 1,
1925, was due and unpaid, and to constitute the payments to be made pursuant to these
arrangements a first charge on receipts accruing to the Government of Czechoslovakia
by way of compensation, reparation or indemnity from ex-enemy Governments, other
than receipts by way of restitution in kind, and subject to any charges already created in
respect of previous loans.
