768
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
281.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of
Intelligence and Research (Spiers) to Secretary of State
Muskie1
Washington, May 8, 1980
SUBJECT
The Hostages and Iranian Domestic Politics
You have received analyses about the hostage situation from NEA
and other sources. INR has prepared here an analysis of the crisis,
setting it within the broader context of the Iranian political situation.
In sum we conclude that the hostages are being used as pawns by
competing factions in the Iranian domestic power struggle. Hence, the
possibility of reaching a negotiated settlement remains minimal. Only
Ayatollah Khomeini has the authority to negotiate on behalf of Iran.
Thus consensus building appears the best route to reach our desired
goals. The US has little ability to influence the key actors, however,
especially if our reward for releasing the hostages is only the cessation
of US power projection and pressures.
Background: The dominant ideology which has fueled Iran’s revolu-
tion rests on two basic ideas:
—Islamic Shiite fundamentalism which projects a vision of an ideal-
ized society governed by Islamic law and mores; and
—fanatical hatred of the imperialistic West and particularly the
United States, which is viewed as the epitome of decadent, bankrupt
Western culture.
These ideas have increasingly demanded strict adherence from all
revolutionary cadres. Over the past year, the hardline revolutionary
core has progressively eliminated or neutralized those individuals,
including former Prime Minister Bazargan, who re-interpreted or modi-
fied the Revolution’s basic ideology.
As events have developed, the Revolution can be divided into
three phases:
—Sweeping away the Shah’s regime. (November 1977–February
1979). This was eventually led by a broad and very large anti-Shah
coalition.
1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Data on Hostages. Secret.
Drafted by Grummon. In the upper right corner of the memorandum, an unknown hand
wrote: “Mr. Newsom has seen May 12, 1980.”
