618
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
233.
Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
No. 337
Tehran, July 1, 1953.
SUBJECT
Popularity and Prestige of Prime Minister Mohammed Mosadeq
Introduction
The Embassy has lately been receiving reports tending to indicate
that Prime Minister Mosadeq has lost much of the popular support
which he previously enjoyed. Without the means or possibility of em-
ploying scientific public opinion polling techniques, it is of course im-
possible to draw definite conclusions, but the comments received may
reveal a broad trend.
Original Support and Its Decline
There seems to be no question of the broad base of popular sup-
port for Dr. Mosadeq at the time he first took office as Prime Minister.
As leader of the struggle against the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company in a
country where resentment and even hatred of the British is deep-
rooted, Mosadeq could count upon the support of people from all
levels of society with but few exceptions. For many months after oil na-
tionalization, the Prime Minister’s popularity continually mounted. To
the common people, Mosadeq was looked upon almost as a demigod.
The phenomenon of Mosadeq was almost unique in Iran. The fig-
ure of a frail, old man, in an Oriental country where age of itself com-
mands respect, who appeared to be successfully winning a battle
against tremendous odds, aroused the sympathy of almost all Iranians.
In a country where political corruption had been the accepted norm,
there now appeared a man whose patriotism and financial honesty
were unassailable.
The economic and financial situation of the country, however, con-
tinued to worsen and as opposition to him increased, the Prime Min-
ister found it ever more necessary to adopt arbitrary means to silence it.
The contradictions in his public statements and promises continued to
become more glaringly apparent. While speaking of an “oilless econ-
omy” on the one hand the Prime Minister excused his failure to initiate
promised reforms on the ground that he could not “fight on two
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.13/7–153. Secret;
Security Information. Drafted by Cuomo. A copy was pouched to London. Received
July 10.
