January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1213 (UNIFIL). The United States, along with the German Democratic Republic and the Soviet Union, abstained. The resolution “reaffirmed” the Security Council’s “determination to implement its previous decisions in the totality of the area of UNIFIL operations, up to the internationally recognized boundaries. It condemned all actions contrary to these decisions and, in particular strongly deplored any violation of Lebanese sovereignty and territorial integrity; Israel’s military intervention in Lebanon; all acts of violence in violation of the General Armistice Agreement between Israel and Lebanon; provision of military assistance to the so-called de facto forces,” i.e., the Lebanese militia forces of Major Saad Haddad;” “all acts of interference” with the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine (UNTSO); “all acts of hostility against UNIFIL and in or through its area of operations; all obstructions of UNIFIL’s ability to confirm the complete withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon, to supervise the cessation of hostilities, to ensure the peaceful character of the area of operation, to control movement and to take measures deemed necessary to ensure the effective restoration of Lebanon’s sovereignty; and acts that had led to loss of life and physical injuries among UNIFIL and UNTSO personnel, their harassment and abuse, the disruption of communication, and the destruction of property and material.” Moreover, the Security Council condemned the shelling of UNIFIL headquarters and “called attention” to the provisions in the UNIFIL mandate giving the force the right to selfdefense. (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, page 352) The complete text of the resolution is printed in Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, pages 358–359. The Resolution was passed in the aftermath of more than two months of increased skirmishing along the Israel-Lebanon border and attacks upon UNIFIL personnel. The issue was referred to the Security Council by Lebanon on April 13 in a letter to the Council charging Israel with “continuing acts of aggression against southern Lebanon and with “direct confrontation with UNIFIL.” (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, page 348) The same day, Secretary-General of the United Nations Kurt Waldheim issued a statement condemning attacks on UNIFIL forces by Haddad’s forces around the At-Tiri area of Lebanon. A description of the situation around At-Tiri is in telegram 7147 from Tel Aviv, April 17 (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800190–0992) A Lebanese draft resolution was circulated to the Security Council on April 17. Following the killing of two Irish UNIFIL peacekeepers on April 18, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Michael Newlin and Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Harold H. Saunders presented Secretary of State Cyrus Vance with an action memorandum outlining three options for a U.S. response: 1) “try to improve the present resolution,” deleting the “worst of the condemnatory language
