1048
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
on the status of women showed themselves amenable to negotiations
on their text, although their proposed final version was not wholly ac-
ceptable and the US, UK and FRG prepared to abstain on the text. The
introduction just prior to the planned voting of amendments by the del-
egation of Bulgaria led to renewed negotiations, a revised text, a hard-
ening of the Western position and a negative vote by the U.S. African
delegates reacted with both anger and understanding to the Western
position. Western delegates made clear that their opposition was due to
the divisive elements introduced into the text by Bulgaria and that they
supported the otherwise mostly constructive text which dealt primarily
with voluntary assistance programs for women in Southern Africa. The
delegation of Sweden found itself in a most uncomfortable position, as
the African group had earlier in the day chosen the representative of
Sweden to represent the Commission at the World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination. This choice was made in
spite of the active lobbying and efforts of the Eastern group to nominate
Byelorussia. Following the vote on the apartheid resolution, the Af-
rican group, at the insistence of Ethiopia and Madagascar, met to recon-
sider the Swedish nomination. The moderates, led by Senegal, pre-
vailed and the group subsequently announced that the choice of
Sweden to represent the Commission would not be revoked.
6. Other issues. The Commission adopted a total of 15 resolutions,
approving all but two by consensus. In addition to the issues discussed
above, the Commission passed resolutions in improving national ma-
chinery for dealing with women’s issues, improving relations with
intergovernmental bodies outside the UN system, strengthening UN
institutions for implementing the World Plan of Action, as well as reso-
lutions on consumer protection, measures to combat prostitution, a
proposal to rationalize the reporting system, and integration of women
in development in international conferences.
7. Relations with other delegations and groups. The Western
group met frequently to coordinate positions, although there was not
always final agreement. The Western group took the initiative on sev-
eral issues, as noted above, and was successful in achieving its goals on
several key issues. The US and other members of the Western group
which included Japan made a concerted effort to hold frequent consul-
tations and to work closely with developing country delegations to find
areas of common interest and to reach consensus on these issues.
Among the developing country delegations, India, Niger and Libya ex-
ercised the strongest leadership. The African group was far more active
than either the Latin or Asian group and took more initiatives to pro-
mote its own interests. Neither the Latin nor Asian groups appeared to
have any group cohesion and initiatives from these delegations were
due to individual delegation actions rather than concerted group ef-
