538 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Treaty with preliminary hearings on the UN Covenants and the Racial Discrimination treaty; and, a campaign to repeal those HR amendments we feel are counter-productive, namely the public reporting requirements and the OPIC amendment. [Omitted here is information unrelated to human rights.] 169. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, October 30, 1978 SUBJECT 1979 PL 480 I Agreements—Human Rights Language Requirement Issue for Decision Which PL 480 I agreements should contain a human rights clause ensuring that the commodities provided or the proceeds derived from their sale will directly benefit needy people? Essential Factors Title I of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 was amended by Public Law 95–88 of August 3, 1977 by adding Section 112 which states: No agreement may be entered into under this title to finance the sale of agricultural commodities to the government of any country which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights, including torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment, prolonged detention without charges, or other flagrant denial of the right to life, liberty, and the security of person, unless such agreement will directly benefit the needy people in such country. An agreement will not directly benefit the needy people in the country for purposes of the preceding sentence unless either the commodities themselves or the proceeds from their sale will be used for specific projects or programs which the President determines would directly benefit the needy people of that country. The agreement shall require a report to the President on such use 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780176–0654. Confidential. Drafted by Bova on October 25; concurred in by Zak, Jennette, Shurtleff, Buncher, Lister, Cleveland, Graham, and EB/OFP. Schneider initialed for Derian. An unknown hand initialed for the clearing officials.
