Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III The program proposals are grouped into major areas of: (1) relief from unfair trade practices; (2) modernization of plant; (3) rationalizing environmental practices and policies; (4) community and labor assistance programs; and (5) other general measures. 1. Relief from Unfair Trade Practices A “trigger-price” antidumping procedure3 is proposed to deal with complaints of steel imports at prices below home market prices or costs of production that injure the U.S. industry. The trigger-price is to be established for each class of steel mill product based on production costs of the world’s most efficient producer (currently Japan). —The use of trigger price to initiate proceedings will accelerate the identification and prevention of dumping. —The system is consistent with U.S. law and the GATT. —It will not deny to any affected person rights to initiate or contest proceedings on findings under the Antidumping Act. 2. Modernization of Plant —The general tax measures of the Administration’s tax reform proposal will emphasize4 incentives for modernization. —IRS will be asked to investigate the appropriateness of shortening useful lives of capital goods for tax depreciation from 18 to 15 years. —Additional funds will be made available for loan guarantees for modernization under existing programs. 3. Rationalizing Environmental Policies and Practices —A review of EPA regulatory procedures will be undertaken to reduce rigidities5 and inconsistencies. —The access of the industry to EPA for discussions with respect to specific policies will be expanded. —There will be a reexamination of other policies (e.g. offset policies6—the transfer of air pollution credits from one facility to another). 3 Under the trigger price anti-dumping procedure, also known as the trigger price mechanism (TPM), the Department of the Treasury would launch an anti-dumping investigation when the price of certain steel imports fell below a pre-determined level (the so-called “trigger price”). 4 Carter underlined the word “emphasize” and wrote “?” in the adjacent margin. 5 Carter underlined the words “reduce rigidities” and wrote “?” in the adjacent margin. 6 Carter underlined the words “offset policies” and wrote “?” in the adjacent margin.
