Venezuela  1231
United States to support Caracas as the site for the 1954 Inter-American 
Conference. By insisting so strongly that this Conference be held in 
Caracas, he said that the United States had estranged several of its best 
democratic friends in Latin America.
With reference to Trujillo and the Dominican Republic, he said that 
if Trujillo does not throw his weight around too much as a dictator and 
against democratic elements outside his own country, Betancourt will 
continue normal but cool relations. If Trujillo continues his exaggerated 
actions however, Betancourt will not hesitate to break relations and to 
impose economic sanctions. When asked about his attitude toward the 
situation in Cuba, it was evident that Betancourt had not given the mat-
ter any particular thought. However, he did say that he felt the OAS 
should go into this Cuban situation or if not the OAS as a body, at least 
a number of the more important countries of the Hemisphere, such as 
United States, Argentina, Mexico, should demonstrate multi-­lateral 
interest.
With reference to the Presidential inauguration Betancourt indi-
cated that there would be no attempt to build the ceremony into a 
tremendous occasion, but he did mention names of various Latin 
American personalities who would be coming to his inauguration as 
members of the delegations of their respective countries.
In answer to a question about his Cabinet, Betancourt said that he 
had mentally pretty well formed his Cabinet but he had not discussed it 
with anyone as yet. He said that probably two or three of the more tech-
nical present Cabinet members would be kept on in the new Cabinet.
At one point in the conversation Betancourt made a disparag-
ing reference to Robert Brinsmade as the kind of American who gets 
involved in political matters in Venezuela which are no concern of 
his. This was only a passing remark and there was no indication what 
Betancourt might have in mind doing, if anything, but it was obvious 
that he has very little respect for Brinsmade.
Betancourt said that the Petroquimica, the steel mill and the 
Caroni project would be continued under his administration. He 
also said there will be no more 40-­year concessions nor as a matter of 
fact will there be any concessions immediately since the companies 
already have 6,000,000 hectares and are actually utilizing only 600,000 
for exploration and exploitation; he spoke of the nation taking a more 
direct part in the development of the industry as well as in a tanker 
fleet. He said that nationalism is a very strong motivating force in any 
country of the world today and that due regard must be taken of it in 
Venezuela.
