a project which is understood to be considerably more favorable to the Government than his original project. The German proposal has the support of General Faupel and the other officers of the Military Mission of Germans at present directing the staff operations of the Peruvian Army. As has been outlined in the Embassy’s despatch No. 854, dated November 1, 1927,80 the object of the German aeronautical interest obviously is to link up with their present air lines operating in Bolivia and Colombia, possibly as part eventually of a system dominated by the European Air companies extending from Panama or Northern Colombia down the West Coast to Ecuador, Peru and Chile and also across Northern Peru to Iquitos, Para and Pernambuco, across from Valparaiso and Santiago, Chile to Buenos Aires, north from Buenos Aires to Rio de Janeiro and Pernambuco and across the South Atlantic to Dakar, Spain, France, Germany and England. It may be noted that according to the press the French-controlled air mail line from Santiago to Paris is already in operation as are the Bolivian and Colombian German-controlled lines. It is reported that a company under French influence is also applying for a concession in Chile to carry the mail and passengers from Santiago to Arica. Mr. Woolman’s activities in addition to being hampered by the opposition of the German officers has met with the opposition of an American, Mr. Fawcett, who has done very creditable flying in Peru for the past eight years. Until recently Mr. Fawcett flew a Curtiss Oreole plane, but that was put out of commission a short time ago by an accident and he is now contemplating the possibility of buying several planes and operating a local line in Peru from Lima to Paita. He feels that Mr. Woolman’s project would prejudice his interests and accordingly went to the President in January to protest against it. A strong supporter of the Keystone Company’s efforts has been Captain Grow, formerly of the United States Navy, who is now Inspector General of Aviation for Peru, and directs the Army Air Service as well as the Naval Air Service besides having supervision over commercial and civilian flying. This enlargement of his previous authority as head of the Naval Air Service was effected about two weeks ago by Presidential decree and is of
