246
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
human rights conventions express concerns and commitments in this
field. Accordingly, we should expand and intensify our efforts at the
UN and support and carry through on them in our bilateral relations
and by ratifying promptly those conventions we support.
We should give careful consideration to taking the following
human rights initiatives in the UN:
—UNESCO Executive Board Session (September–October 1977).
Develop broader support for human rights issues by establishing
an independent Expert Review Committee.
—32nd Session of the UN General Assembly (1977).
Conduct a major effort, in close consultation with other interested
governments, to secure approval for the establishment of a UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Propose the establishment of a spe-
cial ad hoc Expert Committee on Torture to identify serious instances of
torture worldwide.
—Next Session of the UN Commission on Human Rights (Spring 1978).
Propose measures to strengthen procedures for instituting studies
of situations involving consistent patterns of gross violations of
internationally-recognized human rights. Press for an additional an-
nual session of the Commission, to be held at UN headquarters in New
York.
—Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination.
Continue to consult with key African delegations to help break the
pattern whereby they link Zionism and racism. Our objective is to
reach understanding on that issue before the World Conference to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination so that the U.S. can attend
that meeting, scheduled for August 1978.
2. Organization of American States.
The Inter-American Human Rights Commission, an independent
agency of the OAS, is playing an increasingly central role in the
struggle to defend human rights in the Western Hemisphere. We are
working to increase the staff and budget of the IAHRC to cope with
mounting human rights complaints. We shall submit the American
Convention on Human Rights, which President Carter signed, to the
Senate for approval.
IV. National Security Aspects of U.S. Policies on Human Rights, Including
Consideration of Their Impact on Friendly States and Allies; and
Other Areas of Major Strategic Concern Such as the PRC and the
Koreas.
Section I(F) includes a brief discussion of the direction our policy
should take with various groups of countries, including allied nations
and Third World countries. The thesis underlying much of the discus-
