628
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the restrictiveness of the quotas in each successive two-month period,
would have little real effect. It would also allow a greater proportion of
the build-up in foreign specialty steel inventories now in bonded U.S.
warehouses to be imported while the quotas were still in effect thus re-
ducing the likelihood of large surges in imports upon expiration of
relief.
There are also several options with regard to the country structure
of the quotas. Currently, Japan, the EC countries collectively, Sweden,
and Canada generally have separate country quotas in each of five spe-
cialty steel product categories. Imports from other countries are gener-
ally subject to first-come, first-serve “basket” quotas. The existence of
these basket quotas and of quotas for the EC countries collectively in-
stead of individually has created a substantial build-up of imported
steel from these countries in bonded U.S. warehouses.
In two categories (stainless steel bar and alloy tool steel), the stocks
in warehouses are so large in relation to the EC and other country
basket quotas that even very substantial increases in these quotas
would not be sufficient to clear the warehouses. In order to ensure that
these stocks are entered during, not after, the relief period, I recom-
mend that you proclaim global quotas for the bar and alloy tool steel
categories. For the remaining three product categories, I recommend
that we maintain the current country breakdowns since the inventory
problems are not as severe in these categories.
Attached to this memorandum are two alternative draft proclama-
tions—one for a six-month extension and the other for an eight-month
extension—for your signature if you decide to extend relief.5 Since the
current relief program expires on Wednesday,6 it is critical that you de-
cide no later than next Tuesday morning so that importers and ex-
porters will have at least one day’s notice.7
5 Not attached.
6 June 13.
7 Presidential Proclamation 4665, issued on June 12, extended specialty steel import
quotas for an additional 8 months. For the text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the
United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book I, pp. 1032–1034.
