Afghanistan 191 68. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Afghanistan1 Washington, September 29, 1979, 2201Z 256809. Subject: Newsom Meeting With Afghan Foreign Minister. 1. Confidential—Entire text. 2. Summary: During lengthy, businesslike session in New York, Under Secretary Newsom and Afghan FonMin Shah Wali traded mutual expressions of interest in improving bilateral relations, but agreed on little else. Discussion touched on the Dubs assassination and the DRA approach to acceptance of foreign assistance. Shah Wali endorsed good relations with Pakistan, but complained that Afghan “fugitives” were being trained there. He minimized the Soviet presence in Afghanistan and defended his government’s independence and nonalignment. We expressed appreciation for the DRA’s interest in controlling narcotics. End summary.2 3. At U.S. initiative, Under Secretary Newsom called on Afghan FonMin Shah Wali for a general hour-long exchange of views Sept 27 in New York. Assistant Secretary Saunders and NEA/PAB Director Peck sat in. Shah Wali had only a notetaker with him. 4. Newsom opened by noting that when he was last in Afghanistan he had met with then-President Taraki and Fon. Minister Amin.3 He wanted to use the opportunity of the FonMin’s visit to extend his best wishes to Amin and to Shah Wali as they assumed their new responsibilities. Newsom said Chargé Amstutz had reported that he had a cordial conversation earlier the same day with President Amin.4 5. In response Shah Wali said the DRA had from the beginning wanted to have good relations with all countries without exception. Afghanistan had traditionally friendly relations with the U.S. and the DRA had been desirous of maintaining these ties. Referring to the Dubs assassination, Shah Wali said “certain events” had occurred which the 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790446–0947. Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Priority to Islamabad, Moscow, New Delhi, and Tehran. A copy of this telegram was also found in the Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, USSR in Afghanistan (September 79). 2 Newsom and Wali were in New York for the UN General Assembly meeting. 3 See Document 26. 4 The meeting between Amin and Amstutz was reported in telegram 7218 from Kabul, September 27. Amstutz described the meeting as “amicable” and reported that he followed Department orders to keep the meeting short and avoid substantive discussion beyond sharing Amin’s “oft-repeated request” to improve relations between the United States and Afghanistan. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790442–0582)
