794 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III vantage in responding now to such an increase as part of a forthcoming overall U.S. position on aid at the Summit and CIEC Ministerial. Increased World Bank resources would enable the Bank to expand lending in its normal programs. Also, it would enable us to propose new departures in its lending to promote energy development in non-OPEC LDCs, to increase production of minerals in short supply, and to aid diversification in LDCs dependent on commodities with bleak long-term prospects. We believe an ultimate U.S. contribution to a World Bank capital increase could involve up to $2 billion annually in FYs 81–83, with probably no more than 10% or $200 million annually for 3 years representing cash outlays. Recommendation: The EPG unanimously recommends that we agree at the Summit and/or CIEC Ministerial to negotiate a substantial World Bank general capital increase but leave the amounts and timing to be worked out in the Bank Board.8 Decision Issue 3—Strategy on Future Aid Levels Issue: A forthcoming position on future aid levels is essential to meet long-term development needs. A commitment by the US now would pay major political dividends at the CIEC Ministerial. Should the US publicly pledge this spring to seek major increases in our aid, and if so, should we specify our plans in general or quantitative terms? Background: The EPG unanimously agrees that our present aid levels need to increase to respond to the legitimate development needs of LDCs as well as to sustain our objective of a constructive US position in North-South relations. A key element of our Summit and CIEC strategy should, therefore, be a general undertaking with other major donor countries to increase substantially our foreign assistance over the coming years. A significant increase in development assistance levels might take the form of doubling U.S. appropriations over the five years FYs 78–82 (from the base of $5.8 billion in FY ’77). Doubling would imply our seeking total U.S. aid appropriations of $11.6 billion by 1982, compared to $7.6 billion we are seeking for FY ’78. A World Bank general capital increase (as described in the previous issue) would account for about $1.5 billion of the increase. The remaining $2.5 billion might be utilized in our bilateral development and food aid programs and in other multilateral pro- 8 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
