68 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement States is willing to contribute material as well as moral support to this end. Unfortunately, we have not as yet made much progress toward fulfilling these expectations, and our continued failure to offer anything tangible in the way of assistance can be expected to result in a widespread feeling of disillusionment which will adversely affect the whole range of our relationships with the countries concerned. We are already faced with a rising tide of unrest, much of it of economic origin, throughout the entire Caribbean area. It would be most unfortunate indeed if the present political turmoil were to be further intensified by a reaction of disillusionment toward the United States Government over the apparent reversal of a policy which we have so clearly endorsed. The following chronically outlines the principal policy statements which have created this impression: 1. On November 18, 1958 you stated before the Committee of 21: “We have also supported a free-­trade area in Central America. We have also made it clear that we are prepared, through the Export-Import Bank, to consider the dollar financing required by sound regional industries in Latin America.”3 2. On November 27, 1958 Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s report recommended that the United States “participation with the five republics of Central America, and Panama, if possible, in a regional conference, either at the enterprise, and private industrial enterprises, to take a positive approach in helping Central America and Panama to the end that new industries, guaranteed from across to the entire market of the participating countries, would be established.”4 3. In February, 1958 Messers. Frank and Turkel visited all the Governments of Central America5 and stated that the United States desired to see a real forward-­looking, trade-­creating common market in Central America and was prepared to lend material as well as support to bring it about rapidly. They urged starting with two or three countries and then expanding it to five or six. The Frank-Turkel mission aroused a tremendous amount of enthusiasm and the United 3 For the full text of Under Secretary Dillon’s statement before the Committee of 21, see Department of State Bulletin, Doc. 8, 1958, pp. 918–922. 4 For the full text of the referenced Report to the President on United States-Latin American Relations, 1953–1958, see ibid., January 19, 1959, pp. 89–105. 5 The fact-­finding mission conducted by Harry Turkel and Isaiah Frank to survey the feasibility of providing U.S. assistance for the establishment of a Central American common market took place between February 9 and March 4, 1959. They subsequently reported to the Department of State that the time was propitious for a decisive effort to achieve a true Central American common market, starting with perhaps two or three countries.
