Chapter 5, May–June 1990  797
reductions will be designed to make a first strike less plausible. The 
result will be greater stability and a lower risk of war.
Major agreed provisions of the treaty are as follows:
The total number of deployed ICBMs and their associated launch-
ers, deployed SLBMs and their associated launchers and heavy bomb-
ers will be reduced to no more than 1600; within this total deployed 
heavy ICBMs and their associated launchers will be reduced to no more 
than 154;
The total number of warheads attributed to deployed ICBMs, 
deployed SLBMs and heavy bombers will be reduced to no more than 
6000. Of these, no more than 4900 will be warheads on deployed ICBMs 
and deployed SLBMs, no more than 1540 will be warheads on heavy 
ICBMs, and no more than 1100 will be warheads on mobile ICBMs;
The aggregate throw-­weight of the deployed ICBMs and SLBMs of 
each side will be limited to an agreed level which will be approximately 
50 percent below the existing level of the aggregate throw-­weight of 
deployed ICBMs and SLBMs of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
as of a date to be determined. This limit will not be exceeded for the 
duration of the treaty;
Heavy bombers equipped for long-­range nuclear air-­launched 
cruise missiles (ALCMs) will be distinguishable from other heavy 
bombers. Heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments other than 
long-­range nuclear ALCMs will be counted as one delivery vehicle 
against the 1600 limit and will be attributed with one warhead against 
the 6000 limit;
Heavy bombers equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs will 
be counted as one delivery vehicle against the 1600 limit and shall be 
attributed with an agreed number of warheads against the 6000 limit. 
Existing and future U.S. heavy bombers equipped for long-­range 
nuclear ALCMs will be attributed with 10 warheads each. Existing and 
future Soviet heavy bombers equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs 
will be attributed with 8 warheads each;
Within the 1600 limit on delivery vehicles the United States of 
America may have no more than 150 heavy bombers equipped for 
long-­range nuclear ALCMs that are attributed with 10 warheads 
each. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics may exceed that num-
ber of heavy bombers by 40 percent. If the United States of America 
exceeds the 150 number, each additional heavy bomber equipped for 
long-­range nuclear ALCMs will be attributed with the number of long-­
range nuclear ALCMs for which it is actually equipped. If the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics exceeds 210 heavy bombers equipped for 
long-­range nuclear ALCMs, each such heavy bomber will be attributed 
with the number of long-­range nuclear ALCMs for which it is actually 
equipped;
