Arms Control and Disarmament  1501
In considering the Senator’s suggestion it should be borne in mind 
that the proposal would involve a departure from existing U.S. pol­
icy with respect to disarmament, in that it would completely divorce 
the cessation of testing of nuclear weapons from other disarmament 
measures.
The Senator advanced his suggestion to the President as one way 
to meet the situation that would develop were the Soviet Union clearly 
on the verge of breaking off the current negotiations in Geneva, rather 
than as a substantive proposal to be made during the course of the 
negotiations.
The President directs that special note be taken of the fact that the 
proposal would permit the continuation of both underground tests and 
tests in outer space, while ceasing only atmospheric tests for a stated 
period, as for example, three years.
I will be in touch with your respective offices very shortly with a 
view to determining a satisfactory and expeditious method of meeting 
the President’s requirement.
Gordon Gray
Special Assistant to the President
Enclosure
Memorandum From Gore to Eisenhower
November 19, 1958
In the Geneva Conference on Nuclear Tests, two essentials are 
involved: (1) the moral and political position of the U.S. and, (2) U.S. 
military strength vis-­a-­vis the Soviets.
The U.S. delegation would seem to be negotiating toward an unat­
tainable goal. If so, we must face the prospect of a failure of the confer­
ence, for which we would suffer propaganda blame, or an unfavorable 
agreement.
The Russians plainly seek to pressure the U.S. and the U.K. into 
agreeing to stop all tests for all time without accepting effective inspec­
tion. If they fail in this, they will seek to blame the U.S. for failure of 
the conference. Soviet success in either respect would be detrimental 
to U.S. interest.
Mounting fears of radioactive contamination of the air is Russia’s 
most powerful propaganda weapon against us.
The U.S. can strengthen her moral and political position by seiz­
ing the initiative to stop radioactive contamination of the world’s
