Chapter 6, June–December 1990  883
6. Common Elements Ambs Burt and Nazarkin have discussed a 
package with the following elements (text at Tab 5):50
 No destruction of missiles (except for those that exceed the NDM 
limit).
 Limit of 250 non-­deployed mobile ICBMs, including silo-­based 
variants (all SS–24s, SS–25s, Peacekeeper, and future mobiles), of which 
no more than half can be rail-­mobile.
 PPCM in some form.
 Ban on using ICBMs and SLBMs converted for space launch to 
deploy in orbit ABM interceptor missiles or components capable of 
substituting for ABM interceptor missiles such ICBMs and SLBMs can 
be used for other purposes, consistent with existing international treaty 
obligations.
 Include reference to and language from Art XI of the ABM Treaty 
in the START preamble (as well as references to our obligation in the 
Non-­proliferation treaty and the Washington summit joint statement to 
negotiate on strategic arms).
 No agreed statements on the ABM treaty.
These elements can resolve a number of issues, but they are hung 
up on the paragraph banning use of converted START missiles to 
deploy in orbit ABM interceptors. The Soviets rejected our Sept. 29 lan-
guage, claiming it prejudiced the ABM issue. We disagree. However, 
we have developed alternative language which we believe protects 
both sides so long as the negotiating record is clear. The talking points 
are designed to achieve closure and make clear our position. In partic-
ular, you need to make clear to Shev that this can in no way limit our 
freedom to use START missiles to put ABM interceptors into orbit for 
testing purposes.51
Talking points:
 The elements of common ground our negotiators have worked 
out are useful and resolve a number of issues.
 We cannot agree, however, to START limits which put constraints 
on research, development, and testing.52
 That would link START to Defense and Space, something we 
agreed a year ago in Wyoming we would not do.53
50 Baker circled the number 6.
51 Baker underlined “on the paragraph,” “testing,” and drew a short vertical line in 
the left-­hand margin beside this point.
52 Baker underlined “research,” “development,” and “testing,” drew a short vertical 
line in in the left-­hand margin beside this point, and placed an asterisk beside it.
53 Baker drew a short vertical line in in the left-­hand margin beside this point, and 
placed an asterisk beside it.
