Guatemala  659
impetus to this campaign, since the natural outlet for oil exports would 
be through the port of Belize. Ydígoras could count on considerable Latin 
American sympathy and support on this issue, but it would embroil him 
with Mexico, which also has a contingent claim to part of the territory, as 
well as with the United Kingdom. He is not likely to press the issue to the 
point of precipitating a crisis, but he might impulsively take some provoc-
ative action which would be contrary to U.S. policy interests in the area.
The Outlook for Political Stability
30. The stability of the Ydígoras regime is not likely to be seriously 
threatened during 1958. It remains uncertain whether, before the 1959 
congressional elections, he will be able to develop effective congres-
sional and popular support for his moderate program. By that time a 
strong and vociferous political opposition centered in the PR will prob-
ably have developed.
31. The leaders of the PR, if permitted to develop an effective party 
organization, will probably take steps to minimize, and if possible elim-
inate, Communist influence. The degree to which they will succeed in 
this effort is uncertain. The Communists will almost certainly not have 
gained control of the PR prior to the next congressional election, although 
its opponents will accuse it of Communist tendencies in any case.
32. Should Ydígoras fail to muster sufficient party and popular 
support to cope with growing leftist opposition in Congress and in 
the country, he will probably resort increasingly to more authoritarian 
methods. He would probably do so reluctantly and with no greater 
repressive force than he judged the circumstances to require, but he is 
a strong man determined to rule and he would resort to outright dicta-
torship before he would permit political control to pass from his hands. 
The more repressive his regime becomes, however, the more popular 
disaffection will grow.
33. The armed forces will almost certainly support the Ydígoras 
government in whatever measures it finds necessary to maintain sta-
bility and order. They would turn against him only if popular resis-
tance had reached such intensity that serious civil disorder was clearly 
impending. In that case, they would probably see him safely out of the 
country and set up a military junta to supervise a return to constitu-
tional government. In the event of Ydígoras’ death, the army would 
probably support the interim administration of the presidential desig-
nate and the holding of new elections within the constitutionally pre-
scribed four-­month period.6
6 A map, which accompanied the source text, is not printed.
