German Democratic Republic 377 123. Telegram From the Embassy in the German Democratic Republic to the Department of State and Multiple Diplomatic Posts1 East Berlin, October 7, 1978, 1421Z 6566. Subject: Visit of Assistant Secretary Derian to East Berlin: Meeting With Deputy Foreign Minister Nier. Geneva Pass Assistant Secretary Derian. 1. Summary: Assistant Secretary Derian’s October 6 meeting with GDR Deputy Foreign Minister Nier fell into three categories: (1) a general discussion of US and GDR policy approaches to human rights; (2) US–GDR relations, with Nier providing some answers to issues raised by Ambassador in September 19 meeting with GDR Foreign Minister Fischer, and (3) a brief discussion of preparations for 1980 Madrid CSCE meeting. On human rights, Assistant Secretary Derian outlined to Nier the domestic basis and reasons for the importance of human rights in US foreign policy; she noted it was not directed against any government or form of government and that it was not intended to interfere with detente. It should be seen as an effort to discuss humanitarian problems rationally. Nier welcomed Ms. Derian’s visit, expressed the GDR’s hope for better US–GDR relations, and stated that, with respect to human rights, the yardstick for measuring performance must be determined in each country. On US–GDR bilateral relations, Nier said (1) the GDR would receive Congressman English to discuss narcotics issues, (2) preparations were underway to hold “Reflections USA” in Leipzig in the fall of ’79 and that they would look favorably on a 1980 showing at the Berlin TV tower, (3) the GDR would be prepared to hold claims discussions next January–February, and (4) the GDR had gone as far as it could on the Consular Convention but would look at any new US counterproposals. The Ambassador noted that Ms. Derian’s visit was an expression of US interest in developing better relations and welcomed Nier’s remarks on specific items of US– GDR business. Nier, in conclusion, referred to the “constructive atmosphere” which had prevailed during the talks and expressed the hope Ms. Derian could come back to Berlin. We think Asst Sec Derian’s visit was positive in tone and content, and useful to both sides. End summary. 2. Asst Sec Derian, accompanied by the Ambassador, DCM, Political Section Chief and Staff Assistant Heaphy, met with Deputy Foreign 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780411–0170. Confidential; Immediate. Sent to Warsaw, Belgrade, Bonn, Bucharest, Budapest, Geneva, London, Moscow, Paris, Prague, Sofia, West Berlin, and USNATO.
