190
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Our ability to detect promptly the incremental introduction of Soviet
combat support and combat service support units is similarly limited,
although time would increase the probability of our learning that such
units had entered Afghanistan. ([classification marking and codeword not
declassified])
The Soviets are probably well aware of the open-ended military
and political difficulties that could flow if such limited intervention
were allowed to grow into a larger and more visible commitment. They
are also aware of the adverse political consequences this would entail
for them in South Asia and the Middle East. On the other hand, it is
clear that the Soviets’ sense of their interests in Afghanistan is now
more ambitious than it was before the advent of the Marxist regime
in 1978. They see the maintenance of a Marxist state in Afghanistan as
important to their strategic and political interests in the region. This
perception has increasingly supplanted the Soviets’ earlier and less
ambitious goal of simply maintaining a friendly buffer state on their
southern border. If they do decide to provide some additional military
support to Amin, they are likely to do so in the hope of bolstering the
anti-insurgent struggle sufficiently to avoid facing a decision as to
whether to use Soviet combat units on a large scale. ([classification
marking and codeword not declassified])
In the event that Amin does not consolidate his position but that
an acceptable and viable Marxist alternative emerges, the Soviets are
likely to shift their political and military support accordingly. If no
such viable leftist alternative appears, and the Khalqi regime fragments,
the Soviets would promote installation of a more moderate regime
willing to deal with them, rather than accept the political costs and
risks of a massive Soviet invasion to fight the insurgency. Nevertheless,
we can foresee contingencies under which the chances of large-scale
and long-term Soviet intervention would become substantially greater:
—Prolonged political chaos.
—The prospect of advent of an anti-Soviet regime.
—Foreign military intervention. ([classification marking and codeword
not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.]
