Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 tary aid to a number of countries and refused to issue licenses in a variety of instances. The diversity of cultures and the different stages of economic and political maturity tend to produce agonizing, almost incredibly complex, choices in granting or withholding aid. Moreover, human rights, while a fundamental factor in our foreign policy, cannot always be the decisive factor. But the difficulty of the decisions will not deter us from supporting our words with action. International Support. It is important to note that we are not alone in pursuing the diplomacy of human rights. Increasingly, other governments are standing with us. In the United Nations, in the Organization of American States, and in other contexts we have strong partners in the cause of human rights. Recently, we initiated consultations with our West European allies and others on how to promote broader international cooperation in support of human rights. In general, we are finding strong support for giving human rights a higher priority in international relations. Human Rights Data Base. As I reflect on the first year of human rights diplomacy, there is one area in which I would like to ask for the creative thinking and counsel of this great association. I refer to the need I perceive for an objective, authenticated data base on human rights conditions in all countries. Let me put the problem in perspective. With the aid of our embassies around the world, we are constantly trying to gather reliable and extensive human rights data. Nevertheless, the validity of our information on human rights conditions in other countries is frequently challenged. Probably it is inevitable that the data collected by any one country would be suspect. Coverage is bound to be limited, and there may be the suspicion that the collecting country has an ax to grind. What is needed is an objective, widely respected clearinghouse for human rights information on all countries of the world. This would be an important resource for us and others interested in taking human rights conditions in other countries into account in policymaking. It would thus both inform our decisions and authenticate the existence and severity of human rights problems. Perhaps you will be able to suggest how such a clearinghouse might be created. It is clear that it must be international in scope. What is not so clear is whether it should be sponsored by a private organization or by a group of countries or an international organization. Once created, I could visualize that such an entity might also play an important educational role in improving human rights conditions around the world. We stand ready to help in creating such an organization. U.S. Concerns This then is a capsule view of the diplomacy of human rights. It is a diplomacy that refuses to “be indifferent to the fate of freedom else-
