Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
333
tary aid to a number of countries and refused to issue licenses in a
variety of instances.
The diversity of cultures and the different stages of economic and
political maturity tend to produce agonizing, almost incredibly com-
plex, choices in granting or withholding aid. Moreover, human rights,
while a fundamental factor in our foreign policy, cannot always be the
decisive factor. But the difficulty of the decisions will not deter us from
supporting our words with action.
International Support. It is important to note that we are not alone in
pursuing the diplomacy of human rights. Increasingly, other gov-
ernments are standing with us. In the United Nations, in the Organiza-
tion of American States, and in other contexts we have strong partners
in the cause of human rights. Recently, we initiated consultations with
our West European allies and others on how to promote broader inter-
national cooperation in support of human rights. In general, we are
finding strong support for giving human rights a higher priority in in-
ternational relations.
Human Rights Data Base. As I reflect on the first year of human
rights diplomacy, there is one area in which I would like to ask for the
creative thinking and counsel of this great association. I refer to the
need I perceive for an objective, authenticated data base on human
rights conditions in all countries.
Let me put the problem in perspective. With the aid of our em-
bassies around the world, we are constantly trying to gather reliable
and extensive human rights data. Nevertheless, the validity of our in-
formation on human rights conditions in other countries is frequently
challenged. Probably it is inevitable that the data collected by any one
country would be suspect. Coverage is bound to be limited, and there
may be the suspicion that the collecting country has an ax to grind.
What is needed is an objective, widely respected clearinghouse for
human rights information on all countries of the world. This would be
an important resource for us and others interested in taking human
rights conditions in other countries into account in policymaking. It
would thus both inform our decisions and authenticate the existence
and severity of human rights problems.
Perhaps you will be able to suggest how such a clearinghouse
might be created. It is clear that it must be international in scope. What
is not so clear is whether it should be sponsored by a private organiza-
tion or by a group of countries or an international organization. Once
created, I could visualize that such an entity might also play an impor-
tant educational role in improving human rights conditions around the
world. We stand ready to help in creating such an organization.
U.S. Concerns
This then is a capsule view of the diplomacy of human rights. It is a
diplomacy that refuses to “be indifferent to the fate of freedom else-
