Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
539
so far as to say he would resign if the Commission chose to stay
in Tehran.
Waldheim said that Bedjaoui characterized his fellow Commission
members as follows: Aguilar was very outspoken, emotional and diffi-
cult to work with. He also did not understand the unusual political
dynamics in Iran. Pettiti was deeply afraid from the beginning of the
mission and his one overriding goal was to get out of Iran. Jayewardene
was “very honest and nice but living in the clouds.” Bedjaoui contended
he had no political understanding and did not appreciate that in an
unusual situation one must act unusually. He believed that Daoudy
was honest, cooperative but ill for some of the time and therefore did
not play an important role. Waldheim concluded his comments on
the personalities of the Commission members by noting that the real
problem was the Bedjaoui-Aguilar split.
On the substance of the mission, Waldheim said that on Thursday2
everyone was quite optimistic. The students were ready to transfer
authority for the hostages to the government. The Imam had received
Bani-Sadr but refused to see representatives of the students. Over the
next three days, however, something happened, and Khomeini changed
his position saying the Commission would first have to issue a state-
ment on Iran’s grievances castigating the Shah and the American role
in Iran.
Waldheim said that although we did not know specifically what
happened in the three days, he and the Commission members pieced
together the following: Waldheim believes the fundamental mistake
made by Bani-Sadr and Qotbzadeh is that they did not arrange to
transfer authority immediately upon the students’ announcement on
Thursday that they would give up the hostages. Instead there was a
delay and on Friday, a holiday, the students organized demonstrations
in front of the Embassy. On Saturday, Khomeini issued a statement
which did not contain any mention of the transfer of the hostages.
Monday morning, in an attempt to get reconfirmation of Khomeini’s
position, Qotbzadeh went to see the Iman and asked him to order the
immediate transfer of authority. After the meeting with Khomeini,
Qotbzadeh came to see the Commission members and was, for the
first time, accompanied by Revolutionary Council Spokesman Habibi.
The Commission members thought this was a disquieting change since
Habibi had become a hard-liner on the hostage issue. Qotbzadeh told
the Commission members that Khomeini would issue a statement on
Tuesday which would demand that the Commission, before seeing all
2 March 6.
