1979  579
Mr. Slocombe commented that one could make distinctions between 
military C3 and national political leadership.
Dr. Brzezinski observed that a crisis or conflict bargaining advan-
tage could go to the side whose leadership and C3 system could endure 
over time. This might give the Soviets incentives to protract a conflict 
scenario.
Mr. Aaron observed that our vulnerabilities sprang from failures to 
pay sufficient attention to this problem in the past, but asked whether 
we would not be in rather good shape if we succeeded in getting our 
leadership and C3 assets airborne.
Secretary Brown responded that a protracted conflict with strategic 
strikes over time would tax the endurance of our airborne assets.
Dr. Brzezinski expressed doubt as to whether an airborne US lead-
ership could maintain political control during a war.
General Jones noted that current plans contain leadership target-
ing options which can be used or withheld. The question is whether 
the intended targets will actually contain the Soviets leaders when the 
weapons arrive.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether the current options for targeting lead-
ership and C3 are adequate.
General Jones said that the options need improvements but that the 
kinds of improvements needed aren’t really political issues.
Secretary Brown observed that our ability to successfully attack 
Soviet leadership and related C3 appears to require very early strikes 
in a conflict.
General Jones noted that many strategic war games and exchange 
analyses were very misleading because they did not take into account 
the affects on each side of strikes on its C3. This is particularly impor­
tant in assessing retaliatory capabilities.
Secretary Brown noted that DOD is moving forward on these issues.
Regionalization was then discussed.
Secretary Brown observed that we had acquired only the poorest 
insight into the political aspects of this issue. We simply would not 
know what effects various approaches to targeting would have on the 
unity of the Soviet State. Would they fly apart or rally round the flag? 
If we spared certain regions in the hopes they would split off from cen-
tral Soviet authority and they failed to do so, would we not in effect 
spare Soviet resources for continuing and recovering from the conflict? 
Would disclosure of a “regionalization strategy” cause the Soviets to 
tighten peacetime control in the provinces? Secretary Brown summed 
up by noting that the matter remained somewhat academic until we get 
a better handle on how such a strategy could be implemented.
