Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1065
— The Soviets have said that because of the complexity and the 
time required to negotiate acceptable provisions, final agreement on 
this issue could be put off until after treaty signature.
— That would be a serious mistake. We must have these data 
denial provisions nailed down before we can sign a START treaty.
CONCLUSION
— We don’t know how much flexibility the Soviets have on these 
matters. They may accept, but more likely the President’s letter will 
result in a counteroffer.
— This will at least give us an early indication of whether or not 
we can sign a solid treaty within the next several weeks.
221.	 Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State1
Geneva, June 6, 1991, 1004Z
6345. Subject: START: And Now for the Big One
1. Secret—Entire Text.
2. Congratulations on the very successful resolution of the diffi-
cult CFE problems. The spotlight now turns to START and the summit, 
which will be more difficult. We are getting rumors here that announce-
ment of a summit date is imminent. Faced with the risk of giving advice 
and then looking foolish and uninformed when the announcement is 
made, or waiting until the announcement is made and thus having no 
input at all, I will opt for the former. There is general agreement here 
on both delegations that signing the treaty this month is not a realistic 
goal. However, assuming the go button is pushed, and pushed hard, 
now in both capitals, our judgment is that we could complete the treaty 
in July. Other things being equal, which they probably are not, my per-
sonal recommendation would be to schedule the summit for the last 
week of July or the first week of August accompanied by a firm com-
mitment to sign the treaty at that time. I believe Lint Brooks generally 
agrees with this. I was told yesterday by Roslyakov that the Soviet del-
egation’s view is that the period around July 20 would be a reasonable 
target date.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
D910542–0143. Secret; Immediate.
