322
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Gulf, about which it would have been necessary as a minimum to
notify us?10
In connection with the content and spirit of your message I consider
it essential to again clarify the point [explain that] that the request of
the Afghanistani Government and the satisfaction of this request by
the Soviet Union are exclusively a matter for the USSR and Afghanistan,
which regulate their mutual relations themselves, by mutual agree-
ment, and naturally cannot permit any sort of interference from without
in their [these] mutual relations. They, as any member states of the
UN, enjoy [have] the right not only to individual self-defense, but to
collective defense as well, which is envisioned by Article 51 of the UN
Charter, which the USSR and USA formulated themselves. And this
was approved by all member states of the UN.
There is, of course, no basis for your assertion that our actions in
Afghanistan allegedly threaten the peace.
In light of all of this, the immoderate tone of certain formulations
in your message hit us squarely between the eyes [is striking]. What
is the purpose of it? Would it not be better to evaluate the situation
more calmly, keeping in mind the supreme [higher] interests of the
world [peace] rather than, ultimately, the mutual relations of our
two powers.
Concerning your “advice”, we already informed you, and here I
repeat again, that as soon as the reasons which prompted the Afghani-
stani request to the Soviet Union disappear, we fully intend to withdraw
the Soviet military contingents from Afghanistani territory.
And here is our advice to you: the American side could make its
contribution toward ending the armed incursion from without into
Afghanistani territory.11
I do not believe that the work to create more stable and productive
relations between the USSR and USA can be in vain. Unless, of course,
the American side wants this to be. We do not. I think it would not
be to the benefit of the United States of America itself, either.12 It is
10 The alternative translation of this sentence reads: But permit us to ask you—did
you consult with us prior to the beginning of the massive concentration of naval forces
near Iran and in the region of the Persian Gulf, as well as in many other cases about
which you should, as a minimum, have informed us. Carter wrote in the margin next
to this paragraph: “We’ve sent in no invasion forces.”
11 The alternate translation of this paragraph reads: “And here is our advice to you:
the American side could make its contribution to cessation of armed incursions from
without into Afghanistani territory.” In the left margin, Carter wrote: “The only incursion
is from the SU.”
12 The alternate translation of these sentences reads: “I do not believe that work to
create more stable and productive relations between the USSR and USA can turn out
to have been in vain, if, of course, the American side does not want this to be the case.
We do not. I think that this would not, indeed, be to the benefit of the United States of
America itself.”
