Venezuela  1257
From the standpoint of our relations with Latin America, includ-
ing Venezuela itself, the Pérez Jiménez problem was no longer serious. 
We had stood on our long time principle, plus the added factor of his 
having entered the U.S. on a Venezuelan passport issued by the Junta 
Government and with a visa requested by that Government, and this 
seemed to have been widely recognized. In Venezuela itself, every-
body knew that President Betancourt had resided in the United States 
and Puerto Rico for many years in spite of repeated demands by Pérez 
Jiménez that he be expelled.
It is particularly unfortunate to have the Pérez Jiménez issue head-
lined again on the eve of Castro’s probable visit to the U.S., and while 
we are considering cases of many former Cuban officials in the Batista 
administration, some of which are real hardship cases. Decision regard-
ing these cases will now be more difficult.
There remains the basic problem of the failure of the Department 
of Justice (Immigration and Naturalization Service) to consult with us 
on a highly charged case which directly involves our relations with all 
of Latin America and especially Venezuela where U.S. Investment is the 
highest in the world except for Canada.
I recommend that you call Attorney General Rogers at once to 
advise him of our concern over the way this case was handled and that 
Messrs. Murphy, Hanes and I be authorized to take immediate steps in 
concert with the Justice Department to prevent a recurrence.2
2 Herter’s handwritten notation at the bottom of the page reads: “Done—6:30 p.m. 
3/27/59 C.A.H.”
VE–24.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Venezuela (Sparks) to 
the Department of State1

Washington, March 30, 1959, 7 p.m.
566. Saturday papers front paged INS stories order that Perez 
Jimenez and family leave U.S. by April 15, possibility appeal noted but 
general impression is Perez Jimenez will depart. UP and ’AP reported 
State Department supports INS order and that his expulsion is in U.S. 
interests.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.00/3–3059. Official Use Only.
