580 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Dr. Brzezinski commented that we should forget the political effects for the time being and first look at how in practice one could implement a targeting strategy that inflicts higher levels of damage on the great Russians, and creates fears that the Soviet Union would dissolve. Mr. Aaron recommended that a special look should be taken at strikes by theater forces against Eastern Europe in the light of the potential of those countries to break away from Soviet authority. He also noted that we should examine counter declaratory strategy too. Dr. Brzezinski observed that strategic war is still political and that we had to exploit any possible advantages since our margins of strategic strength had narrowed. More discriminating targeting may be of considerable value. Secretary Brown observed that however one approached “regionalization,” it seemed to imply the capabilities for very discriminating use of our weapons. Targeting industry was then discussed. Secretary Brown began by noting that he believes that there would be little practical distinction between targeting economic recovery resources and a general urban industrial target set. Mr. Slocombe said that war supporting industry should be a war option and would be narrower that the current package for attacking Soviet industry. He went on to explain that out of some [less than one line not declassified] economic facilities, DOD had attempted to identify [less than one line not declassified] key installations that would be directly supportive of a general war effort, [4 lines not declassified] Secretary Brown observed that such a war supporting industry attack would cause far fewer fatalities than a general urban industrial attack. Fatalities could be reduced further by evacuation on the Soviet side and by careful targeting by the US. Deputy Secretary Christopher asked if population would be targeted. Secretary Brown answered that targeting population would not be the objective. Secretary Brown went on to say that war supporting industry could be distinguished from general economic targets, the latter would be included in the general urban industrial target set. Dr. Brzezinski noted that one could attack war supporting industry along with strategic and general purpose force targets. General Smith asked how war supporting industry would be defined. Secretary Brown replied that our target data base has such a category. Dr. Brzezinski commented that attacks on war supporting industry might make sense in a limited but sustained conflict not involving general strikes against each other’s economic targets.
