Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1017
in Geneva want an interval . . . they are really tired or less interested in 
getting a deal.” Baker responded: “I talked to the President—­no matter 
what, the CFE thing must go forward, then the President wants START—­
the longer it hands, the tough it will be. The President wants a Summit, 
but not without START.” Later on in the conversation, Baker reiterated: 
“Now on the Summit . . . if we get CFE finished, we should take a break, 
then get START . . . they have been working for eight months and they 
need a three weeks break. Burt is leaving—­but we can go on with his 
deputy. After START we have post-START, CFE Ia . . . by the way many 
people don’t want follow-­up meetings such as these.” (Department of 
State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross Files, Middle East 
Memos of Conversation/Miscellaneous 1989–1995; all ellipses in the 
original) Later that day, Baker departed for Ankara before returning to 
Washington. A memorandum for the record of conversations between 
U.S. and Soviet technical experts is below, Document 207.
In a letter dated March 21, 1991, President George H.W. Bush 
wrote President Gorbachev to reiterate a proposal for overcoming 
differences over Article III of the CFE Treaty that Baker had submit-
ted to Bessmertnykh on March 16: “The proposed approach is based 
on three simple principles. First, total Soviet holdings of tanks, artil-
lery, and armored combat vehicles in the CFE zone (regardless of the 
branch of the military service to which they may be assigned) could not 
exceed the limits specified in the treaty. Second, any such equipment in 
excess of these limits would have to be converted or destroyed using 
agreed procedures. Third, of course, such an approach would need to 
be implemented in a manner that is consistent with the CFE treaty we 
already have signed (including the limits by zone and on holdings in 
active units), so that it will not be necessary to renegotiate its terms.” 
(Department of State, Office of the Under Secretary for Arms Control, 
International Security Affairs, Lot 05D259, Records of James Timbie, 
US-Russia BW, CTB Ratification, CFE Bartholomew May 1991)
In a letter dated March 27, Gorbachev proposed six points of com-
pensation for precluding coastal defense, naval infantry, and armored 
combat vehicles in the Strategic Rocket Forces. In his reply of April 8, 
Bush proposed a “comprehensive approach that elaborates your ideas 
in a way that also would achieve a practical resolution of the difficult 
naval infantry issue, and would remove all of the remaining roadblocks 
to the ratification and implementation of the CFE treaty. Under this 
comprehensive approach, the Soviet side would, as you propose, mak-
ing a binding commitment outside the treaty not to increase the equip-
ment held by units in the coastal defense, naval infantry, and armored 
combat vehicles assigned to the Strategic Rocket Forces.” President 
Bush went on to lay out specific steps in a counterproposal that “differs 
only slightly from the numbers you have proposed, but it has one cru-
cial advantage: it will allow us to move forward with ratification and 
implementation of the CFE treaty because it will bring the Soviet into
