216 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement First, the prestige of being in the nuclear club; and, second, France’s fear that the US would not call upon massive retaliation to save Europe when the cost in US casualties became clear to US leaders. Secretary Dulles said that none of us doubts that President Eisenhower will order a strategic nuclear attack in that event. But his term has but two years to run and who knows what his successor’s views will be. Secretary Dulles said he knew of one potential successor who might not be as firm as President Eisenhower on this score. Secretary Dulles said he felt that the time was near when our European allies are not going to be satisfied with a strategic doctrine depending on a US decision to invoke all-­out nuclear war in the event of an attack on Europe. He felt that the European countries would go their independent ways unless we find with them a concept they con­ sider more dependable. The Secretary said he did not think limited war in Europe was possible. The important thing, however, was what the allies think and do. The Europeans are just starting to think about this problem in a fuzzy manner. Two alternatives seem to be opening to them. One was to develop independent nuclear weapons production capability, such as the British and the French are trying for. It is only logical that oth­ ers will follow. Maybe this course is right. But it is dangerous not to have an agreed strategic concept which is satisfactory to all the NATO partners. It is dangerous for them to prefer that each one have its own nuclear capability. In the case of the French, a nuclear weapons program is something of a gesture. They cannot afford a real program. They must depend on us or accept risks of another kind. Even the United Kingdom cannot afford such a program. Certainly Italy cannot. In the case of Germany, there are strong public opinion controls. The Brussels treaty only prevents produc­ tion of nuclear weapons on German territory. The French-Italian-German (FIG) program may get into nuclear weapons production. The second alternative is to drift into neutralism. Secretary Dulles said that he and others had thought about the possibilities of “area” defense with tactical weapons. He did not believe a war in Europe could be confined to a limited area. However, in order to give our allies a credible policy, we should think of how to create a situation where our allies would have greater rights in regard to the future use of tactical nuclear weapons in Europe. If we insist that, with the exception of possible hostilities in Yugoslavia and Berlin, the only conceivable type of European war is all-­out nuclear war, the result will be a feeling of futility—­a brief effort to manufacture nuclear weapons, followed by an abandonment of that effort because of its expense, and then a drift to neutralism. That is the likely course of events under pres­ ent circumstances. We can hold on one or two years.
