780
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
would logically occur in any case before a Plenary meeting of the Party
which was called upon to set the line for the next Party Congress in
foreign policy.
—Embassy Moscow speculates that the uncertainties stemming
from US and allied economic countermeasures related to Afghanistan
are forcing the delay in producing a new full-year plan as the question
on future dependence on technology and food from the West is debated.
In the Embassy’s view it is barely conceivable that our actions are
having more policy bite than is apparent, and that Brezhnev may
therefore take his withdrawal initiatives more seriously than is
apparent.7
Of course, the Soviets can justify their stated interest in a political
settlement by clinging to the May 14 Afghan proposals as they have
done so far. But they could have had more success in pursuing this line
without any withdrawal announcement, following Gromyko’s time-
tested pattern of complete inflexibility. The kind of iron-pants strategy
is at least as effective in stirring up European doubts about the US as
Soviet hints of flexibility.
The President’s toast at the Yugoslav State Dinner and subsequent
discussion of “transitional” arrangements demonstrate our willingness
to discuss a political settlement seriously.8 Gromyko’s response to the
Muskie letter is a very authoritative indication that the Soviets are not
now ready for such a discussion.9 If the situation has changed since
the “withdrawal” decision, presumably they will find a way of letting
us—or more likely Schmidt—know unambiguously.
However, the passage in the Resolution of the Party Plenum which
comes out for “a political settlement of the situation that has formed
around Afghanistan which is pursuing the policy of nonalignment”
seems to suggest some flexibility in considering a broadly based
arrangement without preconditions or assurances that the gains of the
“socialist” revolution there will not be reversed.
In the meantime, we will presumably be hearing a lot more from
the Soviets about the importance of our making a reciprocal gesture
such as relaxing some of the post-Afghanistan sanctions. Were we or
7 A likely reference to telegram 10353 from Moscow, June 27. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800310–0006)
8 Carter visited Yugoslavia at the conclusion of the Venice Summit. During his
dinner toast, Carter deplored Soviet actions in Afghanistan and declared: “We would
be prepared to explore a transitional arrangement, to be implemented along with the
prompt withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Afghanistan, for the purpose of restoring
peace and tranquility in that suffering country.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book II,
p. 1212)
9 See Document 293.
