December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
813
The United States administration undertakes to seek promptly ad-
ditional statutory authorization that may be necessary for full imple-
mentation of this arrangement.
(Signed)
Moshe Dayan
For the Government of Israel
Cyrus R. Vance
For the Government of the United States.
End text.
3. Annex to Memorandum of Agreement
Begin text:
Annex
Israel will make its own independent arrangements for oil supply
to meet its requirements through normal procedures. In the event Israel
is unable to secure its needs in this way, the United States Government,
upon notification of this fact by the Government of Israel, will act as
follows for five years, at the end of which period either side can termi-
nate this arrangement on one-year’s notice.
(A) If the oil Israel needs to meet all its normal requirements for
domestic consumption is unavailable for purchase in circumstances
where no quantitative restrictions exist on the ability of the United
States to procure oil to meet its normal requirements, the United States
Government will promptly make oil available for purchase by Israel to
meet all of the aforementioned normal requirements of Israel. If Israel
is unable to secure the necessary means to transport such oil to Israel,
the United States Government will make every effort to help Israel se-
cure the necessary means of transport.
(B) If the oil Israel needs to meet all of its normal requirements for
domestic consumption is unavailable for purchase in circumstances
where quantitative restrictions through embargo or otherwise also pre-
vent the United States from procuring oil to meet its normal require-
ments, the United States Government will promptly make oil available
for purchase by Israel in accordance with the International Energy
Agency conservation and allocation formula, as applied by the United
States Government, in order to meet Israel’s essential requirements. If
Israel is unable to secure the necessary means to transport such oil to
Israel, the United States Government will make every effort to help Is-
rael secure the necessary means of transport.
Israeli and United States experts will meet annually or more fre-
quently at the request of either party, to review Israel’s continuing oil
requirement.
End text.
Vance
