1318  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
2. Despite past experiences in this field with the Soviets, you are 
prepared—in the interest of peace—to accept this latest Russian state­
ment at its face value. In effect you say to Khrushchev: “All right, so 
you now say you are stopping tests and ask the US to do the same. Well, 
the US will take you up on this since we have been trying to get some 
agreement about this with you for some time. So—”
3. Let’s try seriously to work out an agreement. Naturally for any 
such agreement to function in the world successfully, other nuclear 
powers—the United Kingdom (and probably France)—have to be in 
accord. Let’s get them to join us in working out such an agreement.
4. To do this, let’s forget for the time being the so-­called Summit 
Conference. Although you have talked about having such a Summit 
Conference you haven’t even answered the US–UK-­French memo­
randum filed with the Soviet Foreign office a week ago. While we are 
perfectly willing to have such a Conference with you to discuss other 
important world matters, we still insist that preparation for such a 
meeting is elementary to its success.
5. While we should continue to work for such a meeting in order to 
discuss other world matters, let’s concentrate right now on one single 
problem—the suspension of testing. Let’s take up that one subject and 
let’s add to it—in order to make it mean something for humanity—the 
question of production and inspection. The US has already proposed 
that in addition to the end of testing, an end should also be reached 
on the production of nuclear weapons and that a workable system of 
inspection be instituted to guarantee any agreement we might reach.
6. Let’s have this Nuclear Conference soon—and let’s hold it where 
all the world can see and hear it. Here is what I proposed to you:
That a Nuclear Conference be held and that the Heads of State of 
the nuclear powers attend such a meeting. This meeting could be held 
soon (within a month?). It could be called as a sort of special session of 
the United Nations, so that all the nations of the world could “sit in” 
as observers and—in effect—as judges of our sincerity. This meeting 
could be held at the UN headquarters at Geneva or at New York. At the 
Conference, the nuclear powers should be able to work out an agree­
ment which would combine an end of testing and production with a 
suitable and workable inspection system. Then—to make the nuclear 
powers responsible before the world for living up to that agreement—
we could sign this agreement before the representatives of the nations 
of the world.
7. If you accept this suggestion and join with me in this meeting, 
I would do one thing more. Even though it might place the US and 
its allies at a disadvantage—since the USSR has already conducted its 
tests this year—I would, nevertheless, to show the good faith of the
