Romania
641
206.
Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, September 22, 1978
SUBJECT
Possible Meeting with Romanian Foreign Minister Stefan Andrei
During Matt Nimetz’s recent visit to Romania, Romanian Foreign
Minister Stefan Andrei expressed an interest in meeting with you per-
sonally when he is in the States next week for the opening of the UN
General Assembly.
Andrei is presently scheduled to meet with Secretary Vance on
September 26 in New York. However, a number of factors suggest that
a meeting with you might also be useful.
—Ceausescu’s deep concern over the impact of the Pacepa affair
on U.S.-Romanian relations (as Christopher’s memo to the President
on Nimetz’s visit makes clear, Tab I)2
—Romania’s more exposed position since the Hua visit.
—Recent indications of Soviet chagrin over Ceausescu’s policy.
(Brezhnev was highly critical of Ceausescu at the Crimean meetings
with East European leaders in July and allegedly told Kadar that he
intended to intensify contacts with other Romanian leaders.)3
A meeting with Andrei would give you an opportunity:
—to reassure Andrei of the President’s interest in good relations
with Romania and his intention not to let the Pacepa affair interfere
with the improvement in relations that has taken place over the last
few years;
—to get a firsthand report of Hua’s visit and sound out Andrei on
the Romanian regime’s intentions vis-a-vis China; and
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 66, Romania: 6/78–3/79. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for action.
2 See footnote 6, Document 207.
3 In telegram 5542 from Bucharest, August 9, the Embassy reported that the Roman-
ian media described the Crimea meeting between Brezhnev and Ceausescu as “‘an
exchange of views’ in a ‘sincere’ atmosphere, perhaps the least flattering terms in Roman-
ian interparty rhetoric.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780325–
0657) Brezhnev also criticized Ceausescu during his meeting with Todor Zhivkov, stating
that Ceausescu’s policies were moving Romania out of step with the rest of the Warsaw
Pact countries. (Information on conversation of the Secretary General of the CC of the
CPSU (Leonid I. Brezhnev) with the Bulgarian Head of State (Todor Zhivkov) in Crimea,
August 14, 1978, Bulgarian Central State Archive (TsDA), Sofia, Fond 378–B, File 495)
