Afghanistan Because the temper of the Politburo as a whole shifted away from detente, however, it seems unlikely that Kosygin’s presence would have altered the decision. Despite this shift, we have not detected a basic realignment of power within the Politburo. In November, an opportunity to replace Kosygin was allowed to pass; he is still being ranked second in the Soviet pecking order. Instead of retiring Kosygin, the Politburo brought in a 74-year-old Brezhnev loyalist, First Deputy Premier Tikhonov. We have no reason to believe that Tikhonov’s promotion, in itself, altered the balance within the Politburo on foreign policy issues. ([classification marking not declassified]) The USSR’s leaders must have taken their positions on the intervention with an eye on their relative standing in a post-Brezhnev political environment. To the extent that the intervention has undercut detente policies—with which most Soviet leaders had been signaling their increased discontent—so, too, has it weakened the succession prospects of Brezhnev’s protege Chernenko, one of detente’s most vocal advocates in the Kremlin. The contender who presumably profited the most is Brezhnev’s party deputy, Kirilenko, who in the past has voiced some reservations about detente. ([classification marking not declassified]) If the invasion is a success, those who might have argued against it probably will remain silent. But if the USSR is drawn into a long, costly military operation that damages Soviet interests on a global basis, the decision will be reexamined. There are already signs of second thoughts surfacing among second-level officials. The outcome of such a debate could have a significant impact on the makeup of the leadership, particularly in the post-Brezhnev era. ([classification marking not declassified]) A prolonged, costly conflict in Afghanistan might encourage younger elements in the Soviet establishment to press for a rejuvenation of the leadership. Unsatisfactory results in Afghanistan might also make KGB Chairman Andropov and Defense Minister Ustinov vulnerable and subject to removal at or before the next party congress in early 1981. Foreign Minister Gromyko might also be faulted for miscalculating the adverse worldwide reaction to the use of military force in Afghanistan. ([classification marking not declassified]) [Omitted here is the body of the report.]
