January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1175 one person and two deputies? This would still be administrative, but it gets a larger number. Israel gets the principle: 13 functions could lead to 39 people. Prime Minister Begin said: Professor Brzezinski, he (Prime Minister Begin) appointed a deputy, and was told by parliament that this was a waste of money. Minister Burg will answer in detail. Minister Burg said that here the quantitative begins to be qualitative. A large body has to be seen as a parliament. On this rationale, we can derive 11 or 12 or 30. It is a question of quality expressed in quantity. And an individual would like to say who is his deputy. For example, Secretary Vance would like to name his deputy. In the elections, would there be 13 districts or 39 in Dr. Brzezinski’s model? Where would they take place: 13? 39? Dr. Brzezinski says that there would be deputies, but if they do not respond to the temperament of the principles, that would not be good. If the 13 want deputies, they can appoint them. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that there be 13 three-man districts. Prime Minister Begin said that if there were 15, there would be 45. What would be the result? Dr. Brzezinski said that this would get Israel the principle, and they (the Egyptians) would get what they want in the number. Prime Minister Begin said that Ministers Burg and Shamir have no deputies. There is one non-military deputy in the Defense Ministry, and there was objection in the country, which saw it as a waste of money. This way results in a quasi-parliament. Then there is the need to hold elections. Say 13 or 15 districts—then there are 13 or 15 members. It would depend on the number of functions, to be decided in negotiations, not in an arbitrary way. Ambassador Linowitz said he would speak with candor. We believe that if numbers are being used as a target, then Israel won’t get its objective. Israel wants no parliament with legislative powers. Israel is worried that it would declare a Palestinian state. We will say—in any form Israel wants—there can be no Palestinian state in this period. He doesn’t care for calling the group an administrative council; and is not happy in Prime Minister Begin’s definition of the Self-Governing Authority as an administrative council. Prime Minister Begin said that this is Camp David, not him. Ambassador Linowitz said that we agree on the need to convey certain powers to the Self-Governing Authority. Is this consistent with Prime Minister Begin’s definition? Prime Minister Begin agreed. Ambassador Linowitz said next, what powers should go to the Self-Governing Authority? We will meet your concerns, and also do so within Camp David. The Egyptian model is not worked on; it is out.
