Haiti  791
expenses by about a million dollars in the fiscal year ending on 30 
September 1960.
13. The regime has managed to keep afloat in the past year with 
the continuation of major outside assistance, a good coffee crop, above 
average tourist earnings, and the prospect of larger sugar exports to the 
U.S. Under terms of the IMF stabilization agreement, Haiti has been 
shored up by a $4 million standby agreement and has received $5.4 mil-
lion in balance of payments support; a new arrangement with the IMF is 
under negotiation. The U.S. provided $6 million in budgetary support 
as grant aid during the 1958–1959 fiscal year, and has already allocated 
a million dollars in grant aid to cover the estimated current deficit. In 
addition, Haiti has continued to receive sizable external development 
loans and assistance, mainly from the U.S.3
14. Even with continuing external aid on the scale of that received 
in recent years, the hand-­to-­mouth Haitian economy will show little 
or no improvement. Economic development is not keeping pace with 
capital depreciation and population growth. The coming smaller off-­
year coffee harvest is likely to produce another budget and balance of 
payments crisis in 1961. Substantial improvement in the basic economic 
situation, as distinguished from budgetary and balance of payments 
relief, would require a long-­term program of investment in economic 
development on a scale not hitherto contemplated. If such a pro-
gram were to be undertaken, its implementation would be hampered 
by Haitian sensitivities regarding national sovereignty as well as the 
Haitian spoils system.
15. Political Prospects. So long as Duvalier remains active and exter-
nal assistance continues, we foresee no major change in the Haitian 
political situation. The domestic opposition is weak, unorganized, and 
discouraged. The military are unlikely to move against the government 
and are reasonably capable of maintaining internal order in present 
circumstances.
16. A successful armed incursion by Haitian exiles—­with or with-
out Cuban support—­is unlikely. Haitian exiles are few in number 
and for the most part lack revolutionary zeal. Even though there is 
important sympathy for Fidel Castro among students, teachers, and 
3 Total U.S. economic aid to Haiti since the end of World War II amounts to over $70 
million: Export-Import Bank ($27 million), the Development Loan Fund ($4.6 million for 
irrigation and road engineering loans), U.S. Public Law 480 (approximately $8 million for 
relief food supplies through 30 June 1960), and ICA ($31.6 million through 30 June 1960). 
The IBRD has provided $2.6 million for a road maintenance program. The economic 
development efforts of U.S. agencies are concentrated in two projects: The Artibonite 
Valley Authority and Poté Colé, which combine regional development projects aimed at 
raising agricultural productivity and improving health, education, and administrative 
standards.
