700 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement statements to Arenas and the Ambassador that no action could be taken until Congress passed new legislation. (Ibid.) GT–22. Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge of Guatemalan Affairs (Gorrell)1 Washington, September 28, 1959. SUBJECT Visit of Guatemalan Foreign Minister PARTICIPANTS His Excellency Lic. Jesus Victor Unda Murillo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala; His Excellency Col. Arturo Ramirez Pinto, Ambassador of Guatemala; Assistant Secretary R. R. Rubottom, Jr.; Mr. Juan L. Correll, Officer in Charge, Guatemala Affairs. Foreign Minister Unda Murillo said he had been requested by President Ydígoras to transmit through Mr. Rubottom, the President’s warm salutations to President and Mrs. Eisenhower. The Minister also asked that Mr. Rubottom communicate his own personal salutations to Secretary Herter. President Ydígoras, the Minister said, had also asked him to inquire of Mr. Rubottom the proper channels for extending an invitation to Governor Muñoz Marin of Puerto Rico to visit Guatemala, and the most effective way of doing so. Mr. Rubottom said he would secure this information and transmit it through Ambassador Ramirez Pinto. The Minister stated that Guatemala is suffering from the drop in coffee prices, which has created financial problem that prevent its dynamic President from doing all the things he would like to do. He expressed satisfaction at the efforts that have been made to stabilize the coffee situation. He mentioned in passing that Guatemala would like to become a sugar exporting nation but understands the difficulties involved in trying to have a quota assigned to it at the present time. Mr. Rubottom expressed interest in hearing the Minister’s views on the political situation in Guatemala. The Minister stressed the tension 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 63 D 146, “Interdepartmental Memoranda: Guatemala, 1959.” Official Use Only. The source text is an unsigned carbon copy.
