596 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV They spend large amounts of effort on programs that have no obvious payoff (e.g., titanium-­hull submarines, large surface effect vehicles, a variety of peculiar aircraft). In addition, the Soviets obtain no real technological support from their Allies. We have Allies with a major technological base, and are developing ways to better share our military R&D burdens. (C) With continuing Soviet inefficiencies in R&D, with continued emphasis on R&D in our defense program, and with improved cooperation with our Allies, we can successfully compete with the Soviets in military technology, despite their larger spending. However, no longer will we have the large per-­vehicle superiority we now enjoy to make up for numerical deficiencies. 5. (TS) In sum, unless we take additional measures soon, I see the military balance shifting in the favor of the Soviet Union. In this regard, I see that trend at a time when the economic and political risks we face in the world are mounting. As the Soviets’ capacity to project military power mounts, so apparently does their willingness to use military forces to intervene on a global scale. Thus, I feel we are entering an era where direct military confrontations between the US and the Soviet Union will become more rather than less likely. Should that be true, it is my firm belief that we must be prepared to meet the Soviets wherever we must rapidly and with whatever military capabilities are necessary. The first task of US forces must be to deter military action; they can only do so when it is clear that they are capable of success in any ensuing conflict. Today our military forces are marginal for such deterrence. Tomorrow they may be inadequate. (TS) In light of these problems, I believe a major review of US policies and forces and budgets should be undertaken by the National Security Council, based on a further assessment of the risks we now face, and the details we will present to the PRC on our programs. I concur that PD–18 remains a valid framework for national strategy,3 but I believe the problems we now face demand more than the “certain changes in emphasis” that your assessment recommends.4 Harold Brown 3 See Document 31. 4 At the bottom of the page, Brown handwrote a postscript: “Zbig—I believe there should be an NSC meeting on this subject. HB.”
