National Security Policy  189
51.	
Letter From McElroy to Eisenhower1
Washington, May 7, 1958
Dear Mr. President:
I am forwarding herewith the first quarterly report of progress 
in the Military Reconnaissance Satellite Program undertaken by the 
Advanced Research Projects Agency, Department of Defense.
The Military Reconnaissance Satellite Program is the initial satellite 
program (other than VANGUARD and JUPITER C) which I have this 
far determined, in accordance with National Security Council Action 
No. 1846, “to have objectives having key political, scientific, psycholog­
ical or military import.”
This initial report covers historical background and program plans 
for the development of Weapons System 117L which consists of the sat­
ellite vehicle, its information sensing, storage and transmission devices, 
and the ground receiving equipment and facilities. A financial plan for 
this project through Fiscal Year 1959 is also included.
Weapons System 117L is the culmination of extensive research and 
investigation since 1946 to determine the feasibility and operational 
capability of a satellite as a military reconnaissance vehicle. These 
studies have concluded that a Satellite Intelligence System is feasible 
and has potential operational capability of providing current and reli­
able intelligence information. Need for this information will continue 
to become more critical as technological advances enable a potential 
enemy to bring into being offensive weapons with constantly increas­
ing range and greater destructive power.
Contracts for development and test of Weapons System 117L were 
let in October and November 1956. The first test flight of the Weapons 
System 117L satellite vehicle is planned to be conducted in late 1958. 
Successive tests of orbital capability of the vehicle and performance of 
the reconnaissance equipment are planned to continue through 1960.
Expected useful life for pioneer versions of the Military Satellite 
Vehicle equipment is 10 to 30 days and for later versions one year. 
The satellite vehicles are planned to be equipped with sensing devices 
which will relay reconnaissance information to the earth at a rate which 
would permit coverage of the entire Soviet Bloc by a single vehicle as 
frequently as once every eight days.
Successive progress reports will be provided to you each quarter 
showing highlights and significant accomplishments in the execution 
1 Source: Transmits report on military reconnaissance satellite program. Secret. 2 pp. 
Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
