1957 1315 Needless to say, Helenka and I both hope something can be worked out. Not only for various personal reasons—[text not declassified]—­but also for the official and principal reason, that there just isn’t any work for me to do here between meetings. However it works out, we appreciate the efforts we know you’re making. Sincerely, David L. Osborn 783. Letter 64 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 64 Washington, January 30, 1957 Dear Alex: 1. Your letter No. 53 of January 19 came January 24 and has been read by Messrs. Robertson, Phleger and Sebald. All of us sympathize with you in the frustrating and exasperating position in which you find yourself, with the talks apparently leading nowhere and dragging on indefinitely with the same tired points being reworked ad infinitum and ad nauseam at every meeting. Undoubtedly it is difficult for the man who is on the scene and who is carrying the chief burden to see the further utility of the exercise. However the talks are precisely fulfilling the primary purpose envisaged by the Secretary in 1955. Mr. Robertson told him yesterday about your letter including the question you had raised about the desirability of prolonging the talks. The Secretary smil­ ingly recalled that when he was giving you your instructions he had mentioned to you that you should be prepared to carry on the talks for two years. The Secretary said that you were handling the talks exactly in accordance with his wishes, and that the talks were serving the pur­ pose he had in mind. He appreciated the difficulties you confront but his views as to the importance of the talks and the desirability of con­ tinuing them had not changed. He said that when the Middle East pres­ sures subsided somewhat, he would be glad to review the ­matter and give careful attention to any arguments against continuation of the talks which we might consider overriding. But as of now he felt the talks 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­Informal.
