432  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
so. It would be well for you to give the Secretary’s staff in Geneva a copy 
of all your messages to the Department simultaneously with the dispatch 
of the messages. This in addition to the arrangement for you to inform 
us of any instructions you receive direct from the Secretary should give 
us a pretty complete cross-­check. In addition, there may be some direct 
exchanges between the Secretary and/or Herman Phleger in Geneva and 
the Department on policy considerations involved in your instructions. 
There will always be a risk of some confusion or misunderstanding in a 
situation like this but we hope that this arrangement will give us maxi­
mum insurance against any serious crossing of the wires.
Ralph Clough has had Joe Nagoski prepare an up-­to-­date box score 
on the status of the 76 Chinese in this country who were mentioned to 
Wang. It is enclosed as of possible background use to you.
The mild and cautious tone of the Secretary’s remarks about the 
Geneva talks at his Press Conference on October 18 has created an 
impression in some quarters that we are not particularly dissatisfied 
with the PRC’s record of implementation of the Agreed Announcement, 
and that a Foreign Ministers’ level meeting might be seriously consid­
ered immediately after your talks are terminated. Senator Knowland 
telephoned from California on October 19 to express his surprise over 
the press reports on the Secretary’s remarks and to go on record as being 
opposed to any discussions under Item 2 “until the 19 Americans rotting 
in Communist jails have been released”. He thought we had abandoned 
our firm position. Mr. Robertson explained that we had not abandoned 
Item 1 and would not do so until the last civilian was released. He also 
pointed out that the only substantive discussion under Item 2 concerned 
the renunciation of force, which was our topic. The discussion of this 
topic was in our interest and in no way indicated a weakening of our 
position or a concession to the Communist viewpoint.
We are doing what we can to counter any impression abroad that 
we are satisfied with Chinese Communist performance under the 
Agreed Announcement, that we are about ready for a Dulles-­Chou En-­
lai meeting, or that our stand on the recognition issue has changed.
We are sending you a memorandum of the latest conversation 
between Ambassador Koo and Mr. Robertson on this subject which 
took place October 20.
The British Embassy here is giving us somewhat fuller abstracts 
of O’Neill’s reports than the Foreign Office in London is giving to our 
Embassy there. There is some duplication involved since you are receiv­
ing this material both from London and from us. We would like to have 
an indication from you as to whether the somewhat greater detail you 
get in our telegrams justifies the added expense.
We are awaiting your reaction to the short and simple draft decla­
ration on renunciation of force. It may not be the best form of statement
