996 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX “self-management socialism” or to alter it beyond recognition remain scatteredandtheirprograms—wheretheyhaveformulatedthem—have yet to find much resonance in society at large. This has obviated the need for more heavy-handed repressive measures. 10. From this we draw several conclusions: —The level of turbulence in the post-Tito period has been well within the tolerable, although the opening up of the political process has proceeded faster than expected. —The leadership, despite some dissenting voices and a foot-dragging party, has turned in a credible if somewhat uneven performance, forcing through necessary inter-Republican compromises and on balance responding to pressures for change and to economic necessity with cautious flexibility and even political courage. —The trend toward more open criticism, debate, and decisionmaking—in one sense a step toward Karelj’s limited concept of the “pluralism of self-management interests”—is fully consonant with the generally liberalizing (and in our view healthy) thrust of Yugoslavia’s post-war political and economic evolution. It has been animated and legitimized not by Western-style Democrats or “closet” capitalists but by pragmatic Communists who are interested more in problem-solving than ideological abstractions, who believe the Party’s leading role is not historically ordained but contingent on its ability to provide convincing answers to current problems, who believe the Socialist system can and should tolerate a much more open expression of differences, and who see cautious adjustment to pressures for change less risky in the long run than sterile resistance. —The forces for change are too broadly based and too deeply rooted to be checked easily. Other pressures aside, the generation now coming into its own is a post-war generation less interested in ideology, more pragmatic, better educated and travelled, less ambivalent about Moscow, thoroughly imbued with a post-1948 spirit of proud independence and more realistic about the nature and requirements of Yugoslavia’s Federal system. Nothing illustrates this new climate more clearly than the Party’s own assessment that it can only hope to maintain control over the on-going process by participating in it and endorsing more criticism and debate. 11. That said, there are developments which could alter the pragmatists’s and reformers’ present advantage. First, a prolonged economic downturn or collapse could undermine this group’s confidence in its ability to control the situation while strengthening conservative elements anxious to preserve power through a more “firm-hand” policy, a quick economic “fix” (i.e., greater reliance on Eastern trade, markets, and economic methods), and consequent abandonment in practice if not in name of genuine non-alignment. So far there is no indication
