Human Rights
69
26.
Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts1
Washington, March 21, 1977, 1853Z
62223. Subject: UN Address by the President.2
1. First major foreign policy address by President provides oppor-
tunity to initiate dialogue with host government on issues which will
be major emphases of new administration, and to note administration’s
commitment to work on these issues in multilateral context. Text of ad-
dress carried on Wireless File. Following guidance suggests points
which should be stressed in discussions with host government.
2. Importance of United Nations. Decision to deliver first major
foreign policy speech at United Nations underlines major importance
administration attaches to UN system. Speech follows highly suc-
cessful visit to Washington by SYG at invitation of President to discuss
major international issues (CFR no. 9 of March 2).3 President empha-
sized that all nations had responsibility for supporting ideals of UN
which he described as commitment to freedom, self-government,
human dignity, mutual toleration and peaceful resolution of disputes.
3. Peace and security. President’s remarks briefly highlighted
problem areas of the world. On Middle East, he called for a flexible
framework for a just and permanent settlement. On Southern Africa, he
pledged US to work for majority rule through peaceful means, noting
that Congress repealed Byrd Amendment this week, bringing US into
full compliance with UN sanctions against Rhodesia. (President signed
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770156–0808.
Limited Official Use. Drafted by Kriebel; cleared by Shurtleff, Frederick Brown, McNutt,
Tuchman, Perry, Hill, Phelps, Phyllis Oakley, Goott, Sebastian, Gold, and Congden; ap-
proved by Baker.
2 The President addressed the UN General Assembly on March 17. The text of the
President’s speech is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 444-451. It is sched-
uled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign
Policy.
3 The President met with UN Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim at the White House
on February 25 from 11:15 a.m. to 1:12 p.m., a visit that included an arrival ceremony, an
exchange of remarks, a meeting with UN and U.S. delegation members, and two lun-
cheons (one hosted by the President for Waldheim and the other hosted by First Lady
Rosalynn Carter for Mrs. Waldheim). (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s
Daily Diary) The text of the President’s and Waldheim’s remarks is printed in Public
Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 245–246. The memorandum of conversation of their
meeting is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject
File, Box 34, Memcons: President: 2/77. Briefing memoranda for Waldheim’s visit are in
the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 14,
United Nations: Secretary General Waldheim, 2/25–26/77: Briefing Book and Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 14, United Na-
tions, Secretary General Waldheim, 2/25–26/77: Cables and Memos.
