1262 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement introduce at the Quito Conference in 19604 a resolution under which membership in the OAS would be made dependent upon the presence in each country of a democratically elected government - perhaps even with the election having been supervised by the OAS. There followed some general discussion as to the United States’ position concerning intervention and Betancourt expounded his ideas on multilateral vs. unilateral action. He feels that if the United States were to take part in a multilateral action or position with reference to dictatorships, this would be generally accepted and applauded by the great majority of Latin American nations. The only ones which would criticize would be those very few countries which do not now enjoy democratic regimes. Mr. Mann indirectly questioned this by a reference to the long-­standing position of Mexico, for example, on the subject of intervention, but President Betancourt expressed the belief that Mexico would go along with a multilateral approach. President Betancourt said that as far as he himself is concerned he definitely plans to have an OAS team present in Venezuela for the 1964 election. He said that the one real imminent danger for Trujillo is that the barbados from Cuba will take things into their own hands and mount an invasion of the Dominican Republic. President Betancourt then entered into a discussion of the great desirability of doing everything possible to strengthen the OAS, particularly by decentralization of some of its functions outside of Washington. He mentioned the Inter-American Juridical Council in Rio de Janeiro as being the only OAS Agency not located in Washington and then repeated the Venezuelan arguments for the establishment of the new Inter-American Bank in Caracas. Mr. Mann reviewed the entire background of this question from the U.S. point of view and described the basis on which the U.S. position has been adopted favoring the location of the Bank in Washington or New York. President Betancourt was obviously not impressed by these arguments and Mr. Mann asked him if this were a highly important issue to him. The President responded by saying that it is a highly important question to the future welfare of the OAS more than it is of importance to him personally or to Venezuela. Mr. Mann said that he would discuss the matter again in Washington, presenting the President’s points of views, although he said he feared that he could offer little hope of success. Ambassador Sparks raised the question of Pan American Airways’ problem of jet flights to and through Venezuela and the company’s hope that the air base at Palo Negro might be used for its Asunción run until the runway at Maiquetia may be lengthened. The Ambassador 4 Reference is to the Eleventh Inter-American Conference which was scheduled to meet in Quito in February 1960, but which was delayed at the request of the Ecuadorean government until early 1961 and then postponed indefinitely.
