1516 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 2. Identification of earthquakes by the method of “First Motion” is less reliable than previously estimated. This result implies a require­ ment for a considerably larger number of inspections. Alternatives to be Considered Since there is clear agreement among informed scientists that significant modifications are necessary in that section of the report of the Geneva Conference of Experts which deals with underground tests, it is important to examine the possible modifications in U.S. pol­ icy which these changes in the estimated capabilities of the system will necessitate. The alternatives presented below are all based on the premises that the United Stated will continue to be firm in insisting on the necessity of proper controls of any test agreement and that we will continue to seek agreement with the Soviets on some form of test discontinuance or limitation. Alternative No. 1—Discontinue all tests in the atmosphere. The AEC has stated this position in the following way: “(1) to adhere rigidly to the principle that control of any test cessa­ tion agreement is essential and that only those tests which are detect­ able and identifiable are to be prohibited by treaty. Under no conditions shall the relaxation of the requirements of the control system antecede policy changes regarding the scope of the tests being suspended. “(2) Negotiate as a first step, beginning at the appropriate time after the resumption of negotiations, a treaty for the cessation of atmo­ spheric tests. “(3) To postpone for later negotiation a treaty applying to under­ ground and outer space tests after further investigation of the techni­ cal problems involved in their detection. The U.S. should be willing to discuss these problems to the extent desired by Russia during current negotiations. “(4) To propose meanwhile international cooperation (with the Control Commission if established) in this investigation to the extent of conducting for the Commission necessary experiments and in making available to the Commission or other appropriate authority the results of national nuclear experiments whose results bear upon the detection and identification problems at issue. “(5) To preserve the right to develop non-­military applications of nuclear explosives.” This position would initially eliminate the problem of detecting underground tests (as well as tests at great distances from the earth) by permitting such tests. This would answer the worldwide concern about fallout hazard. However, unless subsequent phases were carried out, it would fail to accomplish the other objectives of a test suspension since
