762  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Enclosure
National Security Council Directive 5908
NSC 5908	
Washington, July 1, 1959
DIRECTIVE
on
COMPARATIVE EVALUATIONS GROUP
1. There is hereby established under the National Security Council, 
pursuant to the provisions of Section 101 of the National Security Act, 
a Comparative Evaluations Group responsible for the preparation of 
comparative evaluations of U.S. and Soviet capabilities in selected 
weapons systems.
2. The Comparative Evaluations Group shall consist of the 
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, who shall serve as Chairman of the 
Group; the Under Secretary of State; the Deputy Secretary of Defense; 
the Director of Central Intelligence; the Chairman of the President’s 
Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities; the President’s 
Special Assistant for Science and Technology; and the President’s 
Special Assistant for National Security Affairs.
3. The secretariat services for the Group shall be performed by the 
NSC Representative on Internal Security.
4. The Comparative Evaluations Group shall meet at regular inter­
vals, and not less than every three months.
5. The functions of the Comparative Evaluations Group shall 
include:
a. Recommending to the President suitable topics in the field of 
weapons systems for comparative evaluations of U.S. and Soviet 
capabilities.
b. Determining the scope of each of the studies approved by the 
President.
c. Determining the procedures to be followed in connection with 
such studies, including the time limit within which the studies are to be 
completed and submitted to the President.
6. Oral presentation of such comparative evaluations to the 
National Security Council or other groups shall be as determined by 
the President.
7. In view of the sensitive nature of the materials to be included in 
studies made by the Group, special security precautions shall be applied 
thereto. Distribution of the studies prepared by the Group shall be limited 
to two copies—one to be maintained in the files of the National Security 
Council, the other in the files of the Chairman of the Group.
