552 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement discussions of practical matters at issue have expressed the determina­ tion that the differences between the two sides shall not lead to armed conflict. 2. They recognize that the use of force to achieve national objec­ tives does not accord with the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter or with generally accepted standards of international conduct. 3. They furthermore recognize that the renunciation of the threat or use of force is essential to the just settlement of disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace. 4. Therefore, without prejudice to the pursuit by each side of its policies by peaceful means they have agreed to announce the following declarations: 5. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan informed Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson that: 6. In general, and with particular reference to the Taiwan area, the People’s Republic of China renounces the use of force, except in indi­ vidual and collective self defense. 7. Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson informed Ambassador Wang Ping-nan that: 8. In general, and with particular reference to the Taiwan area, the United States renounces the use of force, except in individual and col­ lective self defense. Tab C Johnson’s Proposed Draft4 Geneva, undated AMBASSADOR JOHNSON’S REVISED DRAFT (Proposed for Introduction Dec. 1) 1. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan of the People’s Republic of China and Ambassador U. Alexis Johnson of the United States of America during the course of their discussions of practical matters at issue between the two sides make the following declarations: 2. Ambassador Wang Ping-nan, on behalf of the Government of the People’s Republic of China, declares that the PRC will refrain from the threat or use of force except in self-defense; and 3. In accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter and generally accepted standards of international conduct, the PRC will always seek the solution by peaceful means of any dispute to which it is 4 Secret.
