256
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. Round eleven of the US–USSR Chemical Weapons negotiations,
which began on February 11, 1980, ended on March 19, 1980. During
that period eight plenary meetings and fourteen drafting group meet-
ings were held.
4. Plenary discussions during the round dealt primarily with is-
sues relating to on-site inspection, with problems of irritants and pre-
cursors, and with various declarations concerning chemicals used for
permitted purposes. Work in the drafting group was devoted to discus-
sion of provisions on definition of terms, non-transfer/non-assistance,
permitted activities, declarations to be made within thirty days after a
state becomes a party, and destruction of stocks.
5. The most noteworthy features of the round were: continuing ac-
tive pace of meetings, better-focussed discussion of verification-related
issues, slow progress in resolving substantive questions, drafting of ad-
ditional elements for a joint initiative, and Soviet nervousness about
CW discussions in the Committee on Disarmament (CD).
A) Continued active pace. Meetings were held frequently (4 days
out of 5), continuing the pattern begun in the second half of the pre-
vious round. Atmosphere was business-like with no apparent indica-
tion that US-Soviet tensions were spilling into the bilateral CW negotia-
tions. Both Delegations experienced considerable difficulty in working
around schedule of other meetings (CD and the Biological Weapons
Convention Review Conference).
B) Better-focussed discussion of verification-related issues. So-
viets appeared more willing this round to enter into discussion of
verification-related issues. This reflects pattern first observed toward
end of previous round. Agreement between Dels to respond at the next
plenary meeting, if possible, facilitated exchange of views. Verification-
related discussions dwelt on agreed procedures for facilitating verifica-
tion at declared production and filling facilities, as well as on nature of
international participation in on-site inspections; procedures for chal-
lenge inspection were discussed briefly. As discussed below, while
some progress was achieved on secondary issues, principal issues
remain.
C) Slow progress in resolving substantive questions. Despite some
progress on secondary issues, U.S. Del is disappointed that more
progress was not achieved given the time and effort expended. In terms
of resolving issues, this round was not much more productive than pre-
vious rounds. (Specific issues resolved are noted below). Soviets, how-
ever, appear not only comfortable with current pace but have also re-
sisted our attempts at accelerating it.
(1) On the positive side, the Soviets:
—Agreed
that
herbicides
should
be
excluded
from
the
Convention;
