960 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement the Communists or other extremists may achieve such influence that they can put through programs seriously threatening US interests or even security. In any event, the US will be under increasing pressure, and Latin American support for the US, for example in the UN, will almost certainly continue to decline. (Para. 79) 11. US policy remains crucial both in itself and for its effect on the rest of the Free World. Indications that the US was not maintain­ ing a firm and effective military and political posture would lead to weakening of the resolve of other free nations. The growth of Soviet ICBM capabilities is creating a serious problem for the US in maintain­ ing among other Free World nations confidence in US willingness to bring its nuclear capabilities to bear as a protection for such nations. A second crucial area affecting US prestige and influence will be that of US economic policy. However much the capacity of other Western nations grows, the Free World will still look to the US for leadership in the problem of channeling Western aid to the “have-­not” nations and in the freeing and encouraging of international trade, and will be intensely concerned with the economic policies, both domestic and for­ eign, adopted by the US. (Paras. 82, 84, 86) DISCUSSION I. INTRODUCTION 12. The year 1959 saw many events so dramatic and significant as to appear as landmarks in the course of contemporary history. The Lunik shots dramatized the emerging Soviet attainment of an opera­ tional ICBM capability and reinforced apprehension in the Free World that the USSR was out-­stripping the US. Khrushchev’s visit to the US highlighted a series of top level contacts and negotiations involving the US and the USSR.5 Also during the year, publicly aired differences between the USSR and Communist China marred the appearance of unanimity in the Sino-­Soviet Bloc. On the Western side, France asserted itself, and the economic resurgence of Western Europe and Japan was manifested most conspicuously by the continuance of a major deficit in the balance of payments of the US. In the underdeveloped areas, events in Cuba, Laos, and Iraq during this year highlighted the continuing East-­West conflict for influence, and the danger that some Free World territory may fall under Communist control. 5 The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, would further bring out the significance of the second and third sentences by adding at this point: “The Lunik shots emphasized the continuing Soviet armament effort and the basic aggressive­ ness of Soviet policy, while Khrushchev’s visit indicated that for the short term, at least, the USSR would carry on the present tactics of detente; as between the two approaches, it may be expected that before long the element of pressure and threat will become more pronounced, perhaps much more so than it is at present.” [Footnote is in the original.]
