wanted to know why they could not go on with that proposal immediately.
Dr. Wang replied that Count de Martel and Admiral Tsai were not prepared
to discuss the question at that time, but the Admiral stated that he was
prepared to go ahead. Mr. Strawn, at this point, made it clear that the
position of the American Delegation was that they were agreeable to giving
China the 2½% surtax on necessities and 5% surtax on luxuries at the
earliest possible moment, the money to be impounded by the Customs
Administration to await disposition by the Conference. Again Dr. Wang
placed an obstacle in the way by insisting that the question of Tariff
Autonomy and the question related to the enforcement of the National Tariff
Law to give effect to Tariff Autonomy should be discussed together. Mr.
Strawn remarked that he did not want the Chinese Delegation to get the
impression that they were holding back what China was entitled to receive
under the Washington Treaty while they discussed a new treaty. It was the
desire of the American Delegation to fulfill the terms of the Washington
Treaty at once and they would give more as soon as they could agree on
what it should be. Colonel Peel said that this represented the British view
also, and the Japanese Delegation, while in accord with this plan, made it
plain that the 2½% and 5% surtax agreement would require ratification by
the Emperor, so far as Japan was concerned, before it could become
effective under Japanese law. Adjournment was taken with the
understanding that items 1, 2, 3 and 4 would be discussed together at the
next meeting of the Committee.
 
Committee on Provisional Measures, Third Meeting, November 14, 1925.
The third meeting of the Committee on Provisional Measures was held on
the morning of November 14, at which time the Chinese Delegation
presented the following resolution:
“The Contracting Powers other than China hereby declare their
recognition of China’s right to enjoy tariff autonomy.
“China hereby declares her intention to abolish likin, and further
declares that the Chinese National Tariff Law will come into force
upon the abolition of likin.”
