International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
139
—Unemployment and inflation in Europe remain very high; gov-
ernments in power are weak. Leaders are under increasing pressure to
adopt trade restrictions to protect jobs at home. The heads of state of the
EC Nine last week issued a statement expressing concern about high
unemployment and asked for a study recommending measures to deal
with five sensitive industries, including shipbuilding.4 Adoption of
cargo preferences by the US will further weaken their resolve to resist
demands for protection. Instead, they may emulate our actions. The re-
sult would be disastrous for world trade.
—As Bob Strauss indicates, the concept of preferences is more im-
portant than the actual percentage offered.5 From the standpoint of US
trade policy, a 10% preference is as damaging as 25%. It breaches
treaties with 30 countries. Moreover, once we have started down the
preference road, it will become increasingly difficult to draw the line.
The maritime industry will push for more. A 10% preference will
merely open the door.
—Commerce and Labor recommend that you defend this action on
national security grounds—i. e. that US flag ships will be more reliable
than foreign ships in emergencies. State, Defense and I disagree. We be-
lieve that it is more probable that in an emergency foreign ports would
be closed to US flag ships.
I urge you to reexamine your decision in light of these consider-
ations; my concern is shared by State, Treasury, OMB and CEA.
4 The EC Council met in London June 29–30. Telegram 10953 from London, July 1,
contains the text of the statement on growth, inflation, and employment issued at the
conclusion of the meeting. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D770235–0992)
5 See Document 34.
39.
Editorial Note
In his July 7, 1977, Evening Report to President Jimmy Carter, Sec-
retary of State Cyrus Vance discussed the oil cargo preference issue:
“We have called in officials from the embassies of the major shipping
nations this afternoon and informed them of our decision to support an
oil cargo preference. We told them that their representations had been
carefully considered but that because of domestic employment consid-
erations it is necessary for us to support a limited oil cargo preference.
We emphasized that given current projections of US oil imports and
