National Security Policy 349 Secretary Quarles indicated a desire to comment on the Department of Defense atomic weapons requirements. He pointed out that the Department of Defense had yesterday sent to the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission its estimates of its requirements over the next ten years for both plutonium and U–235. Secretary Quarles indi­ cated that the minimum requirements for small tactical nuclear weapons would continue to exceed the plutonium estimated to be available. The President, with a smile, stated that he was at least perfectly certain that Secretary Quarles was not going to reduce the requirements for fission­ able materials. The Acting Director of the Bureau of the Budget, Mr. Roger Jones, asked whether these Defense Department requirements took account of the material discussed by Admiral Sides at the special meeting of the National Security Council on last Monday afternoon. The subject of this meeting was the evaluation of offensive and defensive weapons systems. Secretary Quarles replied to Mr. Jones by stating that the Defense Department requirements were based on all the latest available infor­ mation, including that presented at the special Council meeting on Monday. He again pointed out that the trend toward smaller sizes of nuclear bombs, such as the DAVY CROCKETT, was greatly increasing the plutonium content per bomb. Mr. Jones pointed out that in view of the constant criticism by the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy of the alleged failure of the Department of Defense to indicate its future requirements, which criticism extended also to the Administration as a whole, it would be worth while to advise the Joint Committee that the Defense Department had just sent to the Atomic Energy Commission its requirements over the next ten years. The National Security Council: Noted and discussed the report on the status of the atomic energy program on June 30, 1958, prepared by the Atomic Energy Commis­ sion and transmitted as Part 3 of NSC 5819; as supplemented by an oral presentation by the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, and AEC Commissioner Libby, on developments in the program since June 30, 1958. [Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.] S. Everett Gleason
