721.2315/178a: Telegram [Document 292] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) WASHINGTON, February 28, 1925—11 p.m. 8. Peruvian Ambassador has received instructions to sign Procès Verbal with following modifications: 1. In the third suggestion of the Secretary of State omit the words “immediately after the ratification of the above treaty.” 2. In statement of Colombian Minister the words “should be ratified by the Government of Peru” to read “should be ratified by both Governments”. 3. In the statement of Doctor Velarde delete whole paragraph and substitute following: “Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his Government in view of the withdrawal by Brazil of its friendly observations upon which consideration of the treaty was suspended to express its acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made in the sense (and to state that (?)) consideration of the treaty by the Peruvian Congress would be resumed and it would take its regular constitutional course before that body.” Colombian Minister definitely refuses first modification as this was a sine qua non of his Government. He gladly accepted second and cannot accept third without communicating with his Government to whom he is sure it will not be acceptable. Brazilian Chargé is unable to accept any modifications without referring matter to his Government. He thinks it possible that second suggestion might be acceptable but greatly doubts whether the others will be. Please call upon President Leguía and point out to him that of the three countries concerned Peru is asked to do the least. Colombia is asked to give up its pretensions to land east of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line; Brazil to grant Colombia freedom of navigation on Amazon and other rivers common to both countries. All Peru is asked to do is to take part in this meeting to receive the withdrawal of Brazil’s observations against the Colombian-Peruvian treaty on certain conditions, to hear Colombian Minister say his Government is willing to meet those conditions and then for Peruvian Ambassador to state that in view thereof his Government will advise its Congress of this fact repeating the recommendation that Congress approve the boundary treaty with Colombia already signed by Peru and submitted to its Congress. There appears to be
