Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission angry but would not kill the hostages. Khomeini would use it as an opportunity to rouse the masses behind him. It could also strengthen the position of Bani-Sadr and the moderates. However, it is not clear that the moderates would succeed in the resulting power play. We might be pressuring the weakest political element. (S) Admiral Turner wondered if it would be possible for the U.S. to absorb the oil drawdown and make up the Japanese loss. Mr. Fried said that we would have to draw down stocks, and the price increases which would have to be imposed to reduce our own consumption by that amount would have to be very high, with substantial effects on inflation and growth. (S) At that point, the meeting had to adjourn, with the understanding that this subject would probably be discussed further by principals over the weekend.3 (C) 3 In a March 20 memorandum detailing potential items for Vance to discuss at the March 21 foreign policy breakfast meeting with the President, Newsom provided Tarnoff with the main points of this discussion and concluded: “My impression is that there will be little support for the concept of a blockade at the breakfast meeting but that it will be kept alive as a contingency.” (Ibid.) In a supplementary March 20 memorandum, Hinton wrote that Fried’s analysis was “extremely bearish.” He thought there was a “strong political case” for increasing pressure on Iran in order to send “an immediate message of resolve.” (Ibid.) 215. Memorandum from the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) and the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State (Raphel) to President Carter and Secretary of State Vance1 New Orleans, March 21, 1980 We are waiting in New Orleans for a new plane to take us to Panama.2 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 12. Secret. 2 In his memoir, Jordan recalled that, after receiving intelligence that the Shah planned to leave Panama, Brzezinski said to him: “Hamilton, Panama and the Shah are your specialty. I’m in charge of current leaders and big countries—you’re in charge of former leaders and small countries.” Jordan then made plans to travel to Panama. (Jordan, Crisis, p. 199)
