organized, as well as the law of England, an endorsement in blank
authorizes anyone who is the lawful owner of the paper to write in a name
and thereby entitle the person so named to demand registration as owner in
his turn on the corporation’s books, and that the question as to who is the
owner of the paper depends upon the law of the place where the paper is,
the court also made the following additional significant statement:
“If the United States had taken steps to assert its paramount
power, as in Miller v. Kaliwerke Asehersleben Aktien-
Gesellsehaft, 283 Fed. 746, a different question would arise that
we have no occasion to deal with. The United States has taken no
such steps. It therefore stands in its usual attitude of indifference
when title to the certificate is lawfully obtained. There is no
conflict in matter of fact or matter of law between the United
States and England and therefore Baker v. Baker, Eccles & Co.,
242 U. S. 394, does not apply.”
It is important to observe, moreover, that following the rendition of this
decision the matter was the subject of fresh discussions between the
Comptroller of the Clearing House (Enemy Debts), who had succeeded to
the duties of the Public Trustee, and the Alien Property Custodian, and it
was agreed that the decision of the Supreme Court did not in any way alter
the situation. The Comptroller, by a communication of February 10, 1925,
addressed to the Alien Property Custodian,32 referring to the understanding
arrived at between the Public Trustee and the Alien Property Custodian,
stated:
“In the case of registered securities, where, under the United
States Trading with the Enemy Legislation, you had already
seized on the register of an American Corporation ex-enemy
holdings therein the certificates of which were in the possession
of the Public Trustee, it was understood that such certificates
should be surrendered to you, and on the other hand, where no
such seizure had taken place, no objection would be raised by you
to their sale by the Public Trustee under the charge imposed upon
enemy property by virtue of the permissive provisions of the
various Treaties of Peace.”
