Chapter 7, January–May 1991  999
200.	 Memorandum From Arnold Kanter of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security 
Affairs (Scowcroft)1
Washington, February 5, 1991
SUBJECT
Your February 5 Meeting on START
Your meeting2 is largely intended to bless the next round of the 
Bartholomew-Obukov talks (scheduled for later this week in Geneva)3 
and ensure that everybody on the U.S. side is singing from the same sheet 
of music. Subject to any issues raised by the principals, the only poten-
tial issue for decision is the U.S. approach to downloading. The other 
major topics are a discussion of the U.S. “approach” to the Bartholomew-
Obukov talks, and—­time permitting—­a report from the Ungroup to the 
principals on other START issues that may come up in Geneva.
An agenda is attached at Tab I4 and a discussion paper on down-
loading is attached at Tab II. Copies were distributed yesterday to the 
Ungroup to pass along to their principals in preparation for today’s 
meeting.
Approach to the Bartholomew-Obukov Talks
This is an opportunity for Secretary Baker to remind everyone 
about the President’s determination to make every effort to complete 
START by the end of the month, and for Secretary Cheney to wonder 
aloud about why we are even bothering to get on a plane to Geneva. It 
is unlikely that this part of the discussion will lead to a clear, much less 
agreed, course of action.
There is much to be said for the argument that if we do not get a 
START agreement very soon (e.g., by the end of February), then the 
prospects for getting one at all grow much dimmer. This perspective 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01034–015, START—February 
1991 [1]. Secret. Sent for information.
2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Bush held a principals meeting on 
February 5 from 1:31 to 2:39 p.m. in the Oval Office. No minutes were found.
3 In telegram 1352 from NST Geneva, February 5, the Delegation confirmed 
Bartholomew’s program in Geneva, February 7–10. (Department of State, Central Foreign 
Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D910117–0485)
4 Attached but not printed is the agenda, which reads: “A. Approach to the 
Bartholomew—Obukov Talks”; “B. Downloading in START—Paper Attached”; and “C. 
Unground Report on Other START Issues.”
