Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1193
The Parties undertake not to produce, test, or deploy systems for rapid 
reload and not to conduct rapid reload practices. Also, they agree not 
to install SLBM launchers on submarines that were not originally con-
structed as ballistic missile submarines.
The Parties are prohibited from producing, testing, or deploying: 
ballistic missiles with a range in excess of 600 kilometers (or launch-
ers of such missiles) for installation on waterborne vehicles other than 
submarines; launchers of ballistic or cruise missiles for emplacement or 
tethering in various underwater locations; systems for placing nuclear 
weapons or any other kinds of weapons of mass destruction into Earth 
orbit; air-to-surface ballistic missiles; and long-range nuclear ALCMs 
armed with two or more nuclear weapons. There are also restrictions 
on flight tests on certain types of aircraft.
The Parties agree to limit the number of long-range nuclear ALCMs 
with which existing or future heavy bombers will be equipped. The 
Treaty contains agreed locational restrictions on various types of heavy 
bombers, based upon the category of armaments for which each type 
of bomber is equipped. The Parties also agree not to have underground 
facilities accessible to ballistic missile submarines and not to base stra-
tegic offensive arms subject to the limitations of the Treaty outside their 
respective territories.
MOBILE LAUNCHERS OF ICBMS
The Treaty contains special provisions for mobile ICBM launchers. 
Mobile ICBMs are a special problem because of the relative difficulty in 
counting them once they are deployed. Generally, road-mobile ICBM 
launchers and their associated missiles may only be based in certain 
restricted areas (each of which may have a limited number of fixed 
structures) that are located within specific deployment areas. Rail-
mobile ICBM launchers and their associated missiles can only be based 
in rail garrisons, which themselves have restrictions on the number of 
entrances and exits, parking sites, fixed structures and maintenance 
facilities. Deployed mobile ICBM launchers and their associated mis-
siles may leave restricted areas or rail garrisons only for routine move-
ments, relocations, or dispersals, each of which (except for operational 
dispersals) is regulated as to frequency and duration.
DATA EXCHANGE AND NOTIFICATIONS
The Memorandum of Understanding establishes a data base of 
information exchanged in accordance with the Treaty. The Parties agree 
that changes in the initial data must be reported, and the data base 
will be updated every six months. In addition, the Treaty establishes a 
regime of over 80 different notifications to keep each Party informed of 
the activities of the other Party’s forces. Such notifications include such 
diverse types of activities as: notice of movements of selected Treaty-
limited items; transits; certain visits and operations by heavy bombers;
