artificial effort to equalize that which is not and cannot be made equal, and,
in consequence, would be totally impracticable.
No International Supervision of the Limitation of Armaments.
In case the question should arise you should make it clear that the United
States would not agree to place the supervision of its armaments or the
carrying out of any program for the limitation of armaments in the hands of
the League of Nations or any other international body. The execution of any
international agreement for the limitation of armaments must depend in so
far as the United States is concerned upon international good faith and
respect for treaties. The United States will not tolerate the supervision of
any outside body in this matter nor be subject to inspection or supervision
by foreign agencies or individuals.
In case the other powers desire to make such a regime of inspection or of
control applicable to themselves, this is not, of course, a matter which
concerns the United States and you should not oppose it, on the clear
understanding of course that we would not even consider the extension of
such a régime to this country.
You will, of course, bear in mind that it is contrary to the traditional policy
of this Government to enter into commitments as to the application of a
régime of sanctions for the enforcement of Treaty obligations. The
application of sanctions of either an economic or military character must,
under our constitutional organization, depend upon the approval of the
Executive and Legislative action in the Congress. In consequence of this
policy of this Government you should not make any commitments in the
matter of sanctions.
In view of what you have learned of this Government’s policies through full
and frank discussion during your stay in Washington, I am confident that
you will understand that the reservations contained in the foregoing
instructions are in no sense to be construed as evidence of an obstructive
attitude on the part of this Government. Quite the contrary is the case and
this Government hopes that you will be able to play a helpful and a
constructive part in the deliberations of the Commission. However, the
questions which have been submitted to the preliminary commission are so
