Chapter 5, May–June 1990  665
Shevardnadze: We would favor all questions being discussed, 
including this question. Realistically speaking, we believe it would be 
difficult given the amount of time remaining to address that question. I 
believe we have to focus on the remaining issues in START. As for how 
we go further, we could agree on the declaration of intent that could be 
initialed in Washington about the next phase of START and the tasks 
we are setting for it. I believe that all aspects of strategic stability should 
be discussed and be an important part of that declaration.
Baker: I should say to you that we would consider signing such a 
statement, but we’ll need to know that we have a general agreement 
on the goals for START II before we’re able to do so. There are some 
things we already agree on. In any case, I raise this issue or this ques-
tion because this is the kind of thing that we’d like to see included 
in the follow-­on to START if we’re not going to get it in this initial 
START treaty. You will recall that the suggestion was really of two 
parts. (1) There would be a ban on mobile MIRVs in the treaty; (2) 
There would be a complete elimination of all land-­based MIRVs in 
the future. That could be one subject of START II. The only reason I’m 
raising it now is to see if there is anything new since you did say to 
me that the Gorbachev letter did not represent your last word on the 
subject. And also I just want to know that if we are not going to con-
sider it in this treaty, we probably will have to consider some limits 
on mobiles. We’ve been keeping that issue on hold and unless I hear 
from you soon on the suggestion of the ban of mobile MIRVs and the 
elimination of land-­based MIRVs, it’s something we are going to have 
to address in the future. We could simply continue in START I and put 
this issue to the side.
If you want to discuss this issue at the Moscow ministerial, please 
let me know before I come. If you want to put it aside for START II, 
then we’ll still need to address limits on mobiles. We began to discuss 
that before but we really put that on hold when I raised the banning of 
mobile MIRV idea in Namibia.
Shevardnadze: Yes, I remember. Anyway, please give us a few days 
and we’ll send you our thoughts when you come.
Baker: I know you want, and we want to resolve the major issues 
before the Summit. The Washington Ministerial did not move us for-
ward, did not move us in the right direction. I very much appreciate 
your sending us Karpov, but it didn’t undo some of the problems of 
the Washington Ministerial. We badly need to resolve the ALCMs and 
the SLCMs issues, and I told my colleagues that I do not want to go 
to Moscow with these issues still hanging open. We need a successful 
ministerial if we’re going to have a successful Summit.
Shevardnadze: You’re right.
