March 27–December 31, 1979 899 the importance of the peace process, indicating our desire to see the Palestinians directly involved, recognizing indications of a PLO willingness to accept 242, restating our conditions for dealing with them, and indicating our constructive approach to the UN debate; and3 —at the UN, we would introduce a short, clean resolution of our own, drawn (in exact words, if possible) from 242 and 338, the Camp David Framework, and the Aswan Formula4 (which indicates the deficiencies of 242 in only mentioning refugees). It would also indicate the primacy of the autonomy negotiations.5 (S) Initially, we should seek to postpone the UN debate until the middle of August, while making known to the PLO the value of inhibiting terrorism as part of this process; and we should indicate in the UN process our good will in taking this approach, but also the need for the resolution not to be taken beyond it.6 (S) 2. Lebanon. The meeting discussed the immediate need to deal with notification of Congress on Israeli use of U.S. equipment in Lebanon. It was agreed that Secretary Vance would use the occasion of a complaining letter from Congressman Findley7 to write to Chairmen Zablocki and Church, saying that a violation “may have occurred,” leaving any action (not anticipated) up to Congress. There would be no threat to reduce military aid, since this would be ineffective.8 (S) At the same time, the State Department would proceed with a series of modest steps with each of the parties (along the lines of Tab 1)9 designed to defuse the situation as much as possible, while recognizing that changing the basic situation at this time is unlikely. In addition, Ambassador Strauss should pursue the idea of a moratorium on Israeli military action with Prime Minister Begin, pursuant to their earlier discussion and exchange of letters.10 (S) The meeting discussed a forthcoming open letter to you from President Sarkis,11 attacking Israeli actions. It was agreed that a rapid 3 Carter placed a check mark in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph. 4 See footnote 5, Document 3. 5 Carter placed a check mark in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph. 6 Carter placed a check mark in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph. 7 Representative Paul Findley (R-Illinois). 8 Carter placed a check mark in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph. 9 Attached but not printed. The document lists a series of “practical steps” that could be taken with the Israelis and Haddad, the United Nations, the Syrians, the Lebanese Government, and the contributors to UNIFIL to address the current situation in Lebanon. 10 Carter placed a check mark in the right-hand margin next to this paragraph. 11 In a July 23 meeting with Dean, Sarkis stated that in light of the Israeli air attacks on Lebanese territory the day before he had decided to send an official letter regarding the situation to Carter “in the next few days.” (Telegram 4116 from Beirut, July 24; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850029–2467)
