September 1953–December 1954 843 cept bribes from all of them and promise each not to interfere with his election. In such cases the candidate who spends the most money wins the election. Influence of the land owners is also needed to make certain of victory in these areas. In many cases, the large land owners, having vested interests with the government do not object to the election of total strangers from their area. Such tactics were used in Saveh, Damavand and Shahrud. For example: 1) Shams Qanatabadi was elected to the 17th Majlis from Shahrud. He had never been in the area before his campaign and he was totally unknown in Iran. However, when Kashani joined the National Front, he announced that he wanted Qanatabadi to be elected to the Majlis. The request was communicated to Mossadeq who was working with Kashani at that time and the necessary instructions were given to the governor, the Chief of Gendarme´rie and the Chief of Police of that area. It was the first that the people of Shahrud had ever heard of Qanatabadi. 3. Conclusions This information has been gathered in order to give us the proper operational intelligence needed to draw up an election program of our own. It is obvious from this study that we cannot hope to change the methods of operation prior to the elections for the 18th Majlis, but instead we must resort to the same methods, through the government and the Shah for the election of a Majlis favorable to our purposes in Iran. We are initiating election talks with the government on 14 November. We already have a list of declared candidates for the 18th Majlis (Attachment C), and we are ready to do what we can to assist the [name not declassified] in this matter. It is imperative, from our point of view, that the Prime Minister and the Shah agree on a list of candidates, thus eliminating harmful conflict between these two elements. [name not declassified], at least, shares this point of view. As far as pushing our own candidates is concerned, we are attempting to place the names in [name not declassified] mouth and thus avoid recommending but maintaining a role of concurrence. Details of our approach to this will be the subject of a separate dispatch. [name not declassified] [name not declassified] [name not declassified]
