182
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
81.
Presidential Directive/NSC–281
Washington, January 25, 1978
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
The Director, Federal Preparedness Agency
SUBJECT
United States Policy on Chemical Warfare Program and Bacteriological/
Biological Research Program (C)
Following consideration by the National Security Council, the
President has decided that:
1. The term Chemical and Biological Warfare (CBW) will no longer
be used. The reference should be to the two categories separately—The
Chemical Warfare Program and The Biological Research Program. (U)
2. With respect to Chemical Warfare:
a. The primary United States objective will be to negotiate a com-
prehensive treaty to ban chemical weapons. U.S. policy on these negoti-
ations is contained in PD–15.2 The objective of the U.S. Chemical War-
fare Program will be to deter the use of chemical weapons by other
nations and to provide a retaliatory capability if deterrence fails. (C)
b. The renunciation of the first use of lethal chemical weapons in
accordance with the Geneva Protocol of 1925 is reaffirmed. (U)
c. This renunciation is also applied to incapacitating chemical
weapons. (U)
d. This renunciation does not apply to the use of riot control agents
or herbicides. Executive Order 11850 provides guidance on authorized
uses.3 (U)
e. Existing overseas stockpiles of chemical weapons can be main-
tained without additional consultations. If the matter is raised by the
FRG, we will agree to consultations about the future of stockpiles lo-
cated in Germany. (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 19,
PD–28. Secret. Carter wrote at the top “ok J.C.”
2 See Document 70.
3 In this April 8, 1975 Executive Order, President Gerald Ford renounced “in certain
uses in war of chemical herbicides and riot control agents.” (http://www.archives.gov/
federal-register/executive-orders/1975.html)
