International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 primarily from forecasts of more rapid growth abroad and moderately slower growth here.4 —It is assumed, however, that reduction of these orders of magnitude will not solve our problems with the dollar unless it is combined with an effective anti-inflation program. Here there are still serious doubts among foreign officials and private bankers about our willpower and ability to succeed. —On the fiscal side, they view the budget deficit as the litmus test of our willpower. The considerable reductions that have been made from the $66 billion deficit we inherited are attributed to shortfalls and “Congressionally imposed” reductions in our tax cut proposal, rather than to Administration initiatives. Your willingness to trim all the fat from our budget will be watched closely. (In this important regard, I wish some of my foreign colleagues could have heard your excellent DNC speech).5 —On the monetary side, official and private money managers are wary of Administration attempts to exhort the Fed not to tighten monetary policy. They view inflation as being both monetarily and fiscally induced, with further discipline needed on both fronts. There is concern that the Fed will prematurely begin easing monetary policy once we have settled on a tight budgetary and wage/price policy. To be sure, there is some concern about overkill if we tighten up too severely on both fronts. But many remember the damage done in 1968 when the Fed too abruptly eased monetary policy in the aftermath of that year’s tax increase.6 —This prevailing sentiment has important implications for the dollar. Adjusted for current rates of inflation, interest rates in the U.S. are essentially zero, whereas investors can earn a positive real return on German and Swiss money market instruments. As long as this relationship prevails money managers will continue to seek out German and Swiss investments. Until our anti-inflation efforts yield tangible results, this tendency will likely be exacerbated if it appears that the Fed is too quickly letting down its guard. —This predicament is complicated by the uncertainty frequently voiced about Chairman Miller. He is still viewed as an unknown quantity. His actions are being closely watched to see whether he will main- 4 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to this paragraph. 5 Carter made a checkmark in the margin adjacent to this paragraph. For the text of his remarks before a September 27 fundraising dinner for the Democratic National Committee at the Washington Hilton Hotel in Washington, see Public Papers of the Presidents of
