Afghanistan 13 3. The relative dearth of prominent political figures who could readily step into any vacated Presidential shoes indicates that Afghanistan may experience a succession struggle whose outcome will ultimately be decided by the interplay of various interest groups rather than by any single individual able to dominate events. Prominent among such groups—and their currently leading contenders for Daoud’s mantle—are: the “centrist” military, represented by National Defense Minister Ghulam Haider Rassuli; the Mohammadzai clan “establishment,” represented principally (within Afghanistan) by Daoud’s brother Mohammad Naim; and, the conservative military, possibly represented by the exiled Mohammadzai ex-General Abdul Wali, who might also forge a candidacy based on some centrist support.3 Daoud’s own apparent choice, Vice President Syed Abdulilah, appears to possess little independent political support, but his chances should improve the longer he is in the number two position. 4. Neither the organized Left nor the reactionary, religious, and landowning Right appears to have identifiable candidates at this time, and neither element will probably furnish Daoud’s successor. However, the organized Left, due to its relatively greater efficiency and experience, could conceivably play a significant role in the succession contest, with or without Soviet backing. The reactionary Right constitutes the country’s single interest group, and, even though the Right probably will not unite behind any specific contender, this group’s role will be crucial nonetheless, because, in all likelihood, no candidate can attain or maintain leadership in the face of rightist opposition.4 5. The immediate post-Daoud period. Were Daoud to die in office, we would anticipate a brief caretaker government under the leadership of Daoud’s brother Mohammad Naim, whose prestige and Mohammadzai credentials make him acceptable to almost all competing groups, but whose age (approximately 68) excludes him as a likely long-term successor. A Naim government might be forged in partnership with General Rassuli, the present dominant military leader and a Mohammadzai, whose ambitions are unclear but probably include the Presidency. Aside from the patrician Naim, no other individual appears to represent the interests of the in-country Mohammadzai clan. 3 The Mohammadzai tribe had dominated Afghan politics since 1826. 4 An intelligence memorandum produced in the Central Intelligence Agency, March 3, also assessed the factors influencing Daoud’s eventual succession. The memorandum predicted: “the ability of foreign powers to influence the result” of the succession “will be limited, however, barring a massive and highly unlikely Soviet effort. At most, foreign support might give one candidate or another a slight edge, but given the Afghans’ deep suspicions of foreign intentions, indications of foreign backing would do an individual more harm than good.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support Services, Job 80T00634A: Production Case Files (1978), Box 2, Document 8)
