1957  1359
suitable opportunities to mention it as a still outstanding item of busi­
ness. Perhaps it would be well for me to at least touch on it again at the 
May meeting.
I do not see any particular advantage in attempting to exhaust by 
individual presentations what might be termed the well-­documented 
individual cases. They having accepted the list of names, we are always 
in position accurately to tell inquirers that the individual case in 
which they are interested has specifically been brought to the attention 
of the other side. You will note that the cases I have thus far used and 
I believe to be by far the strongest from the standpoint of such a pres­
entation are those in which Peiping had itself admitted they were at 
one time being held. I am under the impression that I have already used 
the best cases in this category, although there may be a few more. Not 
having the lists here I am not sure, but Dave who did all the research for 
me on this will undoubtedly be able to recall. In any event I will look 
into it on my next trip. If my belief is correct, I am now or soon will be 
at the point of citing cases in which the evidence is primarily unilateral 
from our side. While, I do not, of course, question the validity of such 
evidence and its usefulness in other contexts it seems to me that for 
Geneva purposes it is much better that I continue to make my stand on 
those cases where Peiping itself had acknowledged the man was being 
held. I have left him now with the impression that I may well still have 
a large number of such cases in my pocket. If I pull out any consider­
able number of other types of cases he will undoubtedly heave a sigh of 
relief that I do not have him on as bad a spot as he is with those I first 
cited. Therefore, I would propose that the next time I take the matter up 
in detail I cite any additional cases I may have in the first category, or if 
necessary refer back to those previously cited rather than taper off on 
what may be weaker cases from a Geneva standpoint.
I cannot think of anything that would be better calculated to give 
them the impression our sole purpose is to make a propaganda play out 
of this issue rather than a serious quest for information than the draft 
statement submitted by the UNC. While I well realize the difference in 
tone between the Panmunjon and Geneva meetings I should think that 
it would be worthwhile for the UNC to at least try a somewhat different 
approach on this subject. It probably will not produce any more results, 
but it certainly stands a better chance of doing so than the approach in 
the draft. Also, it seems better to me from the standpoint of the 16 and 
public relations when the record is published. I also thoroughly agree 
that any such statement must take account of the Communist “account­
ing” calling attention to its falsifications and inadequacies rather than 
simply ignoring it. I should think that this would be much more effec­
tive than building the case almost entirely around the fact that some 
prisoners were taken to Mainland China as in the draft, the apparent 
presumption being that we think that the PRC is holding all or most of
