Uruguay 1143 the economy of this country obviously needs as we here in the Embassy recognize, is the same as that which the Department also appreciates. In summary, it is a definite and possibly drastic program for Uruguay to come to grips itself with its economic plight for which it almost entirely is solely responsible. The adoption of a free exchange rate for exports, the sale of its products at realistic world prices, the improvement of its production, the devotion of more of its efforts to the land rather than merely trying to build up more industry and create more uneconomic urban occupations, the restriction of its imports and the balancing of its budget are obviously the ways it ought to take to cure its economic ills. It still looks as though none of these will be done, at least immediately. Now the Government wants one or both of two things: The United States purchase at a high price of the remainder of Uruguay’s wool clip and/or a stabilization loan. We realize that our Government cannot in all probability do either and even if it did so, without drastic conditions attached we would only be postponing the inevitable day of reckoning. However, the three possibilities that seem to have come out of the conversations in Washington are something concrete and seem to be along the lines of the suggestion made in our Despatch 683 that we at least express to Uruguay our willingness to help. We have heard that Ambassador Lacarte will be coming here next week or the week after and I certainly hope that he will be prepared to explain fully to his Government the whole situation. By several communications, particularly our telegram 369 of March 31, we reported that Uruguay through its newly designated Ambassador to Venezuela, is going to attempt to persuade Venezuela to supply Uruguay with petroleum on a credit basis in the amount of approximately $40 million. If that does work out of course it will help to tide this country over its immediate difficulties. Naturally, we have no idea here what the reaction of the Venezuelan authorities would be to any such approach. Should all go well, with assistance from ourselves and from Venezuela to Uruguay, the picture here will certainly greatly brighten; but, of course, this is all still very “ify”. Now may I refer back to Vice President Nixon’s visit and my telegram 373 of March 31. I mentioned therein that Battle’s newspaper “Acción” reported as a rumor that Batlle would take a leave of absence immediately after Holy Week which would mean he would be away from the official score here both over the Frondizi and Nixon visits. As I see his strategy, perhaps in the first instance he does not wish to play second fiddle to President Fischer when the president elect of Argentina comes here. In part there may be the same motive inducing him to be away when Vice President Nixon comes to Uruguay. On the other hand, however, I have a strong feeling that as regards to Vice President Nixon,
