Afghanistan 113 Afghanistan’s relations with its non-Communist neighbors are becoming more difficult. Although the Pakistani Government is not now giving support to tribal dissidents, it is reportedly making little effort to limit the activities of Afghan exiles in Pakistan and may decide at some point to provide material aid. The new Iranian Government apparently is continuing the Shah’s non-interventionist policy, but anti- Afghan statements by Iranian leaders and verbal attacks on Iran from Afghanistan have increased tension. The increasingly Islamic character of the insurgency in Afghanistan could lead to a change in Iranian policy. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) Soviet money, arms, and advisers have been an important factor in keeping the Taraki government afloat, and the implicit threat of a Soviet reaction has been a major deterrent against Iranian and Pakistani meddling in Afghanistan.4 As his troubles increase, Taraki will need even greater Soviet assistance, and it is even possible that at some point only open Soviet military intervention could save him. ([classification marking not declassified]) The Soviet Role The USSR’s dispatch of a high-level delegation to Afghanistan and its planned airlift point to Moscow’s willingness to help Taraki meet the challenge. As many as 48 Soviet transport aircraft may be involved in the planned delivery of combat helicopters, which suggests to us the Soviets may also be delivering radar, communications, and other support equipment. The Soviets will probably also initially provide ground crews and pilots. The Soviets may already have delivered additional infantry combat vehicles. Even more noteworthy is Moscow’s willingness to jeopardize its relations with the new government in Iran by charging it with complicity in the Afghan unrest. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]) Soviet military advisers in Afghanistan have been helping government forces quell the insurgencies in eastern Afghanistan for several months. There is now an unconfirmed report that Soviet advisers assigned to the Afghan Air Force took part in bombing rebel-held positions in Herat last week. The Soviets reportedly flew bombing 4 An intelligence information cable prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, March 26, reported on information shared by [text not declassified], who alleged that Brezhnev sent Taraki a letter committing Soviet support to Afghanistan with 10 divisions and 500 aircraft near the Afghan border. According to the cable: “Whether the above information is accurate, it is the commonly held perception of Khalq officers that the Soviet Union is prepared to assist Afghanistan. The leadership of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan may wish to disseminate the substance of this message to its officers to instill a sense of confidence that Afghanistan is backed by a powerful neighbor.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 5, Soviets in Afghanistan—General Part #2)
