1202  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
resolved. In treating patient one deals with source and cause of dis­
ease rather than with symptoms. As had pointed out to him here and 
as pointed out in Department’s statement September 24 to which he 
referred, it hardly reasonable expect US discuss relaxation its trade 
restrictions when trade that would result from such relaxation would 
strengthen regime which refuses renounce use force against US. As that 
release also pointed out and I pointed out to him previously here, my 
government also not prepared enter into such discussions at time when 
American citizens continue be held as political hostages despite pledge 
of September 10 last year to permit them expeditiously exercise their 
right return. That release uses term political hostages and I used term 
here advisedly. I done this because his statements here. As well as public 
statement his government made it all too clear it holds these people in 
hope extracting further political concessions from my government. This 
is type trading which I have and will continue refuse enter into. I find it 
hard understand why his authorities also appear now believe my gov­
ernment could consider entering into any understanding with respect 
cultural exchanges as long as these circumstances continue. A coun­
try does not enter into such relationships while its citizens continue be 
unjustly imprisoned in violation of solemn commitments that they will 
be released. Also while I entirely agree cultural relations between peoples 
are important, desirable and can do much remove misunderstanding, it 
hardly consistent to propose such relations with people while maintain­
ing clear threat use armed force against same people.
13. I continued Wang had spoken again this morning of long his­
tory cultural exchange and contact between our two peoples. He had 
also spoken of strong desire cherished by both our people in this regard. 
Cutting off this contact was entirely at initiative his government and 
his government must bear entire responsibility for it. Because of strong 
desire American people maintain this contact, hundreds of Americans 
remained in territory which was brought under their control. These 
were Americans who had long and distinguished history of high-­
minded unselfish cultural relations with Chinese people. They were 
Americans who desired maintain these contacts. They were Americans 
who could have contributed much to understanding between our 
two peoples. What was history of this effort, this individual effort, 
on part these Americans? Organized demonstrations were fomented 
against them; everything possible done to foment hostility of popula­
tion towards them. Money was extorted from them. Chinese who had 
any contact with them were placed in jeopardy. They were expelled 
from country. Above all, out of this small group of people we know of 
at least 155 who were arrested by his authorities. Stories of efforts by his 
authorities to extort confessions of all sorts fantastic crimes from them 
haven’t done much to encourage American Government or people to
