Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II fear that our human rights advocacy has or might stimulate critics of the regime. In both, however, many of those most affected seem to want us to continue our efforts; they apparently believe that the near-term risk is in their own long-range interest. There may be similar risks elsewhere. In South Korea, for instance, the regime now seems eager to resolve differences with us. But it is possible that human rights behavior, combined with withdrawal of our ground combat troops and the “Koreagate” probe,15 could produce a seige mentality which would make easing of repression less likely, or indeed even reduce tolerance for domestic dissent. III. Are We Damaging Other US Interests? Not yet in any quantifiable way, although the risk always is present when we are pursuing several interests at once. Eastern Europe Soviet leaders fear the human rights policy, which they see as an effort to discredit them in world opinion and to undermine the political systems of the Warsaw Pact states. Our early high profile contacts with leading Soviet dissidents,16 combined with our initial SALT proposals, did badly rock the relationship. And we cannot know just how a general unhappiness with the human rights policy affects the atmosphere of Soviet decision-making across the board. But it does not, in fact, seem yet to have interfered with SALT and other arms control negotiations, or US-Soviet dealings in other areas, where the Soviets seem to be pursuing their specific interests much as usual. Indeed the improvement in US-Soviet relations following the SALT breakthrough during Gromyko’s September visit to Washington17 has survived even the human rights beating Moscow has been taking at the Belgrade CSCE conference. The spillover might in fact work the other way: progress on SALT may be making Soviet leaders more willing (within limits) to stomach our human rights position. 15 Reference is to the October 1976 Federal investigation of South Korean businessman Tongsun Park and other South Korean individuals suspected of providing gifts and cash to U.S. members of Congress to influence legislative decisions regarding the ROK Government. See Scott Armstrong and Maxine Cheshire, “Korean Ties to Congress
