360
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
fear that our human rights advocacy has or might stimulate critics of
the regime. In both, however, many of those most affected seem to
want us to continue our efforts; they apparently believe that the
near-term risk is in their own long-range interest.
There may be similar risks elsewhere. In South Korea, for instance,
the regime now seems eager to resolve differences with us. But it is pos-
sible that human rights behavior, combined with withdrawal of our
ground combat troops and the “Koreagate” probe,15 could produce a
seige mentality which would make easing of repression less likely, or
indeed even reduce tolerance for domestic dissent.
III. Are We Damaging Other US Interests?
Not yet in any quantifiable way, although the risk always is
present when we are pursuing several interests at once.
Eastern Europe
Soviet leaders fear the human rights policy, which they see as an
effort to discredit them in world opinion and to undermine the political
systems of the Warsaw Pact states. Our early high profile contacts with
leading Soviet dissidents,16 combined with our initial SALT proposals,
did badly rock the relationship. And we cannot know just how a gen-
eral unhappiness with the human rights policy affects the atmosphere
of Soviet decision-making across the board. But it does not, in fact,
seem yet to have interfered with SALT and other arms control negotia-
tions, or US-Soviet dealings in other areas, where the Soviets seem to be
pursuing their specific interests much as usual. Indeed the improve-
ment in US-Soviet relations following the SALT breakthrough during
Gromyko’s September visit to Washington17 has survived even the
human rights beating Moscow has been taking at the Belgrade CSCE
conference. The spillover might in fact work the other way: progress on
SALT may be making Soviet leaders more willing (within limits) to
stomach our human rights position.
15 Reference is to the October 1976 Federal investigation of South Korean busi-
nessman Tongsun Park and other South Korean individuals suspected of providing gifts
and cash to U.S. members of Congress to influence legislative decisions regarding the
ROK Government. See Scott Armstrong and Maxine Cheshire, “Korean Ties to Congress
Are Probed,” The Washington Post, October 15, 1976, p. A–1; Maxine Cheshire and Scott
Armstrong, “Seoul Gave Millions to U.S. Officials,” The Washington Post, October 24,
1976, pp. A–1 and A–10; and Nicholas M. Horrock, “Big Political Scandal Held Possible—
Study Still in Early Stage,” The New York Times, October 28, 1976, pp. 1 and 12.
16 See footnote 4, Document 7; footnotes 2 and 3, Document 18; and footnote 12,
Document 38.
17 Additional information on Gromyko’s visit is scheduled for publication in For-
eign Relations, 1977–1980, volume VI, Soviet Union.
