170
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Stanton is the author of an extremely controversial set of proposals
for changes in U.S. Government information programs.6 Making him
Chairman of the BIB would be, in effect, to endorse his program.
The ultimate effect of this program would be to take international
broadcasting out of the control of the Administration.
To nip this controversy in the bud, I recommend that you announce as
soon as possible the appointment of Gronouski.7 It will be difficult for
anyone to make a case against him. He is a natural choice as a prominent
Democrat and a man with previous experience (Ambassador to Poland,
e.g.) which fits him for the BIB job. I am confident that he will work
with the Administration to get the BIB restructured in an intelligent
way. Once he has been appointed we can proceed to the two other
vacancies for which I recommend Professor Griffith and former Con-
gressman Peter Frelinghuysen of New Jersey.
6 In a March 18 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski described the report as advocat-
ing the fragmentation of U.S. information policy by, among other things, abolishing
USIA and setting up the Information and Cultural Affairs Agency under the Department
of State, and establishing a separate Board to govern VOA activities. The Board would
eventually be merged with the BIB, leading to the merger of VOA and RFE/RL. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 9, Board for
International Broadcasting (RFE, RL, VOA): 2–12/77)
7 In a March 14 memorandum to Carter, Jordan reported his discussion with Vance
regarding Gronouski’s nomination as BIB Chairman. Jordan indicated that, while Vance
preferred Stanton, he had no objection to Gronouski. Jordan also stated that Senators
McGovern and Percy continued to support Stanton, but would be hard pressed to oppose
Gronouski’s nomination. Carter wrote at the top of the memo: “CC: Ham[ilton Jordan],
Zbig. What are the key elements of the Stanton Report? J.” (Ibid.)
49.
Editorial Note
On March 15, 1977, the Department of State sent a circular telegram
to all Eastern European posts and Moscow and Bonn informing them
of the ongoing debate about relocating Radio Free Europe (RFE) and
Radio Liberty (RL) from their headquarters in Munich to the United
States. The telegram asked for the post’s analysis of the relocation, in
terms of reaction by both the government and the audience in their
respective countries. The Embassy in Bonn, specifically, was also asked
to assess West German perceptions of the U.S. commitment to Europe
in case of a relocation, as well as the effect on West German commitment
to maintain transmitters and any RFE/RL crew on German soil. (Tele-
gram 57405 to multiple posts, March 15; National Archives, RG 59,
