Options Identified
331
If we decide to address Iranian concerns more fully we need to
a) define our position and b) find a way of conveying it that does not
also convey a weakening of our position.
Bearing in mind the concerns listed on page two, I suggest you
consider the following approach.
A. Our Position
We cannot, in any way, condone the involuntary return of the
Shah, from Panama or elsewhere.
This leaves five issues:
—A hearing on the “sins” of the Shah and the U.S.;
—Trials of the hostages;
—The Shah’s assets;
—U.S. intervention in current Iranian affairs; and,
—Our future relations.
On the first three, we must not appear to accept the principle of
hostage trials or our culpability for past events in Iran. Nor should we
imply that, once the hostages are released, we can wipe the slate clean
in our relations with Iran.
Within these constraints, however, the following message could
be passed to Khomeini and members of the Revolutionary Council:
“—No one should doubt American unity and resolve on this issue.
—But the elements of a resolution of the crisis are available. It is
certain that if the hostages were released, the U.S. would:
• Cooperate with the Secretary General in the simultaneous forma-
tion of, and subsequent work of, an international commission ‘to inves-
tigate allegations of grave violations of human rights and other illegal
acts in Iran’ under the Shah. (Note: Ideally the commission should also
investigate violations under Khomeini, but this is a non-starter.)
• Also cooperate with Congressional hearings on U.S. relations
with Iran. The U.S. would grant visas to representatives of Iran who
wished to present their case at such hearings.
• Continue to recognize the right of the Government of Iran to
assert in U.S. courts its claims to assets which, in Iran’s view, have
been illegally taken out of Iran by those connected with the former
regime, as well as Iran’s claims to all other such assets as might later
be transferred to the United States. The U.S. would not interfere with
this process and would to the extent possible support it by providing
information in accordance with U.S. laws under the Freedom of Infor-
mation Act. The U.S. would not interfere with an attachment of funds
but would indicate, if requested by the court, that such a measure was
appropriate. The U.S. would also assist with accounting actions in other
countries as appropriate.
• When the hostages have been released, the U.S. would lift its
freeze on all Iranian assets held overseas by U.S. entities and all assets
in this country with the exception of central bank funds. The latter
