924 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 224. National Intelligence Estimate1 NIE 11–8–59 Washington, December 23, 1959 SOVIET CAPABILITIES FOR STRATEGIC ATTACK THROUGH MID-­1964 NOTE: This is an advance copy of the conclusions of this estimate as approved by the United States Intelligence Board. The complete text will be circulated within five days of this issuance. • The probable Soviet ICBM force. • Medium Range Ballestic Missiles • Long Range Aviation • Submarine-­launched Missiles SUBJECT NIE 11–­8–­59: SOVIET CAPABILITIES FOR STRATEGIC ATTACK THROUGH MID-­1964 THE PROBLEM To estimate probable trends in the strength and deployment of Soviet long-­range air and missile weapons systems suitable for strate­ gic attack, through mid-­1964.2 FOREWORD The critical feature of this estimate is our judgment with respect to the force goals of the existing Soviet ICBM program. This judgment is based in part on calculations regarding Soviet ICBM requirements for various defined strategic purposes. These calculations are especially sensitive to possible differences between our assumptions and those actually made by Soviet planners with respect to two important factors: a. The probable future performance characteristics of the improv­ ing Soviet ICBM. 1 Source: “Soviet Capabilities for Strategic Attack Through Mid-­1964.” Top Secret. 12 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File. 2 “Strategic attack” as used herein is defined as nuclear attack against retaliatory forces and key war-­making strengths in North America, as well as US and Allied retalia­ tory forces at sea and in overseas areas. The weapons systems primarily considered are heavy and medium bombers assigned to Long Range Aviation, related air-­to-­surface mis­ siles, ground launched missiles with maximum ranges of 700 nautical miles or more, and submarine-­launched missiles. It is recognized that other delivery systems are available for use against targets at sea and overseas. [Footnote is in the original.]
