International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 government might want to have at least one Minister present in the morning when North/South issues were under discussion. It was agreed that each of us should check with his leader and report views to Canada as soon as possible. Comment: The Germans felt more strongly about including Ministers in the discussion of economic issues than the others felt about excluding them. Agreement on including them seems likely. Derek Burney, of the Canadian Government, will be in touch with press colleagues of the other Summit governments about media coverage. Discussion of this matter indicated that while some governments want more informal Summits in theory, none want to reduce on-site media coverage of Summits by their national media—if only for fear of offending excluded correspondents. (b) Foreign Policy Consultation. The Canadian Personal Representative stressed the need for more effective foreign policy consultation among the Summit nations and suggested that the Summit Preparatory Group and the Summit itself might provide a framework for such consultation. The British and other Representatives suggested that it would be best to proceed pragmatically—i.e., to follow the Venice precedent by arranging a meeting among the seven nations’ foreign policy experts a month or two before the Ottawa Summit in order to prepare for discussion of foreign policy issues at that Summit. The Canadians seemed to recede from their more ambitious proposal in the face of this suggestion. There was no discussion of existing Four Power procedures for political consultation. (c) Future Summits. It was noted that the Ottawa Summit would be the last in the first cycle of seven Summit meetings, one of which had now taken place in each of the Summit nations. A question to be considered at Ottawa would be whether to proceed with a second cycle. If so, the next host would be France in 1982 and the United States in 1983. (This is consistent with past practice, which has, with a few exceptions, not involved Summits being hosted by a country that is holding a national election in the Summit year. That practice is not surprising: Since one of the main reasons for holding Summits has been to justify by international consensus such politically unpopular economic decisions as increased access to domestic markets for foreign imports, heads of government have rarely sought to draw attention to Summitry in domestic election campaigns, although Prime Minister Thatcher is reported to believe that the preceding Labour government tried to do so.) 2. North-South. The morning meeting on December 10 discussed the list of questions that the Canadian government had prepared, on the basis of submissions from other Summit governments, regarding
