3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
173
this off with a letter to President Carter July 5 [June 30],8 replying to one
of the President’s in June, throwing cold water on a summit unless
there were some agreements to sign, a line Arbatov reiterated to US of-
ficials in early August.
Meanwhile, attacks against US military programs proliferated,
ranging from accusations that US foreign policy was being militarized
to charges that the US was using the stalemate in SALT to advance new
weapons development and using the latter in turn to pressure the
USSR. The President’s July 1 announcement of his decision on the B–1
bomber/cruise missile evidently caught the Soviets by surprise; in re-
sponse they downgraded the B–1, one of their prime targets in the past,
to a propaganda ploy, and concentrated instead on the cruise missile.
US statements on the neutron bomb then replaced the cruise missile as
a prime propaganda target, and the TASS statement of July 30 on that
subject signaled another mass media/communist-front campaign
against the US.
Moscow’s record of public adamancy on SALT remained unaf-
fected by the President’s July 21 speech in Charleston; Arbatov in his
August 3 Pravda unofficial response to that speech merely reiterated
basic Soviet arguments. The regime at that point had, however, still not
given an official response to the President’s overture.
Criticism of President Carter
While the Soviets traditionally give a new US President a honey-
moon period before resuming the inevitable attacks on US policies,
President Carter’s emphasis on human rights quickly diverted Moscow
from its customary approach. The sharpest and most direct criticism of
the President has invariably been pegged to some element of his stance
on human rights. Although the media ignored the issue in reporting
the President’s inaugural address, it was barely a month before the ad-
ministration was accused of playing an ill-intentioned role in its human
rights “campaign.” The President’s letter to Andrei Sakharov9 struck a
particularly sensitive nerve, and although the Soviets did not publicize
it domestically they in effect answered the President officially with the
February 17 letter by Deputy Prosecutor General Gusev to the New York
Times10 warning against outside interference in Soviet domestic affairs.
The March Vance visit and its aftermath briefly distracted attention
from the theme, but in mid-April Soviet media linked the administra-
tion’s decision to expand Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty activities
8 See Document 35.
9 See Document 5.
10 The letter is described in Sergei I. Gusev, “Moscow, On Sakharov,” The New York
Times, February 23, 1977, p. 19.
