1094
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
their direct contributions to the Second Account; $70 million is ex-
pected to be so allocated. In addition, $280 million in additional volun-
tary contributions are expected from members. To date, pledges have
been already announced for around $220 million. The U.S. has decided
not to contribute to the Second Account, on the view that its activities
will duplicate those of existing MDBs.
The Common Fund will have a Governing Council and an Execu-
tive Board. The U.S. is assured a seat on both bodies. Votes will be allo-
cated to countries on the basis of an initial schedule based upon uni-
versal membership. However, adjustments will be made in the voting
system to account for less than universal membership with the aim of
securing a voting breakdown in which the developing countries, as a
group, will have about 47 percent of the total votes, and the developed
countries around 42 percent. The U.S. will have 10–12 percent of the
total vote. The most important decisions of a constitutional or financial
nature will be subject to a 75 percent majority. The U.S., the UK, the
FRG, Canada, and Japan will together account for at least 25 percent of
the vote based on the initial schedule. Other decisions, depending on
their importance, will require a two-thirds or simple majority.
Next Steps
The Common Fund will enter into force when at least 90 countries
accounting for two-thirds of the direct contributions and half of the
$280 million in voluntary contributions have ratified the agreement.
The major developed countries, the U.S., the UK, the FRG, Japan,
Canada and probably France, are likely to coordinate their joining the
Fund. Even without the French, the major countries acting together will
be able to block adverse decisions in the Fund in its initial stages.
Our current thinking is to seek Congressional concurrence in 1981.
Our full share of direct contributions will be included in the FY 82
budget. Assuming Congressional acceptance, we would plan to join the
Fund after October 1, 1981, when we would have received our appro-
priation. Treasury and State will play the major roles in seeking Con-
gressional approval as we have in Hill consultations during the exten-
sive process of negotiation. (Our hope is that Foreign Affairs and
Foreign Relations will handle the authorizing legislation, but several
committees—especially in the House—may seek to assert jurisdiction
because of the financial and commodity characteristics of the institu-
tion.) Our basic approach is that the modest price tag is justified by the
modest economic and major foreign policy benefits of participation.
Since the Common Fund is an international financial institution, State
and the White House (Henry Owen) have agreed that Treasury should
have management responsibility.
