994 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 301. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kreisberg) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology (Nye)1 Washington, November 22, 1977 SUBJECT Draft Presidential Decision Document on International Health Initiatives The problems associated with the draft decision memorandum to the President2 reflect many of the same difficulties the Department had with regard to the larger International Health Report.3 These problems include: —Lack of Priority Setting: The decision document does not address itself to the very thorny but key problem of where specifically we should direct our resources in the area of international health. Should we do more in the area of infant immunization, tropical disease research, nutritional assistance, population or basic health services? What should be the relative mix in our assistance program between bilateral and multilateral programs or one form of health assistance vs. other forms? —Lack of Specificity and Clarity: In many of the recommendations there is a lack of specificity with respect to who should undertake a certain action, how much a particular action would cost and what the benefits might be in return for resources employed and the role of the various agencies in supporting the initiatives. Also the report does not 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 3, TL 11/16–11/30/77. Limited Official Use. 2 Under cover of a November 16 memorandum to Maynes, Lake, Mink, Saunders, Katz, Holbrooke, Atherton, Vest, Moose, and Todman, Nye transmitted a copy of a November 9 draft decision memorandum from Bourne to the President concerning international health initiatives. Nye requested that the bureaus submit comments to T by November 21 in order for T to coordinate the Department’s suggested changes to the decision memorandum. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology, Lot 80D72, Box 1, HEALTH—Peter Bourne) An undated memorandum from Lannon Walker to Nye, a November 22 memorandum from Brewster to Nye, and a November 22 memorandum from Hormats to Nye, all outlining specific bureau concerns with the draft, are all ibid. Bourne also sent the draft decision memorandum to Brzezinski, Eizenstat, McIntyre, Watson, Harold Brown, Kreps, and Sam Brown under a November 17 covering memorandum, in which he indicated that he had distributed copies of the draft decision memorandum at the November 16 White House meeting (see footnote 13, Document 299). Bourne asked the recipients to provide comments on the draft decision memorandum by November 25. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—Peter Bourne Files, Subject Files, Box 35, International Health, 11/2/77–11/30/77) 3 See footnote 2, Document 299.
