994
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
301.
Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Kreisberg) to the Deputy Under Secretary of
State for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology (Nye)1
Washington, November 22, 1977
SUBJECT
Draft Presidential Decision Document on International Health Initiatives
The problems associated with the draft decision memorandum to
the President2 reflect many of the same difficulties the Department had
with regard to the larger International Health Report.3 These problems
include:
—Lack of Priority Setting: The decision document does not address
itself to the very thorny but key problem of where specifically we
should direct our resources in the area of international health. Should
we do more in the area of infant immunization, tropical disease re-
search, nutritional assistance, population or basic health services?
What should be the relative mix in our assistance program between bi-
lateral and multilateral programs or one form of health assistance vs.
other forms?
—Lack of Specificity and Clarity: In many of the recommendations
there is a lack of specificity with respect to who should undertake a cer-
tain action, how much a particular action would cost and what the ben-
efits might be in return for resources employed and the role of the
various agencies in supporting the initiatives. Also the report does not
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Di-
rector, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 3, TL 11/16–11/30/77.
Limited Official Use.
2 Under cover of a November 16 memorandum to Maynes, Lake, Mink, Saunders,
Katz, Holbrooke, Atherton, Vest, Moose, and Todman, Nye transmitted a copy of a No-
vember 9 draft decision memorandum from Bourne to the President concerning interna-
tional health initiatives. Nye requested that the bureaus submit comments to T by No-
vember 21 in order for T to coordinate the Department’s suggested changes to the
decision memorandum. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Under Secretary of State
for Security Assistance, Science, and Technology, Lot 80D72, Box 1, HEALTH—Peter
Bourne) An undated memorandum from Lannon Walker to Nye, a November 22 memo-
randum from Brewster to Nye, and a November 22 memorandum from Hormats to Nye,
all outlining specific bureau concerns with the draft, are all ibid. Bourne also sent the
draft decision memorandum to Brzezinski, Eizenstat, McIntyre, Watson, Harold Brown,
Kreps, and Sam Brown under a November 17 covering memorandum, in which he indi-
cated that he had distributed copies of the draft decision memorandum at the November
16 White House meeting (see footnote 13, Document 299). Bourne asked the recipients to
provide comments on the draft decision memorandum by November 25. (Carter Library,
Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—Peter Bourne Files, Subject Files,
Box 35, International Health, 11/2/77–11/30/77)
3 See footnote 2, Document 299.
