For your guidance in any discussion of these “Propositions” that may take place, there has been prepared a Memorandum (Appendix No. 8)18 which presents the views of this Government with respect to the several matters to which they relate. Topics 1 and 2, Supplement (b) Topic 2 of Article II, which includes consideration of “Methods for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes”, and Article IV, topic 9, page 1, the resolution of the Pan American Congress of Journalists, bring before the Conference the question of arbitration of international disputes. You will notice by analysis of the treaties made between various Central and South American countries that as a whole these countries have gone a long distance upon the question of arbitration. The question was brought up at Santiago during the Fifth Pan American Conference. Those countries generally were not willing to enter into a general arbitration treaty which was less broad than the ones they now have. In other words, they said this would be a step backward. The Department believes, however, that a proposition to arbitrate any claim of right susceptible of judicial decision by application of the principles of law or equity, that is, a legal right under well established principles of international law or a legal right under a treaty, might be acceptable to the principal Central and South American countries. Manifestly, the United States cannot agree to arbitrate purely political questions involving its domestic policy or any question which is purely within the jurisdiction of the United States and which does not infringe the legal right of foreign countries or the citizens thereof. I think it would be comparatively easy to draft a treaty which the United States could agree to and quite likely the Latin American countries would also agree to. It would be a step forward and, in my opinion, have great influence in Latin America. The main question is one of the construction of the Arbitral Tribunal. This has been discussed generally with Mr. Hughes. It would be better to have a panel chosen from the United States and the other members of the Latin American countries with some means of selecting a non- American arbitrator other than drawing by lot. Mr. Hughes made a very valuable suggestion—that if each country selected one or two arbitrators and they could not decide on a chairman or arbitrator, that he be a non-
