Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 687 The Soviets must understand our deep concern. We will delay opening of any new American or Soviet consular facilities, and most of the cultural and economic exchanges currently under consideration will be deferred. Trade with the Soviet Union will be severely restricted. I have decided to halt or to reduce exports to the Soviet Union in three areas that are particularly important to them.5 These new policies are being and will be coordinated with those of our allies. I’ve directed that no high technology or other strategic items will be licensed for sale to the Soviet Union until further notice, while we revise our licensing policy. Fishing privileges for the Soviet Union in United States waters will be severely curtailed. The 17 million tons of grain ordered by the Soviet Union in excess of that amount which we are committed to sell will not be delivered.6 This grain was not intended for human consumption but was to be used for building up Soviet livestock herds. I am determined to minimize any adverse impact on the American farmer from this action.7 The undelivered grain will be removed from 5 Administration officials reached these decisions at the January 2 NSC meeting; see footnote 3 above. 6 In a January 3 memorandum to the President, Mondale expressed his opposition to reducing grain sales to the Soviet Union, noting that it benefited the United States to continue these sales and maintain the Soviet market. Mondale conceded that if the President had to take action on grain, he should cancel the agreement for sales in excess of those already contracted. After summarizing the steps the administration had taken and noting that they constituted a “most significant response” to the invasion, Mondale asserted: “I realize that you have to make this decision without regard to politics.” However, he stated the impact that such a decision might have on commodity prices and farmer support for the administration, continuing: “Because of that, this decision could undermine your ability to persevere in a strong and unified assault upon the Soviet Union with a unified nation behind you. To me, there is something particularly grubby about using food as a weapon and the use of it could damage us in the international community as well. I might also point out that we did not use the food weapon in the case of the holding of American hostages and I believe to do so now would also raise questions as to how the differences in policy might be justified. I try very hard not to be a hair shirt for you, but I feel very strongly about this matter and have therefore written this memo.” (Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Mondale Papers, Office of the Vice President, Box 205, Memos From the VP to the President [7/1/1979–9/2/1980]) For the full text of Mondale’s memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 253. In his diary entry for January 3, the President commented: “After much debate, my inclination is to stop all grain sales to the Soviets above the 8 million tons guaranteed by an international agreement—all for animal feed. Fritz very strongly opposed.” (White House Diary, p. 388) 7 During a January 5 news conference, Bergland indicated that he supported the President’s decision and noted that the President had instructed him to take steps to “protect farmers’ income.” He commented: “We have consistently said that food should not be used as a weapon because as a general rule food assistance goes to people who are poor and hungry and defenseless. But in this instance, we are talking about the Soviet government. The two are not the same. The Soviet Union has invaded by armed aggres-
