Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 245 urging you to improve them—that I thought it might be useful to review what had really gone on in the last six months, to see whether more useful lessons could be drawn. 1. Risk of War. The media have always been preoccupied with whether Soviet leaders smile or frown at the US. But events since 1945 suggest that the ups and downs of detente are not the main factor shaping the danger of conflict between these two countries: The superpowers are drawn into adversary confrontation more by local crises in other areas than by coolness in their bilateral relations. So in assessing how your policy in the last six months has affected the risk of conflict, we should look to what has happened in potential crisis areas: (a) Middle East. In the last six months the US developed a clear policy regarding the principles that should govern a general Middle East settlement. The Arab countries responded with a modest show of flexibility; the Israeli election produced a government less flexible than its predecessors, and its stance is popular at home. So the search for a settlement will be even longer and more difficult than seemed likely a few months ago. But you have defined the kind of settlement that is needed, which is a necessary first step. (b) Korea. Your announced decision to withdraw US forces from Korea involved both potential pluses and minuses.2 The pluses were twofold: Withdrawal of one brigade in 1978 should permit significant savings if that brigade is disbanded (as one brigade of each of the other two lightly-armed US Army divisions has been disbanded); whether or not this is done, eventual withdrawal of all US forces will give us the option of confining US involvement in any future Korean war to air and sea action. The minus is that the North Korean government may be more inclined to consider a pre-emptive attack. If the timing of further withdrawals after 1978 can be made dependent on North Korean actions and attitudes, we will have committed ourselves to the right long-term course without enhancing the risk of conflict. (c) Europe. Six months ago there seemed some danger that the balance of power in Central Europe would shift sufficiently in favor of the USSR to encourage Soviet leaders to mount growing pressure on the West (or perhaps to intervene in a grey situation such as Yugoslavia, if the occasion arose). This risk has been reduced by the program to build up NATO forces that you launched in London.3 2. Economic. The most likely threat to the industrial democracies is not war, but a long-term deterioration in their economic circumstances, 2 See footnote 3, Document 53. 3 See Document 38.
