December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
611
178.
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to
President Carter1
Washington, February 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Middle East Trip Report
You know from my personal messages2 about the highlights of my
meetings with Sadat, Begin, Dayan, Weizman, Hussein and the Saudi
Princes. I will therefore confine this report to a general assessment and
some suggestions for future action.
Conclusions
My overall conclusions are these. First, we must press forward as
quickly as possible to an Israeli-Egyptian accord. Time is probably run-
ning against success. To make this step by Sadat digestible to the other
moderate Arabs, we need to do three things besides portraying the
treaty as part of a process designed to achieve a comprehensive peace:
be forthcoming on regional economic development; be forthcoming on
arms supplies, although not nearly to the extent of the announced de-
mands; and find some form of US military presence which will provide
reassurance without carrying the political burdens of a presence so in-
trusive as a US military base.
These actions will also lay a basis for a greater degree of regional
security cooperation, with US support. That cooperation will come, if at
all, on an evolutionary basis unless the perception of the threat inten-
sifies. All the countries were concerned about the events in Iran; but
there was no panic and, indeed, less anxiety than I had expected. None
of the leaders thought we should do more than “wait and see” on Iran
for the moment.
My second conclusion is that the most likely threats lie in internal
violence supported from across borders or from internal political, eco-
nomic, and social instability. The first will hardly, and the second not at
all, be cured by major military hardware, which can however inhibit di-
rect aggression across borders. We need to promote regional security
cooperation, particularly where there is a threat from a Soviet surrogate
as in North Yemen, and perhaps Oman, from the PDRY. And we need
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 5, Middle East—1979. Secret; Sensitive. A
handwritten notation at the top of the memorandum reads: “Sec State Eyes Only.” A dif-
ferent version of Brown’s memorandum is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula.
2 Not found.
