Arms Control and Disarmament 1317 inspected. Let us say we will go back to the initial program and have a meeting right now of the UK, USSR and us, and possibly France. The Sec. said perhaps we could “beef” it up a little. The Pres. said we could tell Khrushchev that we stand ready in the meantime if he is ready to go ahead on that particular thing. If he would agree to that meeting and that purpose in spite of our plans we would postpone our plans. Perhaps we couldn’t because they are all out in the Pacific. The Pres. said he thought that Hagerty might have something. He said that he and the Sec. were always talking about a new approach and this might be something that would make Khrushchev squirm. 309. Informal Memorandum From Hagerty to Eisenhower1 Washington, April 7, 1958 SUBJECT Nuclear Testing and Defense Reorganization Here are some thoughts on two subjects—Nuclear Testing and Defense Reorganization. These thoughts are admittedly in the propa­ ganda field, but that seems to be the way things are emphasized these days. I don’t know whether they are practical or not; or whether they will give people the jitters—but at least I put them down on paper. USSR—Nuclear Testing The Soviets have now made their big propaganda move in the testing field and they apparently are going to play it as hard as they can. Khrushchev has sent you his first note, using this subject to make another propaganda plug. Using his note as a basis, is it possible to answer along these lines? 1. You are glad to see that the Soviets, at long last, have finally started to make some sense on the whole question of disarmament. After maintaining a negative attitude for a long time, the USSR has now come forward with one-part of a proposal that the US and the UN have made for some time—namely that by international agreements nuclear testing and production of weapons can and should be halted. Up to now the USSR has declined to treat this great problem seriously. 1 Source: Nuclear testing. No classification marking. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations.
