716  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
contribute to our making progress here. I simply wanted remind him 
of expenditure of blood and treasure by American people to free world 
of scourge of their aggression including freeing of China from Japanese 
militarists.
54. I said next wanted correct two apparent misunderstandings he 
appeared have concerning my previous remarks.
55. I said first he quoted me saying this morning we should not 
anticipate any settlement our differences. I might not have made myself 
clear my original statement. Sense my statement was that we should 
not in this declaration anticipate what settlement or any particular set­
tlement of our differences. That is, what settlement would be. I would 
not be sitting here with him unless my government hopeful have set­
tlement with them.
56. I said what I do say is that we should not, in this initial step of 
agreeing that our differences would not lead to war, confuse that with 
the next steps.
57. I said next misunderstanding he apparently might have con­
cerning my remarks that I wanted clear up was his statement he under­
stood me as saying we agreed on principle but only disagreed on words 
express this. What I in fact said was that until recently I had thought 
that to be case. I had then said that it had however become increasingly 
clear that apparently purpose their government from beginning was 
require my government explicitly or implicitly to renounce its solemnly 
undertaken international agreements as well as its views and policies. 
This not something which in these discussions this declaration I asking 
his government to do, and is something which my government is cor­
respondingly not willing do.
58. I said again I say, let us not confuse this essential first step of 
agreeing that differences would not lead war, with differences of our 
views themselves. As he said this morning, and I agree we should in 
discussing this declaration put to one side things on which we do not 
agree.
59. I said I would like make as clear as possibly can and see if I 
could not cut through this difficulty of understanding that seems exist 
between us.
60. Said he holds certain views with respect Taiwan area and rela­
tionship my country that area. As I said this morning in discussing this 
declaration, I trying respect their right hold those views no matter how 
opposed to them I may be.
61. I said my government holds its views regard that area. I respect 
his right peacefully to oppose those views. These are matters of dispute 
between us.
