Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 international research centers—which enjoy support from developed and developing countries, private organizations, and multilateral institutions—have played a major role in addressing developing country agricultural problems. If, as a result of discussions with our colleagues in developed and developing countries, there is agreement that this approach would be appropriate in the field of energy, the United States would support such international energy centers. • We must assure that as new renewable energy technology becomes relatively less expensive, adequate financing is available for the developing countries to acquire it. We will ask the World Bank to undertake a thorough review of this question. These steps and others we will be discussing with developed and developing countries in the months ahead can help assure that high energy costs do not undermine economic growth and a steadily improving way of life for those who live in the developing world. Our future economic well-being and theirs carries an inescapable imperative: We must work together to expand the availability of energy for developed and developing countries alike. There is no promise for any of us in an intensifying competition for limited energy supplies. Food Let me turn to a second development priority which we intend to focus on in the months ahead—the stark fact that one out of every five of our fellow human beings is sick or weak or hungry because he or she simply does not have enough to eat. In one respect, this is a question of the equity with which economic benefits are distributed. Millions are too poor to buy food, even when it is available. As I have stressed, our overall development efforts must address this fundamental issue. But it is also clear that in many developing countries, food production is not keeping pace with population growth. The long-range prospects point to even greater food deficits in developing countries in the years ahead. Not only will we approach the limits of new land to cultivate, but soil erosion, desert encroachment, and simple overuse are robbing the world’s historic breadbaskets of their productive capacity because of inadequate land and resource management practices. The United States is already doing a great deal to increase the availability of food in the developing world. Roughly half of our bilateral economic development assistance—approximately $600 million this year—is devoted to agriculture and rural development. We provide roughly two-thirds of the world’s concessionary food assistance. Our contribution this year will amount to $1.4 billion. And we have contributed $200 million to the International Fund for Agricultural Development.
