1060
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
agendas were the same. He did not perceive these issues as problems
but as opportunities for progress. He reviewed Argentina’s 25 years’
work in developing the peaceful use of nuclear energy, noting that one
power reactor is currently in use, a second under construction and a
third in the planning phase. He understood President Carter’s concern
over the misuse of nuclear energy and said Argentina had offered to es-
tablish safeguards beyond those which were really needed. However,
he understood that even this may not be sufficient reassurance for Latin
America and the world.
President Videla said the GOA had considered ratifying the Treaty
of Tlatelolco but stressed that President Carter must be aware of the
great need for proper political timing of such an action. Argentina was
only 18 months away from its gravest national crisis, so the govern-
ment must be particularly careful not to disturb the progress toward
normalcy. He stated that as soon as political conditions permit—
perhaps before the end of the year—he would give proof of the GOA
goodwill with regard to non-proliferation by ratifying the Treaty of
Tlatelolco. He asked if this reassured President Carter.
President Carter said it did, and stated that if the GOA decided to
send a delegation to the fuel cycle conference, it would be particularly
exciting if it would be possible to announce intended ratification of the
treaty at that time, but he would defer to President Videla on the best
political timing. With Argentine ratification, the treaty would be in ef-
fect for all countries but Cuba, and the United States would be raising
this issue with the Cubans. The President added that Argentine ratifica-
tion would also remove our concerns about technology and heavy
water supply to Argentina from the United States and other suppliers.
The President had discussed this very issue the previous day with
Prime Minister Trudeau in the interest of establishing a common export
policy.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
