Arbitrator. The administration of government in all countries exhibits in varying degrees the infirmities of human nature and affords abundant room for controversy as to the wisdom and justice of measures, but the Parties in their treaty did not attempt to create limitations even of a general character. (2) Article 3 made no provision as to what should happen after the expiration of the ten-year period and pending the holding of a plebiscite. As the plebiscite was not to be held until the term had expired, it must be deemed to have been within the contemplation of the Parties that there might be an interval before the result of the plebiscite could be ascertained. But no express provision was made for this contingency. It seems unreasonable to suppose that the Parties intended that after the expiration of the ten years Chile should surrender possession to Peru, that then the plebiscite should be held, and that, if it were decided in favor of Chile, the possession should then be restored to Chile. Such a disruption and reconstitution of administrative authority would involve practical difficulties which it is hardly to be thought that the Parties intended to create. Chile was in possession of the territory when the treaty was made and was to continue in possession for ten years, and after that period a plebiscite was to be held to determine whether the territory was “to remain definitely” under her dominion and sovereignty. The fair construction is that Chile was to retain possession pending the holding of a plebiscite and that thus retaining possession her administrative authority continued. This would be subject, of course, to the continuance in effect of the provisions of the treaty, and with the implied undertaking on the part of Chile that she would not prevent the holding of a plebiscite and would negotiate in good faith to make the contemplated special protocol to establish the conditions of the plebiscite. This seems to have been the understanding at the outset, for in the Memorandum delivered by the Minister of Foreign Relations of Peru to the Minister of Chile on March 9, 1894, it appeared that the Chilean Minister desired to include among the bases of a protocol “that the territories should remain during the plebiscite in the same state as that in which they are to-day” and that the Peruvian Foreign Minister responded “that it would be unnecessary to say so, for, only in order to change the person of the occupant, would an express declaration be necessary.” If this was the situation immediately after the ten-year period expired, there is no warrant for holding that the failure to agree on the special protocol for the plebiscite produced a change unless there was bad faith in the conduct of the negotiations, and this charge, as already stated, cannot be sustained. The Arbitrator finds the conclusion inescapable that the territory continued “subject to Chilean laws and authority” pending the negotiations for the special protocol. The question then is whether this authority has been used in such a way as to frustrate the purpose of the agreement for the plebiscite.
