International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 943 “It is, of course, up to each nation to determine its own policies, but we are prepared to respond promptly and fully to all requests for assistance in population and health care programs. At my direction, the Department of State and the Agency for International Development stand ready to cooperate through international organizations, through private voluntary organizations, or through direct contacts with other governments.”4 3. In his message to the World Health Assembly on May 10, 1977,5 the President said that he would strive personally to find ways in which our government and the private sector can better cooperate with other nations on health, population and nutritional needs. 4. Commendable progress in slowing population growth has been made in many countries in recent years, but excessive population growth continues to contribute to high unemployment and underemployment, environmental deterioration, subsistence standards of living, malnutrition, and, in a few countries, starvation and increased death rates. Increased vigilance and urgent action are needed if these trends are to be reversed. 5. Leaders of developing countries should be encouraged in their efforts to promote sound population programs. Where requested and justified, the new administration will provide continuing and even expanded support to those programs, along with other donor countries and organizations. 6. The objective of the United States in this field is to work closely with others rather than to impose our views. In our efforts we should stress the economic and social gains for the poorest nations that result from reduced population growth, maternal and child health. In all these efforts, we should recognize the basic dignity of the individual and his or her right freely to choose family goals and to have the information and means to do so. These basic rights were specifically ac- 4 The full text of the President’s May 23 environmental message to Congress is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 967–986. 5 Bourne transmitted a copy of the President’s message to the World Health Assembly under a covering memorandum to Vance on May 5. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770087–1546 and P770087–1547) Bourne delivered the President’s message to Dr. Sione Tapa, World Health Assembly President, who subsequently presented the message to the Assembly, meeting in Geneva, Switzerland, on May 9. The President was in London attending the G–7 Economic Summit and participating in a meeting on Berlin and arrived in Geneva later that afternoon in order to meet with Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad prior to returning to London for the NATO Ministerial meeting on May 10. The full text of Carter’s message is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 839–840.
