414
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
122.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 2, 1978
SUBJECT
Israeli Requests for New Commitments
Dayan has repeatedly raised three issues with us:
—How will the U.S. express its “responsibility” to “guarantee” the
implementation of the treaty? In other words, what will we do if Egypt
violates the terms of the treaty.
—What economic/military assistance is the U.S. prepared to offer
to offset the costs of peace for Israel? Secretary Vance has been very
lukewarm on this issue, making it clear that we want to conclude the
peace treaty negotiations first.
—Which of our previous commitments are we prepared to
reaffirm?
—Will we confirm that if the new airfields in the Negev are not
ready at the end of three years, Israel should not have to relinquish the
airbases in Sinai?
In the talks with my State colleagues, I have recommended the following
courses of action:
—Concerning our “guarantee” that the treaty will be implemented
in good faith, the President would write one letter to Begin and Sadat
spelling out our willingness to take these steps: continuation of Olive
Harvest reconnaissance flights;2 commitment to help create a multina-
tional peacekeeping force if U.N. forces are not available; a general
statement that we will consult with both parties in the event of a breach
of the treaty and that we will offer our good offices to resolve any dis-
putes. There is no way that we can go much further in “guaranteeing”
the treaty.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 15, Egypt-Israel Negotiations: 10/26–31/78. Secret; Outside System. Sent for
information. At the top of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “Agree. ZB.”
2 Implemented in the aftermath of the October 1973 Arab-Israeli war, Operation
Olive Harvest was a program of reconnaissance flights undertaken by the U.S. Air Force
designed to monitor the disengagement of Egyptian, Syrian, and Israeli forces in the Sinai
and Golan Heights.
