line demarcated. This matter has been pending so long to the detriment of the
development of the regions on both sides of the line, that the United States
Government feels that the desire of the Costa Rican Government to have this
matter now definitely determined is a reasonable one; and, being confident
that the White Award and the Treaty of 1910 definitely establish the boundary
my Government instructed me to invite Your Excellency’s Government to
appoint its engineer to demarcate the line. Your Excellency’s Government
declined to appoint its engineer and stated that it considered an arrangement
with Costa Rica along the lines specified in your note of January 29, last,
essential before Panama can appoint its engineer. You did inform me,
however, that your Government is ready to enter immediately into direct
negotiations with the Government of Costa Rica.
In view of the position taken by Your Excellency’s Government I am
instructed to make clear to you the position of the American Government in
the premises:
The Government of the United States feels that the boundary line should now
be definitely established and that the Treaty of 1910 and the White Award are
valid and binding on both Panama and Costa Rica. While my Government
cannot depart from this position it is willing, as a further manifestation of its
friendship and good-will toward Panama, to await for a reasonable time the
outcome of such direct negotiations as Panama may undertake with the
Government of Costa Rica. Any agreement satisfactory to both Panama and
Costa Rica will of course be acceptable to my Government but in the absence
of any such agreement my Government will have no other alternative than to
afford facilities for the engineers appointed by the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court of the United States and by the Government of Costa Rica in
demarcating the boundary line, should Panama refuse to cooperate therein. In
the absence of a prior arrangement between Panama and Costa Rica my
Government will proceed to this in January, 1926.
With reference to the position adumbrated in Your Excellency’s note of the
29th ultimo, I am instructed to say that my Government can find no merit in
the Panaman claim for indemnity against Costa Rica for the action taken by
the latter in 1921. Without expressing any opinion regarding this action it
should nevertheless be pointed out that Panama had then been in occupation
for eleven years of territory which it clearly recognized in the Porras-
Anderson Treaty of 1910 as belonging to Costa Rica and Costa Rica’s action
was doubtless inspired by the desire to enter into possession of what had been
recognized as belonging to it but was being withheld.
