August 8–September 17, 1978
121
the same time have fear of PLO retaliation. They cannot “volunteer”.
He said that they made clear they would be talking to Arafat as well as
with the Jordanians and presumably the Egyptians; he said they used
such defiant phrases as “we will tell Arafat what we intend to do.”
Dayan said he assumed that getting “clearance” from all three parties
for their participation would be more complex, yet he felt confident
that if agreement were reachable with Sadat that one way or another
the Palestine leaders would manage to nominate their own repre-
sentatives to participate either formally or informally as advisers
perhaps to an Egyptian if not Jordanian delegation. Quandt asked
whether there was any Israeli impediment to these leaders seeing Ar-
afat in Beirut. Could they then return? Weizmann replied that there
were now no restrictions on their travel. He cited several cases of PLO
sympathizers who have travelled abroad and returned without diffi-
culty. Weizmann also underscored Dayan’s recital by saying that the
West Bankers “have really started talking a bit differently in the last
few weeks.” Weizmann then recounted his conversations with Sadat
about his concept of peace with Egypt as a “first peace” rather than a
“separate peace”. He said he understood that Sadat’s problem was
whether Israel could give him enough on the West Bank and Gaza to
protect him from charges of treachery by the Arabs. But for the Israelis
it is of course very difficult politically, since practically no one will
agree to return to ’67 borders, even with minor modifications.
Brzezinski said that conceivably one could agree about the interim
solution which might then well become permanent. But an interim so-
lution needed to be attractive enough to permit Sadat to agree to it.
Weizmann agreed. Weizmann then asked whether the United States
was prepared to see an Egyptian/Israeli agreement over the West Bank
if Hussein remained apart. Secretary Vance answered that such an
agreement should go forward even if Hussein will not join, although
obviously it would be better if he did. But, Secretary Vance empha-
sized, the real problem is to find an agreement over the West Bank and
Gaza which is politically sufficiently attractive for Sadat to sell to the
moderate Arabs, especially Saudi Arabia. Dayan again said that he re-
ally believed that the Palestine/Arab leaders would find a way to par-
ticipate with Egypt and Israel, for they can almost “taste” what they
sense to be in their grasp.
Weizmann said he wanted to ask how much influence the Saudis
would have on whether or not an interim solution for the West Bank
would be attractive enough politically, and how much influence they
would have over Palestine/Arab attitudes toward it. Would they sup-
port it? Brzezinski replied he thought it depended on just how attrac-
tive the interim solution were. He said the Saudis are increasinly wor-
ried about other threats in the region and would like to support a
