March 27–December 31, 1979
873
266.
Memorandum From the President’s Senior Adviser on
Middle East Affairs (Sanders) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, June 19, 1979
SUBJECT
Israeli Settlement Activity
I am aware of the seriousness with which the President views the
recent Israeli settlement activity at Alon Moreh2 and I know that he is
considering various options. I am writing this memo to voice my
opinion that the best way to handle this problem is to continue a low-
key approach.
It is my view that both in Israel and in the United States there is a
serious debate going on concerning the propriety of settlements such as
Alon Moreh (see attached Jerusalem Post editorial)3 and that the natural
evolution of such a debate will result in a policy more to our liking.
I believe that the interjection of a U.S. program to pressure Israel to
change its policy would be counterproductive. It would unify Israel
and the American Jewish community, and I believe, recreate a situation
of the type that existed in 1977 (Joint US–USSR Communique) and De-
cember 1978 (Administration’s statements taken to indicate tilt toward
Egypt). Such a policy, I believe, would have a materially adverse effect
on the peace process.
The consequences of such a policy could be an Israeli response de-
signed to resist US pressure and demonstrate independence, and we
might be in the position of losing credibility with both Israel and the
Arabs. We would be seen as setting a precedent for pressure to be ap-
plied to Israel at every critical point in the negotiations.
I do not believe that we should interfere with the healthy debate
going on in Israel and in the American Jewish community. Our interfer-
ence will only boomerang.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 36, Israel: 5–11/79. No classification marking. At the top of the memorandum,
Brzezinski wrote: “Cy FYI Zbig.”
2 See footnote 4, Document 259.
3 Not found attached.
