the Delegation considered that under the recognized rules of procedure in international gatherings, such a vote by acclamation could not be regarded as in any way binding upon this Government. It further felt that its position had already been made so clear in the meetings of the Conference and its Commissions that a further statement at this juncture would be distinctly inopportune and might weaken the effect of the statements it had already made. The Delegation, therefore, refrained from further defining its abstention from this vote by acclamation. Nevertheless, to avoid any possibility of a misunderstanding as to the effect of this vote upon the Government of the United States, the Delegation, at the conclusion of the meeting, explained verbally to officials of the Cuban Department of State that the United States could not consider the procedure of adopting by acclamation the resolution regarding the holding of a Third International Conference on Emigration and Immigration as in any way binding on the United States, and that the American Delegation wished to be understood as having abstained from voting on the resolution. The Cuban officials confirmed the Delegation’s understanding of the non-binding effect of the vote by acclamation under reference and further noted the Delegation’s statement that it desired that it be considered as having abstained from voting on this matter. 8. At the closing session of the Conference on April 17, Dr. Long addressed the Conference in Spanish to express the American Delegation’s pleasure at having taken part in the labors of the Conference and its thanks to the Cuban Government for its hospitality: “I have asked for the floor in the name of the Delegation of the United States of America to express a sentiment we have at this moment, and in evidence of our sincerity I venture to utter it in Spanish, which is a rather difficult thing to do. “In the first place, I wish to say how much we appreciate our having had the privilege of attending so important and informative an event as this Conference has proved to be. To be present at the debates, to listen to the opinions of the several Delegates and the findings of the Committees has proved an education on the subject of world migration.
