Arms Control and Disarmament  1459
behind an object, such as the moon, and the use of distance. It is possi­
ble to go one-­third of the way to the sun.
6. The significance of a violation involving high-­altitudes would 
be that big weapons could be made lighter and of a violation under­
ground that weapons below 1 KT and be below 5 KT (which have been 
neglected) could be developed; also that “clean” weapons could be 
developed.
7. Dr. Teller feels that a moratorium would not be to our advantage 
in any case. However, assuming a moratorium, the question is, how 
best to go about it. He suggests banning all shots that can be policed:
a. Forbid all atmospheric shots (thus getting rid of fall-­out).
b. Forbid all oceanic shots (this assumes that we will be prepared 
to put sufficient money into patrol ships, etc.)
c. Forbid all underground shots above the agreed level of detection. With 
respect to this point, Dr. Teller acknowledges the difficulties and sug­
gests two ways in which it could be done, the first being more easily 
explained, but the second preferable in his opinion.
(1) Prohibit all shots above 5 KT. If one wishes to make a shot, give 
notification to the international organization and have observers pres­
ent although not telling them what is inside the device. These observers 
could detect the yield. This would be a form of international inspection.
(2) Prohibit all shots causing an earthquake equivalent above a 
certain magnitude—say 4.5. This means that if we make a shot which 
gives a 4.5 reaction or less, we can announce the shot and no inspection 
is indicated. However, if the shot produces greater than 4.5 then the 
inspection teams go into action.
d. High altitude shots. If high-­altitude shots are to be reserved from 
the Treaty, it could be provided that they be allowed above 30 miles until 
a system was devised to detect them down to a certain size. Then if the 
treaty were to be revised each year it could be progressively tightened.
8. Explosions for peaceful purposes. Dr. Teller urges that if there is to 
be a moratorium, we should reserve explosions for peaceful uses. He does 
not feel that peaceful uses open up any loopholes which are not already 
in existence because of the “threshold concept.” He acknowledges that 
we might consider opening up peaceful tests completely to international 
inspection. He also feels that we should make clear that we reserve 
nuclear experiments that are not tests of weapons, citing specifically 
nuclear reactions at the level of low yield explosions, or just below.
9. Dr. Teller said that in recent exchanges with the British we found 
that although they had devoted a fraction of time and money to their 
program as compared with the U.S. program, their developments sub­
stantially parallel our own. Nothing of special significance has escaped 
the British and on the other hand the British have learned nothing of 
special significance that we do not know.
Gordon Gray
