214  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
For this reason in addition to special assistance program Dept has 
endeavored to work out practicable program for putting Comibol oper-
ation on sound basis as prerequisite to economic and political viability 
of any Bolivian Government. We estimate the cost of this program (apart 
from $10 million for modern concentration plants and facilities) some-
where in neighborhood of $10 million. This is in addition to approxi-
mately $4 million which is needed for separation pay for 5000 excess 
employees and which would be partially met from PL 480 program. 
Inter-American Bank mission now in Bolivia and there is reason to 
hope Bank will give favorable consideration to loan possibly in neigh-
borhood of $5 million and will be in position to negotiate late January 
or early February. Department encouraging Bank give this first prior-
ity. Department has also urged German Government extend exporter 
credit and conclude private management contract with Comibol.
In addition Department understands Williams Harvey considering 
$2 million loan for purchase of machinery and equipment. Department 
realizes it may be necessary to fill gap if one or more of these plans fall 
through. We do not consider it prudent, however, given our own bal-
ance of payments situation and other problems, to address this aspect 
of problem in advance of knowledge of outcome of these plans.
Second part of problem is need for concentration plants and atten-
dant facilities (Deptel 165). Dept. intended to help Paz by announce-
ment of willingness to make loan not to exceed $10 million for this 
purpose under conditions set out in that telegram.
[text not declassified]
Please telegraph urgently your estimate whether program as outlined 
above is inadequate and if so specifically what you consider Department 
should do. Specifically Department wishes to know whether, re con-
centration plants, offer should be made to Paz. If $5 million needed for 
immediate aid in lieu of $10 million offer for what purposes and projects 
would $5 million be used? Also could situation be alleviated by immedi-
ate release frozen budget support and counterpart funds?
Your recommendations urgently requested.
Herter
