744  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
Could above tactics employed by US Govt be explained away as 
not intended deprive Chinese forever of ability return to homeland?
76. Wang said I should look into situation these two ­Chinese 
­students and give accounting of them and immediately stop those 
unjust acts, or else bear all responsibility for breaking agreed 
announcement. (Here Wang handed me list two names, transmitted 
in separate tel).
77. Wang said so far US has failed give accounting of Chinese pre­
vented from returning and whose names he gave me in five separate 
lists with request that I give accounting.
78. Wang said moreover, even in cases those 103 Chinese students 
whom US admitted it had prevented from returning, so far 32 them 
not yet returned. These people all been subjected obstruction by US 
and return was prevented. He wanted say most emphatically once 
again that US has all responsibility to give accounting for every one 
these people.
79. Wang said I had asserted that Indian Embassy so far not made 
representations with US Govt concerning any obstruction in departure 
Chinese and that Indian Embassy so far had not indicated its ability per­
form its functions under agreed announcement been interfered with. He 
must point out that US so far failed submit list Chinese nationals in US 
so that Indian Embassy finds it difficult perform its functions. US had 
even refused permit Indian Embassy make announcement accordance 
with agreed announcement setting forth information that all Chinese in 
US including those who been compelled apply permanent residence or 
been compelled secure entry permits Taiwan are all entitled return. Was 
this not grave act in violation agreed announcement?
80. Wang said he wanted raise question Chinese in prison in US in 
all seriousness. Although he had made repeated ref regarding Chinese 
in prison, my side had so far not taken any measures regarding Chinese 
in prison US. This situation not satisfactory.
81. Wang said I had once asserted that in my knowledge there no 
Chinese in US prisons. Fact is, in accordance with reports from Chinese 
who returned recently there many innocent Chinese in prison US. As 
to exactly how many Chinese nationals being imprisoned by US and 
exactly what their status and condition, US side must speedily give 
accounting for all of them.
82. Wang said there many points in my statement re Liu Yung-­ming 
which at variance with facts. As matter fact, Liu sent US to further his 
studies and when he went he was in normal health. He even completed 
his studies and obtained degree, which also indicates that during that 
period he enjoying normal health.
