386
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
I’ll be seeing on Sunday.7 The declaration would show the Soviet Union
that there is no difference between us, and it would also demonstrate to
the people of Europe and the United States that they must remain
together.
The President: That is exactly our commitment and our purpose.
That is the reason I suggested escalating the level of the NATO
meeting. I think there is a new commitment to NATO in Europe, and a
renewed commitment here. There was doubt in the past, but now the
Alliance is strong. Our renewed, deepened commitment is reflected in
our budget decisions and in many others. I think a strong statement in
May would be very important.
Callaghan: That kind of statement could have repercussions on
economics as well.
The President: Yes.
Callaghan: I remind those in Europe who could go a separate way
about defense. We couldn’t have close defense relations while econom-
ically we were pursuing different directions.
The President: Yes, Jim, you’re a great man.
[Omitted here is discussion of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
and Carter’s trip to Latin America and Africa.]
7 April 23.
128.
Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff1
Washington, undated
THE DOLLAR CRISIS AND NATIONAL SECURITY
The prolonged decline of the dollar could have an adverse effect
on the conduct of our foreign policy. Because of the importance of psy-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 68, PRC
058, 3/16/78, Monetary Situation. Secret. Sent to Brzezinski under cover of an April 20
memorandum from Renner, who wrote: “Following the failure of CIA and State to pro-
duce any useful indication of foreign reactions to the dollar crisis, I wrote the attached
paper on the basis of reason and instinct.” Renner noted that the paper incorporated the
suggestions of several NSC Staff members and commented: “It is ironical that the dollar
has strengthened in the last several days. Perhaps the traders heard that the NSC was
taking a serious view of the crisis!” (Ibid.) Renner sent a draft of the paper to Brzezinski
and Owen under cover of a March 15 memorandum. (Ibid.)
