March–August 1953
501
and transfers which Mossadeq subsequently carried out. Although a
new military plot was rumored over this last weekend, allegedly in-
volving the armored brigade in Tehran, it is unconfirmed. One of its
supposed leaders has since been assigned to a south Iran post.
(3) The old-line politicians, with leaders like General Zahedi and Ali
Mansour under arrest, have participated in the boycott of the Majlis
sessions but have otherwise been quiescent.
c. The Shah has continued in a state of nervous indecision. He has ap-
parently given some covert encouragement to advocates of strong ac-
tion to overthrow Mossadeq but has taken no positive action himself
and evidently would be quite content with a settlement allowing him to
remain in peace. He may still decide to leave Iran.
d. The tribes have played little part in the crisis. The fiercely anti-
Palace Qashqai leaders have continued to support Mossadeq. While
some Bahktiari leaders are still at odds with the government, there is no
evidence that they have attempted to capitalize on Mossadeq’s current
troubles. Other tribes, including the Kurds, have been quiet.
a. The Tudeh Party has attempted to capitalize on the situation by
joining or sponsoring pro-Mossadeq anti-Shah demonstrations. How-
ever, it has generally been physically rebuffed by both the police and
Mossadeq’s followers and has gained little more than experience and
some propaganda effect.
3. Although the political outlook remains uncertain, the probabil-
ities appear to be as follows:
a. With respect to the immediate crisis:
(1) It is extremely unlikely that the opposition will successfully
rally to unseat Mossadeq at this late stage. Such a development would
almost certainly require army participation, which is improbable now
that Mossadeq’s principal military opponents have been dismissed or
sent to pounding beats in the hinterland.
(2) There is still some possibility that the Shah might leave Iran, on
his own initiative or under pressure from Mossadeq.
(3) It appears most probable, however, that the crisis will end in
some sort of compromise whereby the Palace would be weakened but
not destroyed as a political influence in Iran.
b. Even if Mossadeq succeeds in expelling the Shah, powerful op-
position elements will remain, and new efforts to reassert his leader-
ship will be required from time to time. Mossadeq is unlikely to make
great progress in consolidating his control, and the regime as a whole
will thus be weaker than ever.
c. Tudeh has gained little immediate advantage from the present
crisis but may be able to capitalize on a future crisis, particularly if Mos-
sadeq resorts to violent attacks on the US.
4. An important corollary question is that of the oil negotiations
and Mossadeq’s attitude toward the US. Briefly, the record has been as
follows:
