830 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement accuracies with Soviet capabilities, the Panel believes the statement should be: “The operational CEP of the Soviet ICBM at IOC will not be worse than 5 n.m. and may very well be better.” (3) Available evidence does not adequately support a probability of more than one basic type ICBM currently being flight tested at TYURA TAM. Variations noted in current test programs could well be achieved through relatively minor modifications. Such changes would also be suf­ ficient to accommodate specific special missions, such as certain space requirements. The current missile should be capable of delivering a war­ head of at least 6000 pounds to a range of about 5500 n.m., or with war­ head reduced to the order of 3000 pounds could achieve 7500 n.m. range. d. Positive evidence relative to Soviet ICBM production facilities or operational deployment sites continues to be missing. The Panel believes that intelligence on the status of the Soviet program requires these inputs if it is to be as precise as national security demands. Recognizing that these types of data have not been accumulated on other types of offensive missiles either, some adjudged to have been operational for several years, the Panel giving consideration to collec­ tion means available to the U.S. finds this situation alarming. e. The Panel can see no indications that the Soviet space program has interfered with their ICBM program, nor vice versa. The Panel con­ siders that the Soviet facilities are probably adequate to handle both programs even under a program more accelerated than observed here­ tofore. While the Soviet space program, observed to the current time, appears to have utilized considerable ICBM hardware, there appears to be no deficiency in reserve missiles or equipment. 3. Available intelligence information continued to be inadequate for assessing the Soviet ICBM threat. We therefore strongly recommend that: a. All collection concepts capable of providing date on the status of Soviet ICBM accuracy, deployment and production be vigorously pursued. b. Continued effort be directed toward determining Soviet ICBM characteristics by directing specific attention to the acquisition of read­ able telemetry data prior to first stage burnout and to the intercepts of the ICBM beacon prior to final burnout. Additional collection should be directed to the reentry phase including the type of nosecone, fuzing and arming techniques, and possible use of penetration aids. c. Present ELINT capabilities be augmented by passive tracking capabilities such as interferometer techniques. d. [text not declassified] activities be directed toward acquiring data concerning ICBM deployment, production rates and goals, and future ICBM design concepts. L.A. Hyland Chairman
