1138
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
viously some disagreement, and the President agreed that upon reflec-
tion and after the emotions had subsided there was probably misun-
derstanding between them as to just how long the freeze was to run. He
said he would make clear to Begin that he understood the basis for the
misunderstanding. I told him that I thought this would be helpful.
We then talked about how to move the relationship along and the
fact that Sadat will be concerned with large issues while Begin will be
cautious about details.
I then went through a number of other areas which Sadat had dis-
cussed with me. With respect to military aid and the F–15’s, I told him
of Egypt’s concern that the price to Israel was so much cheaper than
that to Egypt and also that Sadat wanted 4 destroyers on a lend-lease
basis.
I also told the President that Sadat had told me the Shah was very
bitter about the United States and felt he had been betrayed; that 14
months ago Sadat had suggested that he remove his planes from Iran
and bring them to Egypt and the Shah had said that even if he wanted
to do so they would not come unless the United States directed them to.
Sadat said he was trying to temper the Shah’s feeling.
Sadat also asked me to convey to the President that he thought that
there was now civil war in Syria and that Assad would be out by the
end of the year. He thought that Iraq was working against Assad and
cautioned the United States to be careful about Iraq.
With reference to Saudia Arabia, I told him that Sadat had said that
the United States can control it whenever it wants to and that the Royal
Family exists wholly because of the help of the United States. He said
that Saudi Arabia could get Hussein to join the negotiations by a phone
call, since Hussein and his family are on the Saudi payroll. Sadat did
think, however, that this might be the time to improve Saudi-Egypt re-
lations, and that the United States could undertake to do it.
The President then said that he was not surprised at the suggestion
about Hussein; [2 lines not declassified] He also indicated that the Shah
was a trouble-maker and was misstating facts to Sadat.
Quite clearly the President is eager to get back into the negotia-
tions and said as much. He said that he had enjoyed the Camp David
negotiations immensely despite their difficulties because except for his
submarine duty it was the only time perhaps ever that he had devoted
himself for an extended period to a single subject—entirely apart, as he
put it, from the Congressmen on his neck, etc. He seemed to be im-
mensely interested in every aspect of the negotiations and the attitude
of the people involved. He is obviously not only knowledgeable but
keeping current on every tactic.
The President then spoke again about Moshe Dayan’s suggestion
which he said was the best idea he had heard for weeks about the situa-
