3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 309 3. We found that his list of the principal issues to be resolved in SALT corresponded with our own. 4. In the course of our general discussion of US-Soviet relations, I emphasized the importance of the factor of Soviet arming and transport of Cuban troops to Africa in contributing to the deterioration in Soviet- American relations. Although he argued about the justification of this reaction, he recognized that it was a fact, and said in response that in the present climate, in which there was anger among the Soviet leaders about the “pin-pricks” and “propaganda warfare” from the US side, when the air was filled with “threats” and there was an absence of any positive steps in the relationship, it was difficult to get support in Moscow for any measures to accommodate American sensibilities on this or any other points, large or small. In this climate, he said, the propagandists felt free to respond to US attacks on a tit-for-tat basis, though there was a taboo against personal attacks on the President. He expressed the hope that, if the Moscow talks succeed and this was followed by a successful summit, there would be a disposition to try to be more responsive to American concerns in Africa and elsewhere. Vance 95. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, April 12, 1978 SUBJECT SALT, Moscow Visit, Shevchenko,2 Moscow Accommodations PARTICIPANTS US USSR The Secretary Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin Marshall D. Shulman Paul Warnke 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 3, CV–Dobrynin Meet-ing, 4/12/78. Secret. Drafted by Shulman. The meeting took place at the Department of State. 2 Soviet Under Secretary General to the United Nations, Arkady Shevchenko, who the Soviets accused of defection, refused to return to Moscow, but did not seek political asylum in the United States. See Kathleen Teltsch, “Soviet Accuses U.S. of Coercing U.N. Aide,” The New York Times, April 12, 1978, p. NJ 17.
