Chapter 4, February–April 1990 491 300 km. Karpov, however, had said his instructions did not permit the Soviets to agree to that. Shevardnadze noted that he always had said that Karpov was a difficult negotiating partner. Karpov said he would only add that Bartholomew had presented the results of their discussions in clear and precise terms. The Soviets continued to propose a more radical solution, namely, to allow no more that 600 nuclear and 400 conventional SLCMs. The U.S., however, had not accepted this and the Soviets were prepared to agree to the U.S.-­proposed solution that would not be legally binding. If the Ministers thought that the results of these discussions should be elaborated further, the experts would do so. Shevardnadze, looking at the Soviet side’s working text of the draft declaration, said it appeared to have more brackets than letters. After reviewing the text, he remarked that this was a complex issue that perhaps should be reviewed in greater depth at the next ministerial. In our joint statement, we might just indicate we had discussed the issue in a serious way with the participation of experts. He did not think we could settle the issue by early morning. The Secretary said we should ask our negotiators in Geneva to work in the interim to see if they could resolve these differences. The point was that we had made good progress. If we could conclude an agreement up to this point, we could refer the remaining details to our Geneva negotiators. Shevardnadze agreed that we should give this to our delegations. The draft declaration contained interesting things, to be sure. The Secretary said that the U.S. could accept the Soviet position on counting deployed SLCMs rather than the total inventory. This would leave two unresolved questions: range and whether we count only nuclear SLCMs, or nuclear and conventional SLCMs. We would have to leave these points to our negotiators in Geneva and perhaps conclude an agreement before the next ministerial. Shevardnadze said that he did not rule this out. We should give the agreement to our negotiators as a basis for further bargaining. Perhaps we would be able to solve it by the next ministerial. Burt said it would be useful if we could say in our joint statement that we had made more progress on this issue than had been previously possible. Shevardnadze said he thought we could say that. This was progress and it was an appropriate basis on which the Geneva negotiators could work.
