Venezuela 1193 the Armed Forces. General Pérez Jiménez was a member of the original three-­man Junta of Government that assumed power in 1948, following a military coup d’etat that overthrew the legally constituted government of President Gallegos, who had gained a majority of the popular vote in the free elections conducted in Venezuela the preceding year. Installed by the Armed Forces as Provisional President in 1952, following the dissolution of the Junta, General Pérez Jiménez was named Constitutional President the following year by the Constituent Assembly. He was “reelected” for another five-­year term of office as a result of a plebiscite held on December 15, 1957, in which he was the only presidential candidate. Resentment among the younger military officers and the civilian population over the plebiscite is believed to have contributed to a great extent to his downfall. In a note dated January 25, 1958,3 the new Venezuelan Government informed our Embassy at Caracas that, in accordance with the universal desires of the nation, in defense of the supreme interests of the Republic, and in order to move toward a legally constituted democratic form of government, the National Armed Forces had assumed power and had formed a five-man Junta of Government headed by Admiral Wolfgang Larrazábal, as President of the Junta, and comprised of two other military officers and two civilians. The note stated that the new government would comply strictly with its international obligations and expressed its desire to resume cordial relations with the U.S. The Junta is in control of the machinery of government. It appears to enjoy wide popular as well as united military support and there is no substantial resistance to it. It has pledged by public announcement to conduct free elections as soon as possible in order to constitute a demo­cratic form of government. A member of the Junta has assured our Embassy of the new government’s receptivity to foreign investment and of its willingness and ability to protect it. He has also given assurances that the new government will be anti-­communist. In the belief that early recognition on our part would contribute materially to the stability of the new regime, we propose that the U.S. recognize, at 6.00 p.m. today, the Junta as the Provisional Government of Venezuela. Recommendation: That you sign the attached memorandum to the President4 recommending recognition of the Junta as the Provisional Government of the Republic of Venezuela. 3 Reference is to Venezuelan Foreign Office note 69, transmitted to the Department
