824
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
many people came to feel that they wanted no part either of the AIOC
or of the oil industry; in other words, they wanted to be rid of the oil
question completely. In line with this public feeling, Baqai had advo-
cated and still defended the oilless economy as an alternative to the sur-
render of Iran’s legitimate rights and the compromising of her national
honor. Although he felt that if possible Iran should profit from her oil
resources, he feared that the only way that Britain would allow it to do
so would be on the basis of a 50–50 division of profits, which would be
completely unacceptable to the Iranian people. Rather than accept such
a shameful settlement, he believed Iran should forget her oil and turn
to other sources of revenue.7
The Ambassador thanked Dr. Baqai for his frank and detailed pre-
sentation of his views and said that his comments had been most
helpful and revealing. He then stated his intention to explain with
equal frankness and in some detail his own estimate, and what he be-
lieved to be the United States Government’s estimate, of Iran’s situation
with regard to the oil problem. Prefacing his remarks with a summa-
tion of the long-standing struggle among the Great Powers for influ-
ence in Iran, the Ambassador pointed out that the United States, in con-
trast, wanted nothing from Iran and desired merely to preserve the
independence and promote the prosperity of its people. Although cer-
tainly activated in part by self-interest in this matter, the United States
desired neither territory nor profit nor political influence in Iran. It was
no longer possible in the present world situation for Iran to seek advan-
tages by playing one great power against another as it had done so long
in the past. At this rather pointed comment on the traditional Iranian
policy which Baqai’s party has often advocated, the Deputy made no
reply.
Ambassador Henderson then went on to outline the world petro-
leum situation as it is today, emphasizing that present production was
more than adequate to meet world needs and that only through cooper-
ation among a number of the major oil companies of the globe could
Iran’s oil be distributed in appreciable quantities. He emphasized that
the sale of any Iranian oil would necessitate a corresponding reduction
in the production of other Middle Eastern countries, any one of which
could produce enough petroleum to satisfy the entire world demand
for Middle Eastern oil.
The Ambassador emphasized that, in view of these facts, Iran
could not expect to obtain a better price for its oil than the other coun-
tries of the region. In his view, the best solution would involve a provi-
sion akin to a most-favored-nation clause whereby Iran would be sure
7 Richards highlighted and placed his initials in the margin next to this sentence.
