majority or minority report. Further efforts to conciliate the differences
were made by Mr. Oudendijk and others, but a compromise could not be
agreed upon because of the persistency of Dr. Yen in declining to accept any
draft which did not contain the 90 million dollars item. A large number of
amendments were offered designed to satisfy the Chinese viewpoint, but
they were all promptly and emphatically rejected because they did not
concede the 90 million dollars.
Dr. Yen considered that it would be better to permit the 2½ per cent surtax
to go into effect at once and the 5 per cent tax on luxuries to go into force at
a later date, not exceeding two months, in order to allow more time for
preparing a list of luxuries. Mr. Strawn assented to this, although he felt that
it would simplify matters if both rates went into force at the same time. A
discussion ensued as to whether the 2½ and 5 per cent surtaxes should be
based on actual rates then being paid which were slightly less than the rate
of 5 per cent provided in the Customs treaty. It was brought out that one of
the periodical revisions of the schedules of rates would probably be
necessary within the next few months. It was agreed that the Inspector
General of Customs should be consulted concerning this point. Colonel Peel
said that in his opinion, it would be preferable to have the 2½ and 5 per cent
surtaxes go into effect at the same time and that everything should be done
to simplify administrative matters. He emphasized the need for a short
luxury list and suggested that the advisers be instructed to prepare one at
once, in which suggestion Mr. Strawn concurred. A rather prolonged
discussion took place as to the effective date of the new rates and Mr. Hioki
was pronounced in his view that the levying of the new duties, after due
notice had been given, should, as is the universal practice, begin at the
moment the goods have arrived at the port of entry. This, he considered,
would be a simple method of procedure, and would place all goods on an
equal basis at the customs houses. Mr. Strawn and Colonel Peel contended
for the date of shipment rather than for the date of arrival for putting into
force the new rates. The advantages and disadvantages of the two proposals
were discussed at length, during the course of which Mr. Oudendijk
suggested the deletion of the words “country of origin” and the substitution
of the words “goods shipped to China”, his point being that the country of
shipment was not always the country of origin. Both Mr. Strawn and
Colonel Peel agreed with Mr. Oudendijk’s views on this point. As the
