688  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
(d) It is possible to maintain aircraft in the air for twenty-­four 
hours a day.
(e) The operation of KC–135s at accelerated rates is feasible.
(f) Command control and weapons safety were proven to be 
effective.
(g) By conducting lengthy fights at optimum altitude, the B–52 had 
reached greater efficiency levels cost-­wise.
4. The following were not achieved by Headstart I:
(a) Determination of the maximum capability for airborne alert.
(b) Determination of the supply support required.
(c) Adequate crew training.
(d) Firm cost data.
5. Further exercises would accomplish the following:
(a) Determine the maximum capability for airborne alert.
(b) Develop new concepts of operation.
(c) Achieve a greater degree of crew training.
(d) Achieve better cost data.
6. Headstart II, if approved, would be conducted along the follow­
ing lines:
(a) The test would be conducted over a four-­month period, from 
March to June. In March, there would be eight B–52s and twelve 
KC–135s aloft per day; in April there would be eleven B–52s and 
seventeen KC–135s; in May and June, sixteen B–52s and twenty-­four 
KC–135s.
(b) The objectives of Headstart II would be to further investigate 
manpower and cost figures, to develop an optimum ground and air-­
borne alert ratio, to develop a manning doctrine, to refine maintenance 
data, to improve operational readiness, and to improve methods of 
positive control.
(c) To attain these objectives, the problems of maintenance, mate­
rial, real facilities, fiscal matters, and operations would be emphasized. 
The cost of Headstart II would be $20 million over costs for ground 
alert during this period.
(d) The following flight patterns would be followed:
(1) The 28th Bomb Wing, located at Ellsworth Air Force Base 
would send one sortie at 2000  hours daily. Its route, generally in 
the Eastern United States and Canada, would involve support by 
KC–135s from Loring Air Force Base. Canada has granted overflight 
permission.
(2) The 92nd Bomb Wing, located at Fairchild Air Force Base, 
would send three sorties at 1700  hours daily and three sorties at 
2300 hours daily. These aircraft would be in the air for twenty-­four 
hours and would receive two refuelings. This route would involve a 
flight from Fairchild to Kodiak Island in the Aleutians as the initial 
leg of the journey.
