Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I “Mr. Brokaw. You’ve got all that in the treaty, Mr. President. Do you have the votes in the Senate? “The President. I think we will get the votes in the Senate. “Mr. Brokaw. Do you not now have them? “The President. I can’t say for sure that we do because many Senators still haven’t expressed their commitment to me or their opinion. But I was talking to President Ford this past week, who’s strongly supportive of the treaties, along with Secretary Kissinger and others, and he said that in his speeches to college groups and others around the Nation, that he is getting an increasingly favorable response from the audience. I think public opinion is building up for the treaties as they know the terms of them. “Mr. MacNeil. Could we interpret this as the beginning of a new campaign on your part to get out and sell the treaty? You’ve been criticized for having left the ground to the opposition somewhat. Are you going to make a major effort personally to try and sell it? “The President. Yes. I consider it one of my most important responsibilities. “Mr. MacNeil. And you can meet the deadline that President Torrijos has set of April, which he says is urgent, and that Panama’s patience could be exhausted. “The President. Well, no, I don’t feel any constraint to operate under a deadline. But both Senator Byrd and I and the leaders of the Senate all hope that we can resolve that issue early in the year, certainly I think by April. “Ms. Walters. On that—since, by the way, just to get back to my original questions—it seems that your priorities next year are very similar to your priorities this year, energy and the economy. But in October, you and President Torrijos issued a statement—a joint statement to remove doubts about the rights of the United States to defend the neutrality of the canal and also the right of ships to pass promptly through it. A number of Senators have felt that they might be more comfortable with this if it were actually written into the treaty. “Would you be willing to see the treaty amended so that it would reflect this understanding, this statement between you and General Torrijos? “The President. No. I think it would be good to have a signed agreement between me and President Torrijos, and he has indicated he would be glad to sign that statement that was made, and of course, I would too. I think the Senate could express an understanding that the treaty was being approved by them with the understanding that this was a proper interpretation. But to actually amend the treaty would re-
