978  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Bessmertnykh: Well, we could do it on Saturday.2 And just to facil-
itate things I could come by and have a short meeting with you on 
Saturday right after my arrival. That would show that we have been in 
touch and I think that will be a good outcome.
Baker: Let me talk with the President about this and see what he 
feels about the best way of handling this and whether he is prepared to 
go along with referring to a spring or early summer date.
Bessmertnykh: Fine. I will be in my office all day. If you want you 
can send a copy of the draft statement through our embassy today or 
directly to me.
Baker: I will get Chetverikov to come in and I will give him the 
prepared statement once I am sure that’s the way the President wants 
to proceed.
Bessmertnykh: I will come any way. I would like to see you and 
maybe have a chance to see the President as well. I do need to come 
back because my family is still there and I do need to close things up in 
Washington.
Baker: That’s very good. It will give us a chance to talk about these 
things and we can plan to meet on Saturday. I don’t want to have a lot 
of people involved in our Saturday meeting. I want to in that meeting 
to discuss with you the possibilities in the Baltics.
Bessmertnykh: I will tell you frankly that I have been working on 
this since I came back from Washington. My own complete conviction 
on this is that the West is over-­reacting. My President is trying to keep 
to the course he has chartered and now the West is rushing with nega-
tive reactions which will not help the President deal with the forces he 
has to contend with. Indirectly, and objectively speaking, the West’s 
reaction is helping those forces who oppose the President. I under-
stand how the press and the photos guide public opinion and they 
are very troubling photos. I agree they are troubling. I know the Baltic 
people themselves are trying to incite public opinion but President 
Gorbachev is trying very hard to keep the course and steer it.
Baker: I think you have got to get back to finding a negotiating 
mechanism for resolving the problem. Last night troops took over a 
plant in Lithuania. You have gone some time without doing that. Why 
now?
Bessmertnykh: Well, times are very tense. The situation is very tense. 
Things just happen in circumstances like that.
Baker: But, when you send in additional troops in, when you have 
the Black Berets, this creates a situation where things are bound to get 
out of control. I think you know we want to preserve this relationship 
2 January 26.
