Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
655
All this will not get Soviet troops out of Cuba; I doubt anything
will. But it will show the American people that we have drawn the
proper conclusions from these troops’ presence and other Soviet ac-
tions, and are taking steps to reflect these conclusions in the conduct of
US-Soviet relations. (C)
Such a speech would be welcomed abroad. Last week in Paris, Art
Hartman told me that the French are worried less about Cuba than by
what they see as a generally assertive Soviet policy in Third World
areas. They would welcome a firmer US response—a clear indication
that we realize what the Soviets are up to and will act accordingly. (C)
III. Conclusion
These two initiatives should be seen as mutually reinforcing ele-
ments of a coherent program to strengthen the7 US and its position
in the world: Pushing for higher productivity will strengthen the US
at home; responding effectively to Soviet competition will strengthen
it abroad. Neither initiative will yield early results. But both will
strengthen the Administration’s standing, at home and abroad—indi-
cating that we have longer-term programs to help meet the problems
that worry Americans most. (C)
If you make the Soviet speech first, because of Cuba, you could in-
dicate that a second speech would soon follow, foreshadowing the do-
mestic economic programs that are also needed to maintain our na-
tional and international strength. (C)
The second speech could not only announce your new campaign
to boost investment and productivity, but also rehearse the other ele-
ments of our anti-inflationary strategy, emphasizing that prolonged
fiscal and monetary restraint is the key to success. This may not be a
popular message, but the leaders who have done best politically in the
industrial countries (Schmidt, Giscard, LDP leaders in Japan) are those
who have proposed hard measures to beat inflation, while those who
have done poorly (Trudeau, Callaghan) have given the impression of
trying to please everyone.8 A President who tells it like it is, and thus is
seen to put the country’s interest over personal and political advantage,
will make anyone who argues for painless approaches to inflation look
second-rate. (C)
Once made, these two speeches should set the theme for the Ad-
ministration’s posture during the remainder of your first term. You
should come back to this theme at every occasion—stressing the need
to strengthen our country, and underlining the steps to improve pro-
7 The President underlined “strengthen the.”
8 The President placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this sentence.
