432
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
130.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Holbrooke) to the Deputy
Secretary of State (Christopher)1
Washington, March 24, 1978
Position on the Fascell/Fraser Bill To Establish
an Institute For Human Rights and Freedom
The attached memorandum (Tab A)2 recommending options re-
garding the Fascell/Fraser Bill (HR 11320) to establish an Institute for
Human Rights and Freedom has just come to my attention. Since the es-
tablishment of a U.S. Government-funded organization to provide sup-
port for private (non-governmental) human rights activities in foreign
countries has potential political consequences for our bilateral relations
with a number of East Asian countries, I would like to let you know this
Bureau’s opinions regarding Departmental support for the bill as it is
now drafted (text of bill is at Tab B).3
I would like to associate EA with the position taken by S/P4—to
support the bill if certain changes are made. I do believe that such an
Institute could provide valuable support for the Administration’s
human rights policy while enhancing the degree of cooperation with
the non-governmental organizations concerned.
My reservations concern two provisions of the bill, notably a man-
date for the Institute (as an agent of the U.S. Government) to dissemi-
nate material in foreign countries that has been suppressed by their
governments and, secondly, the proposed charter for the Institute to
operate independently of the Secretary of State. Other provisions of the
bill include authorization for the Director of the Institute to “make and
perform contract and other agreements with any nongovernmental
person however designated” (Sec. 7.(a)(3)), authorization for the In-
stitute to draw upon “information, services, facilities, officers, and
employees” of any private or USG organization (Sec. 7.(a)(7)), and
authorization for it to “make advances, grants, and loans to any
nongovernmental person, whether within or without the U.S.”
(Sec. 7.(a)(9)).
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780066–1955. Lim-
ited Official Use. Drafted by Martens and Frank Bennett. A typewritten notation on the
first page of the memorandum reads: “This memo has been OBE’d. No further action will
be taken at this time. Per D/S. Oxman, 4/12/78.
2 Not attached. Printed as Document 126.
3 Not attached.
4 See Document 131.
