Chapter 4, February–April 1990  457
Baker: Yes. I am saying that if they are not observable differences 
they must be counted. For nuclear ALCMs, we would have an exchange 
of information with respect to the external differences, and we would 
also exhibit those nuclear ALCMs in a way that they confirm the infor-
mation and its distinguishable characteristics.
In addition, access to designated weapons storage areas at non-
ALCM heavy bomber bases and former heavy bomber bases would be 
permitted to confirm that any ALCMs present are non-­nuclear. There 
would be a ban on ALCMs with multiple independently targetable 
nuclear warheads. We would permit inspections of non-ALCM heavy 
bombers of a type that have been tested with ALCMs to confirm that 
they are not equipped for ALCMs. Each side would have a continuing 
right to 115 former heavy bombers outside the START limits for non-­
nuclear roles. We would permit inspections of former heavy bombers 
to confirm that they have been converted. There would also be a ban 
on conversion of aircraft originally constructed as aircraft other than 
bombers into ALCM carrying heavy bombers. There would not be a 
1100 limit on bomber weapons. And there would be no limits on non-­
deployed ALCMs, SRAMs, and bombs.
There is no need to respond tonight. Tomorrow I will also want to 
talk to you about cooperation, on non-­proliferation, on open skies and 
on defense and space which I hope is still not a problem between us. 
I was certainly encouraged by what you said in Wyoming.
Shevardnadze: I won’t comment on all your proposals, but I will 
give them to our people and they will work on them through the 
night. My general impression is that there are many reasonable and 
sensible elements here. Of course, they are going to take some work 
and discussion with our experts, and we will try to take advantage of 
this evening.
As far as non-­deployed missiles and telemetry are concerned, I am 
sure we will find answers to these. The verification of mobiles is an 
issue that can be resolved. I will also welcome your suggestions on the 
phasing of START reductions. I do believe this is fundamental for both 
of us and lies at the heart of stability and predictability. I welcome the 
fact that you are addressing this issue.
As for SLCMs, I will have to take a look at your declaration.
Baker: I will give it to you tomorrow.
Shevardnadze: It remains a very complex issue. I appreciate very 
much your compromise on the visit to the radars. I will tell you very 
frankly that the decision to destroy the Krasnoyarsk radar was 
very hard and the debate was very difficult. Even now, in the press, 
some are saying we made an unnecessary concession. Your move is, 
therefore, very important. I understand your interest in having a right 
to visit the two radars and I’ll have to consult on that, but I hope to be
