1218 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement in the event of a breach of the agreement. The Soviet Union finally responded in the informal bilateral discussions conducted in London with a counter-­proposal of an initial period of two or three years of nuclear test suspension. 11. Leading U.S. atomic scientists state that they could hold their laboratories and scientists together for a two-­year period if it was explained as being in the national interest, and they could during this period conduct highly desirable nuclear research without conducting test explosions. 12. [text not declassified] 13. At the UN General Assembly session on November 19, 1957, the key vote in the test suspension issue was taken on an Indian reso­ lution which provided for an inspected suspension of tests of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons. The vote was 24 in favor, 34 against, and 20 abstentions. The make-­up of this 34 voting with the United States was 27 nations in the NATO and Latin America groups, plus Austra­ lia, Nationalist China, Pakistan, Spain, the Philippines, Israel, and New Zealand. New Zealand with its new Government has since changed its position and now favors a test suspension. Six Latin American coun­ tries did not follow the U.S. lead—but even more significant was the fact that 24 Asian-­African countries did not support the United States. As indicated above, no African countries supported the United States on this vote, and only 4 Asian countries (Nationalist China, the Philip­ pines, Pakistan, and Israel). 14. It is widely recognized that Asia and Africa are principal com­ petitive battlegrounds and may probably swing the decisive weight between the Soviet Bloc and the Free World. The two leaders of two most influential Asian nations—India and Japan—have repeatedly and strongly spoken out in favor of a separate test suspension. Nehru, on December 10, 1957, said: “I feel that suspension of atomic explosives is a valid first step (in disarmament). It is a dramatic step. It would not change the power of any country but would give it a tremendous lead. It would come as a tremendous relief to hundreds of millions all over the world.” 15. The prompt negotiation of an inspected two-­year test suspen­ sion, because of the time necessary to work out the inspection agree­ ment and obtain Senate approval, could not at best be made effective as a ratified treaty prior to September 1, 1958, and therefore the next series of U.S. tests would be completed before the suspension became effective. [text not declassified] 16. A temporary suspension of nuclear weapons tests would bring into being a United Nations supervisory organization which could be the forerunner of an organization to regulate and control armaments and armed forces in the decades ahead.
