Human Rights problems exist. An attempt to apply the requirements to all agreements would require substantial changes in the terms now in general use in Title I agreements, reduce AID’s flexibility in negotiating these agreements, and create a significant impediment to the sale of American agricultural commodities which Congress did not contemplate. On the other hand, until specific violators are designated, the EB proposal will look like an inadequate response to Congressional intent. As a practical matter, moreover, it is not possible to reserve judgment until after agreements have been entered into on what reports will be required from the purchasing governments. The governments can realistically report only on the basis of accounting systems set up and made operational well before the commodities are distributed or the proceeds generated. The proposal to include the Section 112 provision in all agreements seeks to avoid public identification of troublesome countries and to permit the U.S. to use PL 480 to show displeasure with a lack of progress on human rights after an agreement is signed. The AID recommendation also allows these objectives to be met. By focusing on troublesome governments, the Executive Branch will not designate violators, and we shall always have ways of indicating displeasure—including, if necessary, adding Section 112 requirements to new PL 480 agreements that might be negotiated. There is no approach open to the Executive Branch which will guarantee the secrecy of human rights problems of governments with which we deal. The problem-governments are aware that they have a problem. Congressional hearings and other public testimony, as well as press reports, will make it clear which countries are troublesome. In any case, the Executive Branch must account for measures it takes at least once a year. The all-agreements proposal could raise public and Congressional suspicions about the Administration’s good faith in carrying out human rights measures. At a time when MODE restraints and AID “effectiveness” are important issues, it would further clog the system with additional manpower requirements and paper. The AID proposal, on the other hand, would impose an additional but manageable workload on purchasing governments, AID missions, Embassies, and Washington review offices by limiting the requirements to cases where a real effort must be made to assure adherence to the legislation. HA View While the current law requires that it must be demonstrated only in the case of gross human rights violators that the food or proceeds go to the needy, the Congress has made it clear that emphasis should be placed on the use of Title I proceeds to benefit the needy. It would,
