Human Rights
285
problems exist. An attempt to apply the requirements to all agreements
would require substantial changes in the terms now in general use in
Title I agreements, reduce AID’s flexibility in negotiating these agree-
ments, and create a significant impediment to the sale of American ag-
ricultural commodities which Congress did not contemplate. On the
other hand, until specific violators are designated, the EB proposal will
look like an inadequate response to Congressional intent.
As a practical matter, moreover, it is not possible to reserve judg-
ment until after agreements have been entered into on what reports
will be required from the purchasing governments. The governments
can realistically report only on the basis of accounting systems set up
and made operational well before the commodities are distributed or
the proceeds generated.
The proposal to include the Section 112 provision in all agreements
seeks to avoid public identification of troublesome countries and to
permit the U.S. to use PL 480 to show displeasure with a lack of
progress on human rights after an agreement is signed. The AID rec-
ommendation also allows these objectives to be met. By focusing on
troublesome governments, the Executive Branch will not designate vio-
lators, and we shall always have ways of indicating displeasure—in-
cluding, if necessary, adding Section 112 requirements to new PL 480
agreements that might be negotiated.
There is no approach open to the Executive Branch which will
guarantee the secrecy of human rights problems of governments with
which we deal. The problem-governments are aware that they have a
problem. Congressional hearings and other public testimony, as well as
press reports, will make it clear which countries are troublesome. In
any case, the Executive Branch must account for measures it takes at
least once a year.
The all-agreements proposal could raise public and Congressional
suspicions about the Administration’s good faith in carrying out
human rights measures. At a time when MODE restraints and AID “ef-
fectiveness” are important issues, it would further clog the system with
additional manpower requirements and paper. The AID proposal, on
the other hand, would impose an additional but manageable workload
on purchasing governments, AID missions, Embassies, and Wash-
ington review offices by limiting the requirements to cases where a real
effort must be made to assure adherence to the legislation.
HA View
While the current law requires that it must be demonstrated only
in the case of gross human rights violators that the food or proceeds go
to the needy, the Congress has made it clear that emphasis should be
placed on the use of Title I proceeds to benefit the needy. It would,
