622
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
215.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, May 30, 1979
SUBJECT
Japan (U)
1. Prime Minister Ohira sent an aide to Washington last week to
negotiate with Bob Strauss about the items on which you asked Ohira
for agreement before your trip to Japan. In a week of hard bargaining,
agreement was reached as follows:
a. Japan agreed to conclude a telephone and telecommunications
government procurement agreement based on “mutual reciprocity” by
December 30, 1980. Japan also agreed to make some concessions on
tariff staging, to work out new import standards and testing proce-
dures based on reciprocity, and to try to increase coal purchases. All
this will be announced when Bob visits Tokyo next week, if Ohira is
able between now and then to form a Japanese consensus around the
concessions that his emissary made here on his behalf.2 (Otherwise, it
will be announced later, but still before you arrive in Japan.) To avoid
complicating Ohira’s task, we agreed to say nothing about all this in the
meantime. (C)
b. Japan also agreed to negotiate a more generous arrangement on
cigars and cigarettes, and this intention will be announced just before
you leave for Tokyo. (C)
2. This outcome confirms my view that Ohira intends to fulfill the
pledges that he made during his visit. I believe we will find that this
also extends to the pledges he made on medium-term economic policy,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 41, Japan: 5–9/79. Confidential. Sent for information. Sent to Brzezinski for for-
warding to Carter under cover of a May 30 note from Owen. Brzezinski wrote “DR to-
morrow” on Owen’s note. (Ibid.) An attached note, dated May 31, indicates that Owen’s
memorandum to Carter was included in Carter’s Daily Report. (Ibid.)
2 On June 2, Strauss and Ushiba initialed a joint statement on U.S.-Japanese eco-
nomic relations; a copy of the initialed statement is in the National Archives, RG 364,
364–80–4, Special Trade Representative Subject Files, 1977–1979, Box 4, Japan (III). In a
June 6 memorandum to Carter, Strauss asserted that “the important underlying theme
for these understandings is reciprocity—the insistence on a real two-way street with
Japan. The Japanese recognize that this is the key principle necessary for a positive and
lasting trading relationship between our two nations. We agreed with the Japanese to
work toward reciprocity in government procurement and standards, to accelerate Japa-
nese tariff reductions, and to encourage Japanese imports of tobacco products and U.S.
coal.” (Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box
135, 6/12/79 [2])
