723.2515/2153: Telegram [Document 251] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State ARICA, April 18, 1926—5 p.m. [Received April 22—1 a.m.60 ] From Lassiter. Your April 15, 6 p.m. The following statement prepared by my legal advisers is forwarded herewith: Chile’s real default does not lie in the technical nonfulfillment of this or that provision of the prerequisites resolution or of any other specific demand of the Commission, although technical nonfulfillment can be shown. Her real default lies in the ruthless deportation of Peruvian electors which has continued since the protocol, the submission, and the award, in flagrant fraud of all three. It lies in the establishment and maintenance since the award, through open violence and secret coercion, of a reign of terrorism over the Peruvians who have been allowed to remain in the province. Chile, by her deportations and by her consistent campaign of open violence and secret terrorism, has placed herself in a position where she can afford to accord from time to time a purely technical and formal compliance with a number of the provisions of the prerequisites resolution without in the least relaxing her unlawful strangle hold on the situation and without permitting any improvement in essential conditions. See telegram March 17, 6 p.m.61 Every impartial person acquainted with the situation here knows that the foregoing is the simple truth. But because it is the truth, it follows that it is difficult to prove it as one proves an ordinary case in court. If it is true that the Chilean authorities systematically deport Peruvians, it follows that they will leave no written record of what they have done and that when questioned they will one and all deny it. If it is true that Peruvians are living in terror of their lives, it follows that they will fear to give evidence, even of the fact that they are afraid, in the presence of the representatives of the men they fear. If it is true that a man who complains is likely to disappear without a trace, it follows that most men will be ready to make an affidavit
