States of America and the Government of France regarding the conclusion
of an international pact for the outlawry of war. At the same time you asked
me the question whether the German Government was disposed to conclude
such a pact in accordance with the draft put forward by the Government of
the United States or whether it considered certain changes in this draft
necessary.
The German Government has studied the question put by you with the care
appropriate to the extraordinary importance of the matter. It was possible
also in this study to take into consideration the draft treaty which had been
drawn up in the meantime by the French Government and handed to the
participating powers. As a result of this study I have the honor to inform
Your Excellency of the following in the name of the German Government:
The German Government welcomes most warmly the opening of
negotiations for the conclusion of an international pact for the outlawry of
war. The two main ideas on which are based the initiative of the French
Minister of Foreign Affairs and the resulting proposal of the United States
correspond fully to the principles of German policy. Germany has no higher
interest than to see the possibility of armed conflicts eliminated and a
development assured in the life of the nations which would guarantee the
peaceful settlement of all international disputes. The conclusion of a pact
such as the United States now has in view would certainly bring the nations
a good deal nearer to this goal.
As the need of the nations for the assurance of peace since the termination
of the World War has already led to other international agreements, the
necessity arises for the states concerned to make a decision as to the
relationship in which the pact now being planned would stand to these
international agreements which are already in effect. You have already, Mr.
Ambassador, referred in your note to the considerations which were put
forward in this connection by the French Government in its exchange of
views with the Government of the United States. So far as Germany is
concerned, the Covenant of the League of Nations and the Rhine Pact of
Locarno come into consideration as international agreements which might
affect the substance of the new pact. Other international obligations of this
kind have not been entered into by Germany. Respect for the obligations
