152
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
NODIS and EXDIS messages concerning the Shah, a telegram
reporting a meeting with Yazdi and Bazargan, [1½ lines not declassified]
and a State telegram and a State letter and memorandum concerning
the Shah’s possible admission into the United States were among the
documents seized (the last three documents are mentioned in a Novem-
ber 21 article in the London Times).
Political and Economic Section files contain information concerning
local sources, interviews with members of minority groups, and bio-
graphic data that could be used to damage innocent persons.
DAO files include material about U.S.-Iranian cooperation in mak-
ing technical assessments of Soviet-origin military equipment. MAAG
files record cooperation on military procurement matters that was con-
tinuing up to the time the Embassy was seized.
In brief, though some of the safes had not yet been opened when
the last group of hostages was released, Embassy files now in Iranian
hands can compromise many of those with whom we have dealt, and
if disclosed or used as the basis for distorted stories can do incalcula-
ble damage.
Although virtually all CIA documents in the Embassy were
destroyed, a safe containing Iranian, U.S. [less than 1 line not declassified]
currency notes was seized by the Iranians.4 These will confirm Iranian
suspicions about espionage activities conducted from the Embassy.
We do know that records relating to the recent [less than 1 line not
declassified] survey were destroyed with the material in the Embassy’s
central files. We also believe that the material on the recent intelligence
briefing of Entezam and Yazdi was destroyed.
As soon as officers recently returned from Tehran who are familiar
with the DAO and MAAG files can be reached, we will provide a further
assessment of the material in those offices that was compromised.
Peter Tarnoff
Executive Secretary
4 The CIA also assessed the possible damage of the Embassy takeover. Turner wrote
Carter that he would “weigh additional evidence that we receive in an effort at least to
know whether accusations that may be made in public trials are accurate.” [text not
declassified] (Memorandum from Turner to Carter, November 27; Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran 11/21/79–11/27/79)
Bowdler and Precht also reviewed the damage and how to respond. (Memorandum
from Bowdler to Newsom, November 28; Department of State, Records of David D.
Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot
81D154, Intelligence Iran)
