500
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
—Both Super Powers are viewed as malevolent forces bent on
exploiting the region. The U.S., however, is still seen as the most danger-
ous threat to Iran, despite the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
—Iran will probably not give significant material support to foreign
liberation groups in the immediate future. It will, however, encourage
such groups to follow Iran’s example.
—Iran’s revolutionary ideas have unleashed a potentially signifi-
cant force which could impair U.S. strategic interests. Those ideas
should be considered in reaching any decision about how to protect
U.S. influence in the region.
—The impact of Iran in the region will be conditioned by the ability
of Bani-Sadr and his government to bring political coherence to the
revolution, control dissident ethnic groups, and make some progress
in economic recovery.
—An anarchic Iran will increase the danger of coup attempts and be
a tempting target for external intervention and subversion, particularly
from the Soviet Union and Iraq.
U.S. Objectives in Post-Hostage Iran
—Establishing the foundations for gradual movement towards an
improved bilateral relationship.
—The preservation of an independent Iran with the ability to main-
tain its territorial integrity.
—Strengthened economic and political relations between Iran and
the West.
—Containment of the Iranian revolution within its own borders.
—Increased Iranian differentiation in its perceptions of the relative
U.S. and Soviet threats, and understanding of U.S. actions in the area
to meet the Soviet threat.
—Stable relationships between Iran and Iraq.
Post-hostage Iran, as the paper suggests, will be extremely difficult
for the U.S. to deal with. Even if the U.S. is able to overcome the
domestic obstacles to rebuilding a relationship with Iran, the revolu-
tionary government will continue to pursue policies vis-à-vis the U.S.
bilaterally and regionally in the area which will impinge on our own
strategic interests, e.g., clearing the area of all foreign presence, pressur-
ing Pakistan to steer clear of a security relationship with the U.S., and
reduced oil production.
In pursuing our objectives in Iran, we should work both bilaterally
and through third parties, which may have to carry much of the freight,
given the bilateral strains which are likely to persist. The bilateral
relationship will be strongly affected by the degree to which the U.S.
can be forthcoming on issues of importance to Iran, e.g., supply of
