Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1061 Tab B Paper Prepared in the National Security Council4 Washington, undated POINTS TO BE MADE FOR NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING ON START — I am pleased that we finally seem to have gotten the Soviets to live up to their obligations under the CFE Treaty. That clears the way for us to see if we can conclude a START treaty we have been negotiating for some eight years. — We are at a critical point in our relationship with the Soviet Union. A solid START treaty not only is important on its own merits, it also could encourage the improvements in Soviet behavior and policies we are starting to see again. A good treaty would also fit well with all the other areas where we are seeking cooperation. — My sense is that we are within striking distance of a START treaty that serves our interests, and that if we can show a little flexibility on two or three of the most stubborn issues, it may be possible to wrap it up very quickly. It takes two to make a deal, but I want to make sure we do everything we can to conclude a solid START agreement as soon a possible. — To that end, I know that our negotiator, Ambassador Linton Brooks, will get the full support of your people to resolve quickly the many relatively minor issues that remain. — What I want to address today is an approach that could lead to closure on those last few “stubborn” issues. — I am convinced that simply to insist that Gorbachev accept all our negotiating positions as his price for a ticket to a summit would be self-defeating. At the same time, the issues are too important to accept the Soviet positions just to expedite final agreement on START. But I do think that we can adjust some of our positions while still protecting our most important security concerns and lock up a treaty that is clearly in our interest. — The strategy we used to resolve CFE proved successful. I want to apply that same approach in START. — I want to make a proposal directly to Gorbachev on an approach to conclude the treaty quickly. I want to engage him personally, using 4 Secret.
