404
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
8. Under Condition III—Anti-Communist Iranian forces withdraw to
south and oppose Tudeh regime. U.S. national objective requires military ac-
tion to prevent further spread of Communism in Middle East. The feasible
military courses of action are:
a. Same as Condition I.
b. Provide additional logistic assistance to the anti-Communist Ira-
nian forces including augmentation of the U.S. Military Missions.
9. Under Condition IV—Anti-Communist Iranian forces withdraw to
south and oppose Tudeh regime. U.S. national objective requires military ac-
tion to re-establish a Western oriented government. The feasible military
courses of action are the same as Conditions I, II and III. These limited
U.S., Iranian, U.K., and/or other Commonwealth forces probably could
not insure the re-establishment of a Western oriented government in
Iran, but could cooperate with and covertly support the Central Intelli-
gence Agency as required in the overthrow of a Tudeh regime and
re-establishment of a friendly government.
10. The Joint Chiefs of Staff desire to emphasize that in the fore-
going discussion they are not recommending that a decision be made to
employ U.S. military forces in the Middle East for the purposes indi-
cated in this memorandum. Rather, they are only indicating certain
courses of military action which might be feasible in the event that such
a decision is made by appropriate governmental authorities. While this
memorandum is primarily concerned with the stationing of U.S. mili-
tary forces in the Middle East under conditions short of war, the Joint
Chiefs of Staff consider that in the event of Communist aggression in
the area the resultant situation would be not unlike that we face in
Korea, and it is unlikely that we could withdraw those forces. Under
such circumstances we would find ourselves committed to military op-
erations in the Middle East involving substantial forces, supplies, and
other logistical support.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
W.M. Fechteler4
Chief of Naval Operations
4 Printed from a copy with this typed signature and an indication that the original
was signed.
