Non-Proliferation 787 same, and we expect early and full discussions with FRG as US evaluation activities progress. Similar considerations apply in the case of Japan. 8. If issue of amending NPT arises in connection with discussions of US export policy, Department suggests that US position strongly opposing this approach as impracticable, undesirable, and unnecessary be reaffirmed. Such an approach would be impracticable, since it would involve reconsideration of NPT by almost 100 legislatures. It would also seriously endanger future viability of treaty by raising devisive questions and risking weakening of the NPT. This is why we and others strongly resisted all moves at NPT review conference to amend treaty. Further, we believe that policies US have proposed in context of nuclear suppliers discussions are supplementary to, and not in conflict with, the NPT. End FYI. Vance 319. Backchannel Message From Vice President Mondale to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Bonn, January 25, 1977, 1139Z 590. Subject: My First Day of Meetings in Europe As I mentioned on the phone,2 my first day of meetings went well and received an enthusiastic response. In the morning, I spoke to Prime Minister Tindemans of Belgium, the NATO Council, NATO Secretary General Luns and General Haig. In the afternoon I had indepth discussions with European Commission President Roy Jenkins and the other Commissioners, as well as Dutch Foreign Minister Van der Stoel. On your authority I released my NATO statement, and I also held a press conference.3 The highlights of my conversations are as follows: [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.] 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 7, Backchannel Messages: Europe: 1–6/77. Secret; Eyes Only; Sensitive. 2 A record of this conversation was not found. 3 Documents on Mondale’s meetings with the NATO leaders and his statement are scheduled to be printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
