Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 631 “We are sure7 you understand the urgency of resolving this crisis before it deepens further.” Ambassador Lang is requested to convey with utmost urgency the response of Ghotbzadeh and Bani-Sadr to this message. 7 Carter changed the word “believe” to the words “are sure.” 239. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, April 4, 1980 SUBJECT Iran Update—April 4, 1980 Today’s Objective —To determine the chances for an Iranian decision to transfer the hostages this weekend. —To begin to prepare a second package of measures we might take against Iran if the transfer does not occur.2 Status of Initiatives —The attached cable from Lang3 responds as best he is able to the questions we put to him on Wednesday. It also conveys the flavor of the situation prior to the Revolutionary Council’s about-face late yesterday. 1 Source: Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran Update April 1980. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Precht. Also sent to Christopher and Newsom. 2 In an April 4 memorandum to Aaron on “Next Steps on Iran,” Sick noted burgeoning support for retaliatory measures against Iran, writing, “The hawks are flying.” He listed possible retaliatory acts that the United States could take against Iran. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 32, Subject File, Iran [Retained] 4/80) 3 Attached but not printed. The undated cable from Lang provided details of events in Tehran, with particular emphasis on the domestic political context of the events on April 1. Lang also wrote that he was afraid that the Iranian leadership would “‘screw up’ and procrastinate and let the opportunity slip by” for one reason or another. He also suggested that the United States had to pressure the Iranians “unrelentingly, go over the same material untiringly lest they slacken off and the matter becomes bogged down one more time.” (Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran Update April 1980)
