893.74/516: Telegram
[Document 737]
The Minister in China (Schurman) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, January 23, 1925—1 p.m.
[Received 7:10 p.m.]
39. Your 4, January 7, 4 p.m.
1. Copy of the Japanese Government’s proposal received from Tokyo January
13th and after careful consideration I offer the following comments:
2. The Federal contract constitutes a joint partnership between the American
company and the Chinese Government in which the Government enjoys full
reversionary rights. Consequently any proposal to pool the contract in a
consortium or otherwise admit other interests to participation in its terms
would require consent of the Government, which I am inclined to think could
not be obtained. See my telegram of October [February] 10, 4 p.m., 1922,
No. 44.5
3. To recognize that there are any difficulties to compose between the
Japanese and American Governments in the matter of the radio contracts
concluded with the Chinese Government is to admit that some validity
attaches to the monopolistic claim advanced by Mitsui. This has been so
often denied by the American Government on the following [sic] open-door
principle that any apparent compromise based upon a withdrawal of this
claim would be construed in China as a diplomatic defeat for the United
States and its contempt and victory for Japan. Moreover if the Mitsui and
Federal contracts were to be pooled in the proposed four-nation consortium,
the Marconi contracts would presumably demand the same treatment. Hence
the consortium would begin operations with approximately 12 million silver
dollars of noncollectible indebtedness of the Chinese Government invested in
commercially profitless undertakings. See enclosure No. 3, Legation’s
despatch 1994, December 23rd, 1923.6 I have always felt that in so
desperately fighting the Federal contract on the basis of the Mitsui
monopolistic clause the Japanese Government had three principal aims: 1st,
secure reimbursement of the millions comparatively speaking wasted by
Mitsui and the Japanese Government on the Peking station; 2d, secure
prestige of diplomatic victory over the American Government; 3d, frustrate
independent radio communication between China and America concerning
