Romania
553
attractive, especially with regard to emigration to Israel, would be
helpful.3
3. RCP CC Secretary for International Affairs Stefan Andrei noted
October 10 that U.S. was surely aware both of Rom desire for more
ample relations and of President Ceausescu’s desire to get away from
the annual review of the MFN clause; the President’s argument that
we need a more stable basis for the whole relationship strengthened
this desire, Andrei said. Counselor replied that it is difficult to be
optimistic about short-term prospects. Multi-year review would be a
serious matter in the Congress, as most recent annual extension had not
been, and it would be necessary to lay the groundwork very carefully.
Acceleration of the process of good relations between the two countries
and a demonstration to our public that progress on human rights is
possible here would be the kinds of developments needed. It is impor-
tant to continue to consult on these matters.4
4. In Nimetz’s meeting with Deputy Prime Minister Patan on Octo-
ber 11, Patan stressed the peculiarity of the Romanian fate, pointing
out that it was the single country which had concluded an arrangement
under the provisions of the Trade Act of 1974 for Most Favored Nation
treatment. By doing so, Romania had set a sort of example for those
states which were and remain highly skeptical that any satisfactory
accommodation on this issue can be reached with the United States.
Patan stressed that the example set by the GOR should be a more
positive model. There are diplomatic representatives in Bucharest, who,
having advised against the GOR entering into the agreement with the
USG concerning MFN, are now saying, quote, I told you so, end quote.
5. In October 12 meeting, FornMin Macovescu was somewhat less
elliptical in comments on annual review process.5 As Foreign Minister
he wished to give the political viewpoint, he said: It is important from
all points of view to avoid the kinds of things that happen during the
3 In telegram 7677 from Bucharest, October 18, the Embassy reported on Nimetz’s
discussions of bilateral issues with Gliga and Macovescu, including the proposed Ceau-
sescu visit to Washington, other high-level exchanges, arms control, and scientific and
cultural exchanges. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770382–0169)
4 In telegram 7726 from Bucharest, October 19, the Embassy reported that Andrei
told Nimetz that Communist parties in the West are in the process of establishing an
independent line, with the strongest parties having a special role. (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770385–0502)
5 Nimetz also discussed international issues with Macovescu during their meeting.
In telegram 7602 from Bucharest, October 14, the Embassy reported Macovescu’s assertion
to Nimetz that the joint U.S.-Soviet declaration preoccupied Romania, and that Bucharest
was wary of any agreements between the superpowers which might infringe on its
sovereignty. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770378–0592) In
telegram 7655 from Bucharest, the Embassy reported Macovescu’s summary to Nimetz
of the Romanian position on the Middle East and his conversations with Israeli Foreign
Minister Dayan. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770380–1259)
