326
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the coincidence of these Israeli statements with some of the at least su-
perficial aspects of the Camp David Accords were an element contrib-
uting to reserve with which he has been treating Camp David.
3. King said he hopes we appreciate his efforts over past 11 years
during which he undertook extensive clandestine contacts with Is-
raelis, involving considerable risks, during which he tried his best to
move towards peace. He said that in a sense his previous wife (Queen
Alya) met her death (in night helicopter crash) as a result of this effort
because it was necessary to do extensive night flying in royal helicopter
to provide a cover for the use of helicopter for night meetings with Is-
raelis. King added that he personally would be ready to meet his death
“this minute” if that would help to bring a sound lasting peace to the
area and that “nothing is too great” for him to undertake to advance
that goal.
4. King said he deeply appreciates all you have done and are doing
for peace in MidEast and wishes to convey his gratitude and respect to
you, and his hopes to continue our dialogue. King mentioned your
handwritten letter3 to him in which you referred to your awareness of
risks to his position but to greater risk of not taking steps to continue
momentum of peace process.
5. King said that he will need a little time to look closely at the
evolving situation and to consult and discuss Jordan’s possible role
within Jordan and with Arab moderates. He said that “before he takes
the plunge he would like to know where the shore line is since Jordan is
not a good swimmer”, unlike Egypt, which is more isolated from heart-
land of Arab world, any miscalculation could involve Jordan in fight-
ing on several fronts. As a result Jordan must work on the Arabs for
some support. In this respect, he noted particularly that Saudis with
their fixation with PLO were not rpt. not giving him support he would
need to enter negotiations. I will be following this up in Saudi Arabia.4
West
3 See Document 61.
4 Saunders met with Fahd on October 18. They discussed the U.S. answer to Hus-
sein’s questions. The Embassy transmitted a summary of the meeting in telegram 7469
from Jidda, October 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P850036–2409) In addition, Saunders held a meeting with Kamel, Adham, and Turki on
October 18 and a final meeting with Saud, Turki, Adham, and others on October 19.
Saunders dispatched a report of all his meetings with Saudi officials in telegram 7470
from Jidda, October 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P850036–2413)
