396
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
world attention on human rights would gain credibility if sponsored by
an institution with some autonomy from the U.S. government.
2. Functions of an HRF
Working with private groups and national organizations in this
country and abroad, as well as with international agencies, the HRF
would develop ideas and programs to further the observance of human
rights on a global basis. The HRF would engage in at least five major
types of activities.
—Provide financial and other support to the non-governmental human
rights organizations (NGOs) in the U.S. and elsewhere. For years the NGOs
have operated quite effectively with little public support, and they now
have the potential to do much more. They can often act in circum-
stances and with techniques that would be inappropriate for the USG.
The NGOs need, want and deserve our support, but at the same time,
they must be insulated from direct dependence on the USG.
—Foster research on human rights. We need research on the different
types of human rights, their interactions, the relevance of each in dif-
ferent societial and cultural contexts, and which kinds of policies work
best where. We also need to know much more about conditions and
longer term trends in individual countries and regions. Though State
has worked hard this past year to improve its data base, most of its in-
formation comes through official channels which often give a very in-
complete picture. Finally, as time goes on, we need a critical assessment
of how well our policies are working.
—Aid victims of human rights violations. Support is badly needed for
refugee resettlement efforts, including the retraining (language, profes-
sional standards, etc.) and placement of skilled and professional polit-
ical refugees. An HRF could help to arrange and finance the resettle-
ment of such key individuals—not in the U.S. where their talents are
wasted—but in other Third World nations badly in need of these skills.
Equally important, the HRF can provide direct help and psychological
support for dissenters within their own societies by, for example,
awarding an annual prize to an artist or writer whose works are sup-
pressed in his own country, or by helping to finance the publication
and distribution of suppressed works.
—Promote efforts to multilateralize governmental human rights policies.
While the primary responsibility here rests with the U.S. government,
the HRF, working on its own and through the NGOs, could prove a
powerful ally in such efforts as: building support for the creation of a
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights; energizing the UN Human
Rights Commission; evolving harmonious policies among Western na-
tions in the IFIs; and promoting regional human rights organizations in
Africa and elsewhere. Particularly in the Third World (and notwith-
