998 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III The question of timing is also important. The 1979 legislative calendar will be crowded with other initiatives of great importance to the LDCs and ourselves, viz the MTN, IMF quota increase, aid legislation, and a World Bank capital increase. The Common Fund would compete with these initiatives for Congressional support and funds, and success in obtaining Congressional support for the Fund might come at the expense of these initiatives. On the other hand, to put off submission of any Common Fund agreement until 1980 would involve another set of problems, since 1980 will be a short session, shadowed by the election. If, however, we stick to our present position, the negotiations are likely to fail, and the onus of failure will likely be on the United States. Acrimony in the North/South dialogue would be inevitable, though how damaging or enduring the fall-out might be is open to question since—with the exception of a few countries (e.g., Venezuela)—the Common Fund has not been a problem in our bilateral relations with LDCs. Most other developed countries are anxious to move for political reasons and will join us if we move in a positive direction. The exception so far has been Germany. Schmidt has argued that a global export earnings stabilization scheme would be preferable to a Common Fund. In fact a similar scheme has been in existence for some time—i.e. the IMF’s Compensatory Finance Facility, which lends substantial sums to countries suffering export shortfalls. We are now looking for ways to improve this Facility. Schmidt’s argument also ignores the political significance of the Common Fund to the LDCs. There is obviously considerable room for trade-offs among the four major issues discussed above. Highly satisfactory decisionmaking arrangements would allow us to be more flexible on the terms of reference, for instance, and a willingness to make a contribution to the second window might permit successful negotiations on the basis of a very tight position on the first window. We will be working with Treasury and others during the next month to establish a detailed negotiating position if you give us the general go ahead now.6 You will have an opportunity to review the position before we begin negotiations. Recommendation That you approve our moving forward to achieve a timely and successful conclusion of the Common Fund negotiations. This will al- 6 In an August 29 memorandum to Vance, Cooper noted “that the President took favorable note of Secretary Blumenthal’s position that we could fashion a more limited approach to a Common Fund based on contributions to a contingency reserve fund.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Official Working Papers of S/P Director Anthony Lake, 1977–January 1981, Lot 82D298, Box 17, S/P-Lake Papers—Sensitive 7/1–9/30/78) For Blumenthal’s position, see Document 313.
