1464 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement arms situation, we give the Soviets opportunity to discuss all their old proposals such as “ban the bomb”, and this would sow the seeds of destruction of the Conference, as well as place the U.S. at a propaganda disadvantage. He said it was quite true that disarmament measures with inspection would gain greater security for the U.S. but this Con­ ference should not get into such questions. He commented that, in this regard, the language on Page 3 of the terms of reference paper was too broad. Mr. Herter said the issue centered particularly in the wording to be used for Section III C of the agenda. He had hoped that it would be possible to have developed some specific suggestions from the delega­ tion with respect to limitations that might be discussed but this had not proved possible. Mr. Foster said he was the servant of whatever the Committee of Three decided, and that the possibility of some fruitful discussion with the Soviets existed even if we did not get beyond Section II of the agenda. However, he said, Sections III A and B are progressive in nature and when you get to qualitation discussions, we can assess the value to the surprise attack problem of various types of hypothetical limitations, and this could be of real value to subsequent political negotiations. He said you could discuss variables in general terms or as percentages, or as “minimum cuts” and “substantial cuts”. Dr. Killian inquired as to views of the delegation on any exclusion of a discussion of limitations, and said that any technical analysis he had seen shows that as far as missiles are concerned, there would be little value in more observation and inspection. He noted the views of the Interagency Working Group which expressed this view. Mr. Quarles said he did not believe there would not be some value in observation and inspection. Mr. Foster said we should aim at an assessment of the effectiveness of measures relating to various levels of armaments. Mr. Quarles said he did not object to the technical discussion hav­ ing a range of conditions which must be faced, but that this Conference should not get into a discussion of the value of reaching agreements on various disarmament measures. Mr. McCone said we might start in the discussions at a zero assump­ tion for certain armaments, such as missiles, and work upward rather than back in terms of reductions and limitations. Mr. Foster commented that he had never liked the word “limita­ tion” for use in the terms of reference paper and perhaps another word could be found. Mr. Herter said there was always a danger that public opinion would view any technical recommendations of the experts as some­ thing that should be adopted by their governments, considering related
