756 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement Communists which specifically included the general area of Taiwan would tend to compound the seriousness of the implication of any sub­ sequent attack by them on Kinmon or Matsu. You probably have been impressed with the paucity of information in our telegrams on the issue of Chinese prisoners in Federal and State penitentiaries in this country. As you have probably gathered the sparse guidance reflects not a lack of awareness or concern, but a feeling that if we get into this subject we “open a can of worms”. We have explored the problem in a cautious way with the Federal Bureau of Prisons and the I. & N.S. We know there are at least 30 Chinese aliens in Federal penitentiaries. There is no estimate of the number in State institutions, although Judge Phleger is sure there are a lot of Chinese in San Quentin for murder and other felonies. If we enter into correspondence on this subject with all the wardens and State Governors, there is no telling where we will come out. A few of the prisoners might want to go to the Mainland, or claim that they did. It is by no means certain that pardons or paroles for deportation could readily be obtained in all cases. It could be argued that any Chinese Communist agent in this country would in effect be given immunity if he could be sure of immediate deporta­ tion to his home base after the commission of a crime in this country. The Indian Embassy would probably get into the act in a big way once we started polling Chinese prisoners. We fear that the issues would become confused, our compliance with the Agreed Announcement might become clouded, the right of the GRC to represent Chinese in this country might appear compromised, and a propaganda field day might be afforded the Communists. So all in all it seems better to play our cards close to our chest on this, relying on the fact that probably all Chinese inmates of jails have heard about the Agreed Announcement and could write to the Indian Embassy if they wanted to. We know that some prisoners on their own initiative stated they would prefer remain­ ing in prison to being sent to Communist China. If the Indians receive a request from a prisoner, we will cross that bridge when we get to it. In the meantime we are not pressing any further inquiries into the subject. We hear there are 50 known Chinese aliens in mental institutions in this country. We are keeping our fingers crossed on that. We will give you any interesting information we may receive in the course of our private checks with the I. & N.S. on the names handed you by Wang. So far the information is mostly negative. Of course in cases where there is no allegation of obstruction, we are not going beyond the information already on hand in Washington on these cases and the check is only for our own background illumination. We are enclosing a number of documents which may be of interest to you as follows: 1. Full record of O’Neill’s conversation of Jan. 11 with Chang Han-­fu.
