Arms Control and Disarmament  1575
Any agreement is bound to include certain disadvantages and 
risks. The main disadvantage, of course, is the handicap an agreement 
would impose on our ability to improve the nuclear deterrent. The 
main risk is that the Russians would find some means of evading the 
agreement, which we could not do. You and I both know how serious 
this disadvantage and this risk would be. What we have to do, it seems 
to me, is to judge and balance up whether the advantages an agreement 
might bring to us would outweigh the disadvantage and risk it would 
entail.
I will not make any attempt in this message to estimate the disad­
vantage and the risk. But I do want to tell you that I am very deeply 
impressed by the advantages which an agreement might bring us. 
I think it would do three things, each of which would be very import­
ant. It would reduce tension. It would hinder the spread of nuclear 
weapons to other countries. And it would provide a pilot scheme and a 
precedent for controls in other fields.
How much would all this be worth to us? I want to tell you that 
I myself sincerely believe it would be worth the extra risk involved in 
our accepting something less than perfect control. Perfect control is in 
any case almost impossible in theory and quite impossible in practice. It 
seems to me that if we can create a control system which involves a suffi­
cient degree of risk to a potential violator that he cannot get away unde­
tected with a violation of the armament, then we shall have done enough 
to justify our accepting the [illegible in the original] and risks involved. 
This seemed to be Foster’s view when he was with us two weeks ago.
I have the impression the Russians still want an agreement. The 
most likely explanation seems to me to be that they are concerned about 
the spread of nuclear weapons to other countries and they dislike the 
mounting cost of these nuclear programs. So do both of us; and to that 
extent we have a common interest with the Russians. Whatever be their 
motive, I feel we still have some prospect of reaching agreement with 
them, provided they drop some of their present demands and provided 
we insist only on such a degree of inspection and control as is necessary. 
While we must certainly press them to go further than they have so far 
shown themselves ready to go, I think we must remember that they 
have already come some way toward accepting foreign control, further 
indeed I think than either you or I would have expected a year ago. The 
French have a saying that the better is the enemy of the good; I think it 
applies to our present position in relation to this conference.
Do not think for one moment that I am ready to compromise on 
essentials. I agree entirely that we cannot accept the present Soviet posi­
tion under which they would retain a veto over the crucial operations 
of the control system, in particular the despatch of inspection teams. On 
this, and on the related question of a veto over findings of a violation
