Yugoslavia 957 Yugoslav finances but the action would be an important indication of our readiness to be helpful. State and AID are discussing the possibility of establishing Yugoslavia’s eligibility to compete on US-Yugoslav tenders for local service contracts overseas. Again the impact would be small but it would be a welcome gesture to the Yugoslavs. On the question of financing military sales to Yugoslavia, State and Defense agreed that there was no possible solution outside the US Foreign Military Sales program which the Yugoslavs are reluctant to use because they believe it would tarnish their non-aligned image. During the forthcoming US-Yugoslav Joint Military Committee meeting the week before the President’s arrival,4 Defense will be prepared to explain the FMS program in more detail and describe the nature of our programs with other nonaligned countries. If the question of financing of military sales comes up during the President’s visit, it was agreed that the best solution would be to recommend that the Yugoslavs reconsider their position on FMS. The Agriculture representative pointed out that the PL480 Title I program would not be available for Yugoslavia given policy and budgetary constraints. There was considerable discussion of the possibility of assisting Yugoslavia in some way to increase its exports to the US, thus closing the sizeable trade gap. It was agreed that there was little prospect of greater Yugoslav use of the Generalized System of Preferences to provide concessionary access to the US market. However, we have included language in the draft joint statement to be issued during the President’s trip pointing to the importance of expanded mutual trade. Late news received today indicates that there is greater urgency than we had assumed to help the Yugoslavs with their financial situation, and to act before the President’s visit. The Yugoslavs today announced a 30 percent devaluation and Yugoslav Ambassador Loncar told Ambassador Eagleburger in Belgrade that, as a result of a June 5 decision by the Yugoslav Government, they will ask us for an urgent swap arrangement.5 This may result from pessimistic reactions the Yugoslavs have received from US banks on their interest in new balance of payments borrowings and the “political strings” which certain Arab countries want to attach to loans they would grant Yugoslavia. 4 The U.S-Yugoslav Joint Military Commission meet in Belgrade June 17–18. The Embassy reported on the meeting in telegram 4906 from Belgrade, June 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870123–0429) 5 The Embassy reported Loncar’s meeting with Eagleburger in telegram 4516 from Belgrade, June 6. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870123–0432)
