Sources
Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II, Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs
The presidential papers of Jimmy Carter are the best source of
high-level decision making documentation on human rights and hu-
manitarian affairs from 1977 to 1980. A number of collections from the
National Security Affairs (NSA) files are relevant to research in this
area. Within the NSA files, the Brzezinski Material (especially the Sub-
ject File), Brzezinski Office File (particularly the Subject Chron File),
and Staff Material collections yield important documentation. The Staff
Material is of particular note, as it contains the files of the National Se-
curity Council’s Global Issues Cluster, which assumed responsibility
for human rights policy and related issues within the NSC. The Global
Issues files contain memoranda prepared by NSC staff members Jessica
Tuchman Mathews, Leslie Denend, Lincoln P. Bloomfield, and Gerald
Oplinger, including the Evening Reports prepared each night for Presi-
dent’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski. The
NSC Institutional Files contain records related to the issuance of Presi-
dential Directives.
The Carter Library also holds a number of other significant collec-
tions essential for research on world hunger and international health.
The Office of the Staff Secretary, President’s Handwriting File contains
copies of various memoranda associated with the establishment of the
Presidential Commission on World Hunger, including Carter’s hand-
written comments on the size and composition of the Commission. Vo-
luminous documentation on the Commission’s establishment, mem-
bership, research, and findings can be found in the records of the
Presidential Commission on World Hunger (Record Group 220). The
documents contained within the Staff Office Files, notably Director of
the Domestic Policy Staff Stuart Eizenstat’s Files and Special Assistant
for Health Issues Peter Bourne’s Files, and the White House Central
Files also help illuminate the Executive Office of the President’s role in
the world hunger and health initiatives.
The Department of State played a significant role in the develop-
ment and implementation of human rights policy. Of particular impor-
tance are the Department’s lot files for this period. The files of Secretary
of State Cyrus R. Vance do contain high-level documentation on
human rights; however, given that Vance designated responsibility for
most human rights matters to Deputy Secretary of State Warren M.
Christopher, Christopher’s files, available at the National Archives and
XI
