668
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
and asked him to agree to an early exchange of ambassadors. He
agreed with my proposal. Later your proposal was withdrawn. Sadat
then called me, and he said that it was wrong for the Israelis to have
withdrawn its proposal. Sadat said that he would not go back on his
promise to me about the ambassadors, but he had made no commit-
ment directly to Israel. Could Israel return to the idea of accelerated
withdrawal?
(Ambassador Blum enters the room at 2:30.)
Prime Minister Begin: We cannot go back on this. We do not rule it
out. We agreed to set up a mixed commission to discuss this. The gov-
ernment decided that this commitment cannot be made a priori. The
committee must decide.
President Carter: When would the mixed committee meet?
Prime Minister Begin: After the ratification of the treaty. (Lengthy
discussion in Hebrew with Ambassador Blum.)
President Carter: It might be good if you could keep this language
confidential within your Cabinet.
Prime Minister Begin: I’ll do my best.
Ambassador Evron: Do you plan to call President Sadat this
afternoon?
President Carter: I won’t tell him about this on the phone. I’ll just
tell him that we made some progress.
Prime Minister Begin: We still have the problem of oil.
President Carter: The Egyptian position is that when other issues
have been concluded, they will be forthcoming on this. I have talked to
Sadat. We can guarantee your supply of oil. With our guarantee and
with Sadat’s willingness to sell you oil, we can reach an agreement. If
the oil must come from the Sinai wells, I am not sure that Sadat will
agree.
Prime Minister Begin: We know of your 1975 commitment.6 It could
raise psychological problems in the United States. We want other inde-
pendent solutions. We have several sources. We don’t want to have to
invoke the U.S. commitment, but we may have to in the future. We
need oil to safeguard our lives. We only need 2.5 million tons. Egypt
doesn’t need the oil.
President Carter: There may be more problems in Egypt on this than
in the United States. Our country is deeply committed to Israel. We
don’t expect it would cause any problems for us to supply you with oil.
Prime Minister Begin: We need an iron-clad guarantee from that
source.
6 See footnote 20, Document 190.
