272 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I We believe that larger and more effective foreign assistance programs—bilateral and multilateral—are in the U.S. national interest and in the interest of global development. So year by year, it is increasingly important to convince the Congress and the public that devoting resources to the fight against poverty abroad is tied to the ultimate health of our economy here at home. The Administration consequently faces the challenge of demonstrating to American citizens that foreign assistance works—that it can, together with other policies, make a difference in the global food, energy, or population balance and that it can, by mobilizing the assistance of other donors and encouraging sound domestic policies on the part of recipients, stimulate growth and equity. Let me say another word about our approach to foreign assistance. Our focus on meeting basic human needs, which is an integral part of our overall human rights policy, is not as simple as it may appear. We face at least two basic challenges here. • In some cases, we face a dilemma when we consider foreign assistance for countries where political and economic human rights are denied. Our assistance is targeted on improving the economic conditions of poor people. Since aid is generally government-to-government, the regime concerned inevitably derives some political boost from our assistance. But we do not want to deprive poor people because of the nature of their government. In such cases, our decisions must be made on a pragmatic, case-by-case basis and very human terms. • In addition, meeting basic human needs is not, in our view, a welfare program but a way for a country and a society to develop. Accordingly, we will encourage host governments to make an increasing commitment of their own to the needs of their poor, at the same time as we increase our aid to them. Many developing countries faced with balance-of-payments problems, high energy prices, and the need for massive domestic investment, may resist placing a priority emphasis on the well-being of their poor. Because the poor are often excluded from the political process, their concerns are given less weight by governing elites. If we place conditions on our aid, these elites could charge us with attempting to intervene in their internal affairs. Our challenge is to be sensitive to their concerns, while promoting our views and our commitment to the poor. A second dilemma which underlies our North-South efforts is the need both to maintain a cooperative multilateral political environment for discussing economic issues while expressing our differences over what are the soundest and most effective economic policies that can serve our common longterm interests. I can think of two cases where this issue has arisen. In the area of commodity policy, the developing nations have proposed the negotia-
