24
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
For these reasons, the United States should continue its basic
policy to take all feasible steps to assure that Iran does not fall victim to
communist control.
2. Because of United States commitments in other areas, the cur-
rent understanding with the United Kingdom that it is responsible for
the initiative in military support of Iran should be continued. The vul-
nerability of Iran, particularly the northern part, and the paucity of the
military resources available make it desirable that the United States
and the United Kingdom jointly give early consideration to measures
designed to strengthen the general area in order to give Iran support in
depth.
3. Present conditions in Iran as well as Soviet threats to that
country require that the United States further strengthen its programs
in Iran in support of its basic policy. Accordingly, the United States
should:
a. Continue to extend political support and military aid and accel-
erate economic aid as much as possible in order to (1) increase internal
security in Iran, (2) strengthen the Iranian Government and people in
their resistance to communist pressures, (3) bring them into closer asso-
ciation with the free world, and (4) demonstrate the intention of the
United States to assist the Iranians to remain independent.
b. Press the United Kingdom to effect an early and equitable settle-
ment of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company dispute.
4. In the event an Iranian Government, despite the foregoing
United States measures, should take steps leading toward communist
control in Iran and capitulation to the USSR, the United States should
be prepared to undertake special political operations to reverse the
trend and to effect Iranian alignment with the free world.
5. The United States should now make plans and preparations in
conjunction with the United Kingdom to counter possible communist
subversion in Iran and to increase support of the pro-Western Iranian
Government in the event of either a communist seizure of power in one
or more of the provinces or a communist seizure of the central gov-
ernment. Such plans and preparations should envisage political and
economic support, including:
a. Correlated political action by the United States and the United
Kingdom.
b. Conduct of special political operations by the United States and
the United Kingdom.
c. Efforts to induce nearby countries such as Turkey and Pakistan
to assist the legal Iranian Government.
d. As desirable, consultation with selected countries to attain sup-
port for the United States position.
