334  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
consulted three of the committee of ladies who had organized and were 
running the cafeterias, and that they had flatly refused to abolish the 10 
centavo charge. They had informed him that they would rather close the 
cafeterias than do this. The cafeterias were organized as a social project 
rather than as a charity. Under present conditions many self-­respecting 
families were simply unable to get the food which they needed. They did 
not want charity but if they could get food for a nominal charge it sup-
plied a vital need for them. If, on the other hand, the cafeterias were freely 
opened to all comers, the self-­respecting element would be driven out, and 
the cafeterias would be taken over by beggars and paupers. So far as the 
committee was concerned, pure charity work was in the hands of the par-
ish priests and they did not wish to invade this field. The Foreign Minister 
pointed out that “limosna” had a derogatory meaning in Colombia. It 
really was essential in each country to take that country’s idiosyncrasies 
into account. We should not insist on rigid rules on a world-­wide basis.
The Foreign Minister then proposed that signs be posted in the 
cafeteria, spelling out that the milk and flour were given by the United 
States, and he said that it could even be spelled out that the total cost 
of the meals was, say, 40 centavos, of which so much was given by the 
United States, so much by the Coffee Federation, and so much paid by 
the 10 centavo charge. I said that the Department of Agriculture had 
rejected this formula when I proposed it and insisted that no charge 
could be made in connection with food given by the United States. I 
said that I did not see how the position of the ladies’ committee and 
the Department of Agriculture could be reconciled, but I felt a formula 
must be found. I was sure that he agreed with me that if it were not, a 
grave social crisis would result. He said that this was true, but I did not 
get the impression that he was as concerned as I was. (I do not believe 
that the upper classes in Colombia fully appreciate how close Colombia 
is to social revolution. They talk much of this with their lips but I doubt 
that they really feel it in their hearts).
The Foreign Minister then said he wanted to discuss with me 
threats to the public order and that he would be as frank as he had 
always been. He had received a series of messages which indicated that 
a vast plot was being organized to overthrow the governments of var-
ious American republics and establish dictatorships. (He skipped from 
one point to another and the following is therefore a synthesis rather 
than a direct account of what he said).
With regard to Colombia there were indications that Rojas Pinilla 
was again planning to return. The Foreign Minister referred to the let-
ter which Rojas Pinilla had written to the armed forces.4 He said that 
4 No copy of the letter described here was found in Department of State files.
