1070 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III United States Objectives Our objectives for the global negotiations are twofold: 1) to prevent them from undermining the effectiveness of the international system which in general has served the world well for the past thirty years, and 2) to strengthen the system by adapting it to the evolving needs of a larger and more interdependent global economic order. Regarding the first point, we want to prevent: —global negotiations from weakening existing international institutions such as the IMF, the GATT, or the multilateral development banks; —a deterioration of the political atmosphere surrounding the preparatory phase and global negotiations which damages other U.S. multilateral, regional, and bilateral interests; and —global negotiations from being seen as an automatic court of last resort for the resolution of difficult issues under negotiation elsewhere (this could either freeze constructive negotiations or put more pressure on the U.S. to make concessions). Despite the difficulties apparent in the economic setting and the expected characteristics of the forum, we will try to structure the global negotiations so that they can contribute to the resolution of major economic problems facing the international community in the 1980’s: —an increasing dependence on high priced and potentially unstable supplies of imported energy, —a growing potential food shortage, and —an expanding number of balance of payments problems associated with increasing import costs and declining growth in export earnings. We are under no illusion that global negotiations can by themselves solve these problems. Moreover, we recognize that unless the major participants can agree to establish priorities or focus on a few subjects, the outcome will be less productive than CIEC or the COW. But there is a chance—and we will strive to realize it—that we can use the global negotiations to: 1. increase pressure on the oil exporting nations to follow more responsible pricing and production policies, on the consuming countries to enhance conservation efforts and accelerate the development of new energy, and on the world community to increase funding of energy development; 2. stimulate greater domestic and international efforts to increase food production, improve food distribution, and strengthen international food security; 3. increase understanding of the urgent need to reduce protectionist barriers in all countries, LDCs as well as DCs; and, 4. examine the measures necessary to sustain reasonable levels of economic growth in countries faced with balance of payments deficits, especially the very poor countries.
