1108 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II countries, employment of third country nationals for water projects, procurement of materials in third countries, increased co-financing of aid projects by the U.S. and middle income countries to be carried out in third countries, and the use of U.S. owned local currencies to fund TCDC projects. The Congress has passed legislation which calls for the establishment of a new Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation.5 When funded this Institute plans to undertake programs of research, training and institution building in a variety of development areas, including water resources management, agriculture and environmental planning. In order to increase U.S. effectiveness in assisting developing countries to develop their water supply and sanitation facilities, new approaches must be formulated, tested, evaluated, and improved. Coordination and cooperation among multilateral and bilateral agencies, non-governmental organizations and technical cooperation among the developing countries themselves can help greatly in this process. In addition to AID, other U.S. agencies carry out activities which can support the objectives of the Decade. These include: technical assistance for assessments, program planning and project development; manpower development at all levels; institutional infrastructure development; financing of materials, equipment and services; research on implementation and evaluation methodology; collection, evaluation, selection and dissemination of technical information; and impact studies on the relationship between water, sanitation and health. The United States believes that developing countries participating in the Water Decade have an excellent opportunity to improve greatly the dental health of their populations by incorporating fluoridation capability in their new water systems. The U.S. will assist governments desiring this improvement to include it in community water supply projects. On the basis of the best available data, which are unavoidably sketchy, the UN estimates that providing a billion rural people with “safe” water and improved sanitation will cost at least $44 billion (1977 prices). Of this, about two-thirds would be provided by the developing countries themselves, while the remaining one-third would come from external sources. The U.S., through its contribution to multilateral agencies, through its own bilateral activities and those of private organizations, plans substantial support for water and sanitation projects over the Decade,
