894
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
this time. Progress will be paced by intelligence production, but is also
dependent on procurement and training. It is believed that launch
bases can be obtained, given approval to seek the necessary authority.
Force proficiency must be maintained and improved or a substantial
delay in mission execution will occur should it be ordered. Currently
it is believed that the mission could be executed within three weeks
given the requisite intelligence. Although compromise of the mission
through continued training and procurement activity is possible, there
is no known disabling compromise to date.
The JTF staff of 32 personnel is inadequate to handle a number of
administrative tasks such as budgeting, since operational functions
must have the priority. Should additional administrative requirements
be levied, an augmentation of both personnel and working space would
be required. The current relationship with the CIA is unsatisfactory but
a practical solution has been reached to support the mission. Currently,
SNOWBIRD IX, the LOH option, is considered to be the most probable
and is thus being used as a model for force structure and equipment
decisions. Option X, designed for multiple, dispersed targets may be
more appropriate and is currently under consideration as a model.
[Omitted here is material on JTF achievements and CTJTF.]
In the final analysis, it must be concluded that the United States
is ill-prepared to conduct any sort of Special Operation. The Army has
subjected its Special Operations forces to a 70% reduction from their
pre-Vietnam level. A further cut of 10% is forecasted for FY 81. The
Air Force has cut its Special Operations forces by 75% during the same
period. CIA apparently stands without either the Special Operations
personnel or funds to support sizeable clandestine, military endeavors.
Currently, almost any unprogrammed CIA action activity has to be
approved by seven committees of Congress. Special Operations has
been an unhealed casualty of the Vietnam war. The events of the last
year have clearly indicated that immediate remedial action is essential.
The JTF has accomplished much but the continued lack of an adequate
national Special Operations capability may well plague the United
States in the future.
10. (TS) Recommendations: (See Inclosure 15). It is recommended that
the JTF be provided with $34.3 million to fund SNOWBIRD activities
through 30 Sep 80. It is also requested that JCS press the intelligence
community to use all available resources to fulfill outstanding SNOW-
BIRD requirements. In order to secure authority and essential informa-
tion concerning a launch base, it is recommended that the JCS approve
a JTF approach to the [2 lines not declassified]. It is further recommended
that the JTF be dissolved between 1 and 15 November and the SNOW-
BIRD mission passed to the CTJTF. In order to capture experience and
properly brief the new commander and staff, it is recommended that
