296 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Gorbachev a 70-­percent chance of staying in power over the next three years. These are not especially good odds. However, even if he does survive, the mounting economic, ethnic and political problems he faces may so constrain his power in the future that he cannot deliver the hard decisions START requires. He could also come to the conclusion that this administration is not particularly interested in completing START and turn his attention elsewhere. A further point is that a failure of START could itself be an important factor in Gorbachev’s downfall, since he has invested a great deal of his personal prestige in this negotiation, almost certainly over the objections of important segments of Soviet society. Looking Toward the Ministerial 7. Rick has discussed possible ideas for the September meeting with Nazarkin (memcon-XI-M-059, Geneva 6780).2 Several issues seem ripe for resolution. — Heavy bombers/ALCMs One side or the other needs finally to make a package proposal and get us over the hump on this. It should involve an ALCM counting rule which would allow us a modest discount, but not the open-­ended 100-­percent or more discount in our current position. This would be coupled with an ALCM range threshold in the range 600–1000 km. There is a linkage here such that a more permissive counting rule is likely to be accompanied by a more restrictive (lower) range, and vice versa. My perspective is that the counting rule is more important to us and the range is more important to the soviets, which does suggest a trade-­off. There have been mixed signals from the Soviets on what they will accept. The formal Soviet position is apparently still “as equipped.” However, I believe we can do better. Roslyakov has been more reasonable with me on this (memcon-XI-M-038, Geneva 6300)3 than Nazarkin has been with Rick, but even Nazarkin said there might be “more information” on the Soviet ALCM position, if the U.S. shows a “more forthcoming response” to their ideas. The point is that they now agree that the ALCM counting rule should be “negotiated numbers.” We should pocket this and start exploring what numbers they could accept, coupled, of course, with a compromise on the range problem. The latter remains very important to them and 600 km might buy us a lot on the counting rules. In the package solution, we should also clean up the issues of non-­deployed ALCMs, non-­deployed heavy bombers, 2 Reference is to telegram 6780 from NST Geneva, August 1, 1989 (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D890658–0530) 3 Reference is to telegram 6300 from NST Geneva, July 18, 1989 (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D890615–0838)
