(c) reside for three months immediately preceding
registration in the sub-delegation in which they are
resident at the time of registration; and
(d) make an affidavit as to residence in a form, to be
prescribed by the Plebiscitary Commission hereafter
described.
3. Foreigners, i. e., persons who are neither Chileans nor Peruvians,
who are eligible for naturalization in either Chile or Peru and who
fulfill the qualifications described in subdivisions a, b, c and d,
under paragraph A-2, and who, in addition, make affidavit in a
form prescribed by the Plebiscitary Commission of their intention
to apply at once for naturalization in the State winning the
plebiscite.
B. 1. Provided, however, that no person shall be denied the right to vote at
the plebiscite solely because of inability to read and write who on July 20,
1922, and continuously from that date until the date when he applies for
registration was the owner of real property in said territory.
2. Provided, further, that no person shall acquire a vote through residence in
said territory under the provisions of paragraphs A-2 and 3 if during any part
of such required period of residence he has been a member in any capacity of
the army, navy, carbineers, government police, secret service, or gendarmerie
of either Chile or Peru, or has received compensation as such; or has been a
government official or civil employee in the political, judicial or fiscal
service of either country, or has received compensation as such.
3. Provided, further, that military persons of all ranks and civil employees of
every degree of both governments who were born in said territory shall be
given the opportunity to return to their native place both to register and vote
in the plebiscite.
4. Provided, further, (a) that no person serving a term of imprisonment after
sentence for a non-political offense involving moral turpitude or (b) under
guardianship, non compos mentis or insane, shall be allowed to register or
vote.
The Governments of Chile and Peru shall facilitate the entry into Tacna and Arica and
the transit through Chile and Peru respectively for that purpose of any person claiming
to be entitled to vote at the plebiscite, and the Plebiscitary Commission shall be
competent to receive claims based on alleged violations of the foregoing provision and
to decide as to the validity of such claims and the right of such persons to vote.
