1476 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 391. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, November 17, 1958 SUBJECT Geneva Nuclear Test Negotiations PARTICIPANTS Senator Albert Gore, Member, Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy The Secretary William B. Macomber, Assistant Secretary—Congressional Relations Philip J. Farley, Special Assistant for Disarmament and Atomic Energy The Secretary said that the President had been greatly interested in this discussion with Senator Gore and had suggested that the Secretary talk with the Senator. Senator Gore outlined his reactions to the negotiations on nuclear test suspension under way at Geneva and his proposal for a U.S. statement calling for agreement on cessation of atmospheric tests and announcing a unilateral three-year U.S. suspension on such tests regardless of the Soviet position. Senator Gore said that he did not think there was much prospect of success in the Geneva negotiations and the move he was proposing would be highly effective since it would offer the prospect of an end to the “anti-­social” fallout effects from atmospheric tests. The Secretary said that Senator Gore’s proposal was very similar to what was being considered as a possible course of action in event the Geneva talks break down. He stressed the importance of a U.S. position, both in pressing the present negotiations and in any unilateral steps which might be taken in the event of a deadlock, which would show the moral and political soundness of the U.S. approach to nuclear test­ ing. The present negotiations with the Russians was in many respects a “poker game” in which we would not want to show our hand too soon. Instead we wanted to expose the real attitude of the Russians toward acceptance of commitments for inspection and control. Senator Gore spoke favorably of the performance of Ambassador Wadsworth and the U.S. Delegation. 1 Source: Gore proposal on atmospheric testing. Confidential. 1 p. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/11–1758.
