Eastern Europe Region imprisonment and torture, also violate the spirit, and frequently the letter, of the Helsinki accords. F. Generate publicity on the key human rights issues in other East European countries. In Czechoslovakia, for example, focus on the Charter 77 manifesto and the official reprisals against its authors. Polish workers who demonstrated against the June announcement of price increases have been fired and some arrested; some of their defenders, members of the Workers Defense League, have subsequently lost their jobs. The German Democratic Republic continues obstructing reunions of families separated by the East/West border; recently East Berlin imposed exile on dissident balladeer Wolf Biermann. According to recent reports, the health of veteran critic of the Yugoslav regime, Mihajlo Mihajlov, imprisoned under particularly harsh conditions, is deteriorating rapidly. G. Encourage CP contacts, where feasible, to view objectively human rights violations in the Soviet bloc. Several West European parties have already demonstrated varying degrees of independence from the CPSU. In 1976 they reacted sharply to Plyushch’s account of psychiatric abuse and to films of Soviet labor camps. More recently they denounced Prague’s reprisals against the Charter 77 group. H. Appeal to local and international professional and religious organizations to speak out on behalf of persecuted colleagues in the USSR and Eastern Europe: authors, artists, engineers, historians, clergy, etc. Where feasible, urge these groups to promote professional contacts with their Eastern colleagues. I. Persuade agents of influence and liaison contacts that their governments could make a contribution to human rights everywhere by speaking out on behalf of dissidents—especially those governments with strong socialist credentials or those which have protested human rights violations in non-socialist countries. Stress the importance of many voices, representing differing systems, working to influence Soviet and Eastern European leaders in a matter of international concern.
