862
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
263.
Preliminary Report of the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger1
Washington, December 1979
[Omitted here are the table of contents, introduction, and preface.]
SECTION I
THE ROLE OF THE UNITED STATES:
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
A. Why Should the United States Be Concerned?
The major recommendation of the Presidential Commission on
World Hunger is that the United States make the elimination of hunger
the primary focus of its relations with the developing world—with all
that implies for U.S. policy toward development assistance, trade, for-
eign investment and foreign affairs. In the Commission’s view, there
are significant reasons for the United States to place the elimination of
hunger at the top of its list of global concerns.
1. Moral Obligation and Responsibility
Moral obligation alone would justify giving highest priority to the
task of overcoming hunger. Even now, millions of human beings live
on the edge of starvation—in conditions of subhuman poverty that, if
we think about them at all, must fill us with shame and horror. We see
this now most poignantly in Cambodia,2 but it is a fact of life every day
for half a billion people. At least one out of every eight men, women
1 Source: Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Sub-
ject File, 1978–1980, Box 16, Status Report of the Commission [2]. No classification
marking. Under a December 7 covering note, Owen sent Brzezinski an agenda for the
Commission’s December 10 meeting with the President, talking points, Linowitz’s De-
cember 6 cover letter to the President transmitting the report, and a copy of the report.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 93, Food: 1979–1980) According to the President’s Daily Diary,
Carter met with members of the Commission in the Cabinet Room on December 10 from
11:46 a.m. to 12:15 p.m. in order to receive a copy of the preliminary report. (Carter Li-
brary, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) Upon receiving it, the President
stated, “This is an opportunity for our nation to embark upon an exciting, challenging ef-
fort to alleviate world hunger. It is obvious that our nation is better off if hunger can be
eliminated in nations not as fortunate as we.” (Thomas O’Toole, “Major U.S. Role Urged
to End World Hunger,” The Washington Post, December 11, 1979, p. A–1) No memo-
randum of conversation of this meeting was found. In the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s
December 10 evening report, Bloomfield commented, “Attended presentation to Presi-
dent of Report and subsequent press conference. The acting co-chairmen (Jean Mayer
and Steve Muller) took me aside to plead that food not be used as a weapon in Iran.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/
Bloomfield Subject File, Box 37, Evening Reports: 9–12/79)
2 See Document 261 and footnote 2 thereto.
