846 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 258. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Cooper)1 Washington, undated SUBJECT U.S. Food Policy Objectives and Activities Policy Objectives Since the 1974 World Food Conference, U.S. food initiatives have been directed toward the broad goal of world food security. The world food crisis of the early 1970’s demonstrated the need for actions to ensure adequate food supplies in the event of major crop shortfalls, either locally or globally. In 1975 the FAO estimated a food deficit of more than 20 million tons in the developing countries and that 455 million people suffered from malnutrition. For the 1990’s LDC food deficits have been projected at over 100 million tons and the number of people affected by hunger and malnutrition at one billion. U.S. efforts to enhance world food security have three objectives: 1. improving food production in the developing countries; 2. introducing stability in wheat supplies through nationally-held reserves in developed and developing countries; 3. providing food aid to meet immediate food needs of developing countries. U.S. Activities and Programs 1. Food Production The U.S. has accepted the World Food Conference target of 4% growth of food output in those countries with the highest incidence of hunger and malnutrition. U.S. activities directed at that end include: a) Bilateral assistance. Roughly half (about $600 million in FY 79) of AID’s development assistance budget is allocated to food and agriculture projects emphasizing the rural poor. b) Food losses. AID-supported programs to help eliminate food losses from inefficient harvesting practices and poorly maintained 1 Source: Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Subject File, 1978–1980, Box 14, Food Production. No classification marking. Drafted by Kolar on July 26; cleared by Michael Calingaert (EB/ORF); Hart; Dane F. Smith Jr. (EB/OFP/ FPD); and Parsons. Katz did not initial the memorandum.
