1642 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement PARTICIPANTS Department of State G—Mr. Murphy EUR—Mr. Kohler S/AE—Mr. Farley Mr. Baker Mr. Morris S/S—Mr. Berg The White House Mr. Gray Dr. Killian Mr. Beckler Department of Defense Mr. Quarles General Fox Atomic Energy Commission Mr. McCone Mr. Gardner Central Intelligence Agency Mr. Dulles Dr. Scoville In Mr. Herter’s absence Mr. Farley explained that during the course of consultations with the U.K. last week regarding the phased approach to a test cessation agreement presented by Amb. Wadsworth in Geneva on Monday, Prime Minister Macmillan had proposed to President Eisenhower that we supplement our proposal for a first step inspected agreement on the cessation of atmospheric tests by offering a unilateral moratorium on testing underground and in outer space for a finite period while further negotiations on extension of the agreement to these areas are in progress. The State Department felt that such a move at this time would not be wise from a negotiating point of view and Mr. Herter had so recommended to the President. The President accepted Mr. Herter’s recommendation but noted agreement with Prime Minister Macmillan that such a course of action might have to be reconsidered at some point. The President had therefore directed that the British proposal receive urgent and objective consideration within the US Government. Mr. Farley said that staff personnel of the agencies concerned had attempted to identify the considerations bearing on this question as reflected in the paper which had been distributed to each of the princi­ pals as a guide for this morning’s discussion. Mr. Quarles said that, speaking for the Department of Defense, he found the considerations outlined in the staff paper appropriate but felt that the conclusions reflected an overly sympathetic attitude toward the British proposal. Mr. McCone said that the AEC would have consid­ erable concern about any such proposal which would stop our testing underground or in outer space in the absence of adequate assurance that the Soviet Union was likewise refraining from such tests. He explained that the effect on the weapons laboratories of any temporary one or two-­ year suspension of nuclear tests would be quite far-reaching. Whereas if a permanent cessation of tests came into effect, new missions could be assigned and the staffs could be reorganized, temporary cessation would make such reorganization extremely difficult. It would be almost impossible to retain the teams presently working together at the labora­ tories in the absence of firm goals for their work. Once these groups had dispersed it would be extremely difficult to reassemble them. Mr. McCone noted that the proposed Humphrey-Fulbright joint resolution concerning the negotiations had been discussed at an
