Yugoslavia
977
The President said that when he returned to Washington he would
meet with Secretary Miller and ask him to pursue the question of
credits with Rockefeller and other bankers. He understood that one of
the problems had been a lack of dealing with the Central Bank, and
that Mr. Rockefeller would be sending one of his bankers to Belgrade
very soon. The President offered to do anything he could within the
bounds of US laws and customs to give the Yugoslavs assistance in
this matter. He asked if it would be helpful if he talked to Chancellor
Schmidt privately, and other European banks, or whether the Yugo-
slavs would prefer to handle this themselves. (C)
Mr. Djuranovic replied that Yugoslavs had already talked to the
Federal Republic, particularly to its finance minister. He himself would
be visiting the FRG soon and would appreciate US help in this mat-
ter. (C)
The President then asked whether the Yugoslavs had any contact
with British and French banks. He offered to suggest to them that
they participate in any consortium if the Yugoslavs felt this would be
appropriate. He stressed this would be done on a confidential basis.
In this connection he stated that the United States regarded Yugoslavia
as a sound investment for the banks. Despite current difficulties the
US believed that Yugoslavia’s economic system was basically sound,
and that the banks would respond favorably. (C)
Mr. Djuranovic said that he would like to say some things frankly
and openly. He had the feeling that the banks needed more time in
order to gain confidence in Yugoslavia. The President’s visit had been
helpful in this regard. The Yugoslavs intended to continue with their
stabilization program, but the banks still had some reservations. He
noted, in this regard, that the Yugoslavs had already had contacts with
the French and British bankers and the response had been favorable. (C)
The President said it would be helpful to have Rockefeller’s financial
expert come to Belgrade and see the strength of the Yugoslav economy.
This would help to influence a positive response. (C)
Mr. Cooper added that all countries had problems with the increase
of the price of oil. He stressed that these countries had to break the link
between economic growth and dependence on oil. This was particularly
true for small and medium countries. (C)
The President noted that at Venice the countries represented had
discussed the reduction of the import of oil through conservation meas-
ures. The U.S., for instance, had reduced the import of oil in the first
six months by thirteen and a half percent and it would increase its
effort to save energy in every possible way. He offered to share any
U.S. experience and scientific developments to conserve energy. Some
countries, he noted, import as much oil as their exports. These countries
were in much worse condition than the U.S. or Yugoslavia. The problem
