Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX gether with the other texts which we worked out yesterday3 and today4 with the Prime Minister, we now have U.S.-Egyptian agreement on a package which is along the lines of the one we hoped for and which will enable us to demonstrate in Israel that Sadat has shown considerable flexibility. 2. Sadat’s advisors fought the Article VI question to the very end, arguing that we should insist on an interpretive note that would be annexed to the treaty, therefore requiring Israeli concurrence. In overruling his advisors, Sadat stressed to me that he was doing so in order to create a “package deal” that would have to be put to the Israelis on a this-is-as-far-as-I-can go basis. He said candidly that the Egyptian concern was that the Israelis would put his concession on Article VI in their pocket and then bargain for further concessions on the other issues, by which he means primarily the approach we have worked out on the West Bank/Gaza side letter and exchange of ambassadors issue. Sadat said, “I must make it clear Cy, this is a final position and there is no room for further compromise.” 3. After Sadat made this decision, Khalil asked what we would do if the Israelis refused the package. Before I could answer, Sadat commented he was prepared to wait “a month or two” if necessary to get Israeli agreement. Addressing the Prime Minister, Sadat said the important thing was that he would be fighting “this last round” with the U.S. at his side. He said it had taken us nine months to get Begin to 3 On December 11, Vance met with Khalil, Ali, Boutros Ghali, and al-Baz to go over the formulations of the linkage letter, and the interpretive notes to Articles IV and VI. Summarizing the meeting, Vance noted: “In general, I believe the Egyptians were impressed by our concept, which I discussed with President Sadat last night, of linking the exchange of ambassadors to inauguration of the self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza. They seem to have made a constructive effort overnight to solve a number of points, and although we still have a problem on Article VI, I feel we are in a good position to take things up in Israel having demonstrated that some definite progress has been made here.” (Telegram Secto 14033 from Jerusalem, December 12; National Ar-
