546
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
gether with the other texts which we worked out yesterday3 and today4
with the Prime Minister, we now have U.S.-Egyptian agreement on a
package which is along the lines of the one we hoped for and which
will enable us to demonstrate in Israel that Sadat has shown consider-
able flexibility.
2. Sadat’s advisors fought the Article VI question to the very end,
arguing that we should insist on an interpretive note that would be an-
nexed to the treaty, therefore requiring Israeli concurrence. In over-
ruling his advisors, Sadat stressed to me that he was doing so in order
to create a “package deal” that would have to be put to the Israelis on a
this-is-as-far-as-I-can go basis. He said candidly that the Egyptian con-
cern was that the Israelis would put his concession on Article VI in their
pocket and then bargain for further concessions on the other issues, by
which he means primarily the approach we have worked out on the
West Bank/Gaza side letter and exchange of ambassadors issue. Sadat
said, “I must make it clear Cy, this is a final position and there is no
room for further compromise.”
3. After Sadat made this decision, Khalil asked what we would do
if the Israelis refused the package. Before I could answer, Sadat com-
mented he was prepared to wait “a month or two” if necessary to get
Israeli agreement. Addressing the Prime Minister, Sadat said the im-
portant thing was that he would be fighting “this last round” with the
U.S. at his side. He said it had taken us nine months to get Begin to
3 On December 11, Vance met with Khalil, Ali, Boutros Ghali, and al-Baz to go over
the formulations of the linkage letter, and the interpretive notes to Articles IV and VI.
Summarizing the meeting, Vance noted: “In general, I believe the Egyptians were im-
pressed by our concept, which I discussed with President Sadat last night, of linking the
exchange of ambassadors to inauguration of the self-governing authority in the West
Bank and Gaza. They seem to have made a constructive effort overnight to solve a
number of points, and although we still have a problem on Article VI, I feel we are in a
good position to take things up in Israel having demonstrated that some definite progress
has been made here.” (Telegram Secto 14033 from Jerusalem, December 12; National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840153–1494) The texts of the revised set of
documents resulting from this meeting were sent by Vance to Washington on December
11. (Telegram Secto 14030 from Jerusalem, December 11; National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, P840153–1502) Vance met with Sadat later in the afternoon of De-
cember 11. On the discussion, Vance reported: “The tone of the meeting was character-
ized by Sadat’s comment at one point as he brushed an el-Baz comment aside: ‘I don’t
want to make things more difficult for my friend, Cy.’” (Telegram Secto 14032 from
Jerusalem, December 12; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
P840153–1500)
4 The textual changes to the treaty documents agreed in this meeting were compiled
and sent by Vance to the Department and the White House in telegram Secto 14042 from
Cairo, December 12. A copy of this telegram, bearing Carter’s handwritten comments ap-
proving the agreed changes, is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Ma-
terial, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 72, Middle East: Box 3. Another facsimile
version of this document package, bearing a handwritten notation indicating its accept-
ance by Sadat on December 12, is in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat
Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 5, Middle East—
Reading—December, 1978.
