318
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
145.
Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency (Sloss) to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, February 11, 1977
SUBJECT
Nuclear Test Cessation and PNEs
This Agency believes there are serious risks in attempting to ac-
commodate “peaceful nuclear explosions” under a comprehensive test
ban treaty. The purpose of this early warning is simply to prevent fur-
ther steps that could be construed as prejudging the issue before it has
been thoroughly examined and Soviet positions tested in negotiations.
Such an accommodation—which may well not prove necessary to
achieving Soviet agreement on a CTB—would introduce a major short-
coming in the treaty, provide the USSR with an important military
asset, weaken the Limited Test Ban Treaty, and do incalculable harm to
our non-proliferation efforts. Early encouragement of a Soviet impres-
sion that the US may already be persuaded that a PNE allowance in a
CTB is necessary and tolerable could quickly grow into a serious im-
pediment to negotiation with the USSR of an advantageous agreement.
We offer the following points for your consideration:
SEPARATION OF PNEs FROM WEAPON TESTS
(1) Both the US and the USSR have acknowledged that the tech-
nology of nuclear explosive devices for peaceful purposes is indistin-
guishable from that of nuclear explosive devices for weapon purposes.
(2) Point (1) is the central difficulty of the “PNE verification
problem.” No techniques have been devised to verify that a nuclear ex-
plosion in a PNE project is not also a weapon test simply because there
are no meaningful criteria on which to base the distinction. This in-
trinsic difficulty cannot be eased by international arrangements for “in-
spection” or other procedures.
(3) Criteria to govern PNEs in ways that do not substantially com-
promise the objectives of an agreement limiting a weapon test can be
devised if, and only if: (a) the constraints to be imposed on weapon ac-
tivities are less than complete, and (b) the weapon benefits available
under the permissive PNE regime do not extend substantially beyond
those permitted in the weapon test regime.
1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–80–0017, Box
63, A–400.112 Test Ban (Jan–July) 1977. Secret. Copies were sent to Vance, Harold Brown,
Fri, and Turner.
