3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 767 people here in town” he said, are beginning to have doubts about the prospects. 4. We talked about perceptions and throughout the luncheon there was an interesting theme expressed again and again by Arbatov, which I shall characterize by a few examples. In response to Arbatov’s mention of Soviet concern about our increasing conventional weapons budget, I mentioned the inexorable increase of Soviet weapons budgets year in and year out. Arbatov said even if you added all of the budgets of the Warsaw Pact countries and his own, the amount of expenditure actually made was less than that made by NATO and the US. This seems like a doubtful statement to me, but he made it. In speaking of the SS–20/Pershing II situation, he mentioned that for years the Soviet Union was on the receiving end of superior weapons deployed by NATO countries and that it was only with the deployment of the SS–20 that this inequity was being attended to. He stressed, however, that with the deployment of the Pershing II, all of the Soviet western cities were for the first time at risk from our missiles based in Europe. He, like most Soviets who argue this point, seem to forget that Western European capitals have for a long time been under the threat of USSR medium range missiles. But the fact that this is a new situation for his western cities is indisputable. He mentioned that U.S. forward based systems could reach his western cities but the warning time was relatively long, whereas the warning time on the Pershing II’s would be extremely short relative to the warning of strategic missiles from the U.S. All Soviets that I have talked with absolutely forget Western capitals when they begin this argument. He also mentioned his concern about cruise missiles and the FRG which is not a new idea. 5. On Afghanistan, I made very strongly the argument that the Soviet press was blaming the whole problem upon the US upsetting the internal situation in Afghanistan and that we had specifically stated that we had not been interfering and had done so many times, most recently in President Carter’s letter to Tito, from which I quoted. Arbatov’s answer to this was, “I am not disputing your word, but perhaps the Agency has been misinforming the State Department.” He said his government was convinced that the US is in fact training and sending in Afghans from Pakistan to disrupt the internal situation. He said that about three million Afghanis moved back and forth between Pakistan and Afghanistan seasonally with their flocks and that the infiltration of 200,000 armed Afghans would be relatively simple to be hidden in this migration—though he added that he had no information that this was actually happening. 6. While he stressed the role of outside interference, by the US and also by China and Pakistan, Arbatov discussed the internal situation in Afghanistan as well as a reason for the Soviet action. He said the So-
