changed by a result of yesterday’s revelations, will notify you that Chile
insists upon going on with the plebiscite. The Under Secretary said there
was no objection to immediate publication my note in American papers, but
they would like to keep it out of Argentine and Chilean papers for a couple
of days. The more he laid stress upon this, the more I felt that the note
should be published and published without delay. I declined to comply with
his request that I write and telegraph to the papers withdrawing the note
from publicity. I told him that, in view of the campaign of abuse against the
United States which so far the Ministry had made little effort to stop, I
thought the note should be published at once. I said there had been five
memorandums including this one with regard to good offices; and that,
without previously asking the consent of the Government of the United
States, the Chilean Foreign Office on March 27 gave publicity to your
memorandum of February 16 and to their answer, and you thereupon
published the memorandums exchanged a month or so later and that
therefore there was no violation of confidence or irregularity in publishing
the Chilean memorandum of October 27th which virtually started the
matter. On the contrary one memorandum having been published, ordinarily
all relating to the same matter should be published. I also said that the note
that I had given out could in no way embarrass the present Minister of
Foreign Affairs nor the actual President. For your information I think it will
help them to swing back to their original positions in favor of good offices
from which they have both drifted with the popular tide. I understand that
the Government got the local papers to hold off publication until it could try
to persuade me to withdraw it. I refused to do so saying that it would be
construed as cowardice or possibly a frustrated attempt at misrepresentation
or a diplomatic irregularity and I would not make any such admissions. The
article therefore appears in all Santiago papers this morning and I
understand that the United Press cabled the full text to the United States and
South America.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[Paraphrase.] I sincerely trust you will not disapprove my action in
publishing this note. I am aware how perilous a step it was, but I thought it
necessary to take action before Chilean Congress met. As there was not a
minute to spare I did not telegraph you, but had to assume responsibility,
