666
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
technique which enabled him to roll up such overwhelming majorities
in the recently completed “referendum”, the operation would be an ex-
ceedingly difficult one. The Iranian practice of holding elections over a
period of weeks or months would facilitate government rigging of the
balloting and enable Mossadeq once again to cancel elections in
doubtful districts once he had seated a minimum number of sup-
porters. However, Mossadeq would probably still have difficulty in in-
vading the feudal strongholds of the old conservative landlord class,
which held on to a considerable number of seats in the 1952 elections,
when Mossadeq’s popular appeal and ability to secure local supporters
were far greater than they are now, and which would probably have
fared even better if Mossadeq had not stopped the balloting when it
was little more than half-finished. This time, Mossadeq would lack the
support of Kashani, whose local workers were extremely effective in
1952. Moreover, Mossadeq would probably lose some seats in Tehran
and possibly other urban centers to Tudeh nominees.
9. In any event, Mossadeq is unlikely to be any more successful
than in the past in finding men he can trust to stand by him after they
are elected. Although Mossadeq is likely to go through with new elec-
tions so long as they show any promise of reinforcing his position, they
are at best likely to provide him with only a short breathing spell.
The Communist Danger
10. In Mossadeq’s attempts to retain power, he is likely to take
steps which will weaken the prestige and influence of the US in Iran
and which will increase the danger of an ultimate Communist
takeover.
11. In the foreign relations field, Mossadeq is likely to give Tudeh
free rein in attacking the US and to become more critical of the US in his
own public statements. He can be expected to accept any genuine con-
cessions the USSR may offer him and might go so far as to eject the US
military missions and to pledge Iran to refrain from entering into any
defense arrangement with the West if offered sufficient Soviet induce-
ment. Such moves are likely to result in a decline in US prestige, an im-
provement in the popular standing of the pro-Soviet element, and pos-
sibly widened opportunities for Soviet propaganda and subversion.
12. In the domestic field, Mossadeq will probably continue to rely
on Tudeh support in his efforts to dominate his non-Communist oppo-
nents. As a result, he will probably feel compelled to wink at the contin-
uation of Tudeh demonstrations and the re-emergence of Tudeh as an
acknowledged political party, may go so far as restore Tudeh’s legal
status, and might even bring some Tudeh sympathizers into the gov-
ernment. These moves will greatly assist Tudeh in its efforts to increase
its influence both in political circles and in the bureaucracy.
