298 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 11. Reference had been made in my statement to the 19 Americans who had committed crimes and to others being detained in his country. He resolutely opposed allegation that Americans being detained. Only US Government had illegally detained Chinese in US. Innocent Chinese nationals had been illegally detained by US. This action was violation of legal freedom of Chinese nationals and also violated practices under international law. As to Americans in China his side had never detained any of them. Those who were in prison had been prosecuted according to Chinese law because they had violated Chinese law. Recently a num­ ber of Americans who had violated Chinese law had been released. He was sure I was well aware of crimes they had committed in his country because their account had been reported in newspapers. All of them had admitted they had committed crimes and also admitted they were pun­ ished lightly. According to statements made by Americans themselves they admitted they had carried out espionage. He asked if any aliens in US had right to carry out subversive activities against US Government. Were all those in US jails Americans, or were there also some aliens? 12. He said I had put forward repeated claims regarding the 19 Americans and that he had repeatedly made clear his government’s stand. He had made clear his position in a spirit of maximum concili­ ation. His government had reviewed a number of cases, had released a number and had advanced release of a number who had committed crimes. As to remainder, he had made clear his government’s attitude on way their cases would be handled and that had been made a mat­ ter of record in our talks. PRC willing to conduct reviews of cases in light of agreement, in accordance with degree of each offense and also taking into account improvement of relations between our two coun­ tries. When results these reviews available, his side would inform third power concerned. 13. He said he had made very clear his government’s position on countless occasions, but in spite of this I again put forward question of 19 Americans. He recalled I had on more than one occasion stated I was not attempting interfere internal affairs or violate sovereignty of China. However, it hard for him to explain why I again brought forward ques­ tion 19 Americans if it was not interference in juridical processes and violation of sovereignty China. His country had no desire violate sov­ ereignty other states but on other hand had no intention permit anyone else violate its sovereignty. 14. He said reference had been made to idea that agreed announce­ ment should be implemented immediately without regard for fact that not all Chinese in US could return immediately to China. This inter­ pretation of agreement was being used as pretext to intentionally stall talks. This intentional stalling was not conducing to success of talks nor to implementation of agreement. It was intentional stalling. We had
