International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1151
Attachment
Letter From Secretary of State Muskie to All Ambassadors4
Washington, August 4, 1980
Dear Ambassador
On July 24 I participated in the public release of a government
study which has etremely important implications for U.S. foreign
policy in the months and years ahead. The Global 2000 Report to the Presi-
dent: Entering the Twenty-First Century was prepared by the State De-
partment and the Council on Environmental Quality at the request of
President Carter. Its purpose is to assess the possible changes in the
world’s population, natural resources base and environment through
the end of the century.
The conclusions are sobering. If present trends in population
growth, resource degradation and environmental pollution continue,
the efforts of the international community to achieve higher qualities of
life and expanded social opportunities will be overwhelmed. The po-
tential for famine, economic dislocation, social disruption and political
instability will increase . . . sparing neither rich nor poor from the col-
lective effects.
Global 2000 is not a prediction. But it is a warning of the kind of fu-
ture which could occur if nations do not respond in time to make a dif-
ference. The problems highlighted in the study defy easy solution; but
they will yield if we have the will and commit the resources.
President Carter, in his response to the report, stated that
“America must provide special leadership” if these global challenges
are to be met. I could not agree more. The President also called upon
the State Department to play a central role. I will be representing the
Department on a Presidential Task Force on Global Resources and En-
vironment established to recommend actions by the U.S. in areas
needing priority attention. Further, the Department is directed to raise
and discuss the Global 2000 issues internationally.
I hope you will give this mandate your personal involvement and
assistance by bringing the report to the attention of key government of-
ficials in your country, and seeking their reactions and comments. In
addition, I welcome your thoughts on how the message of Global 2000
can be pursued by the U.S. most effectively at the country and interna-
tional levels; how our foreign policy should be adjusted in light of the
Global 2000 conclusions; and how the Department’s own capabilities for
4 No classification marking.
