1108  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
16. Transit rights and bases in Italy and Turkey are essential to U.S. 
limited military operations in Iran. Additional over flight, staging and 
operational rights in advance of U.S. deployment would enhance our 
ability to deploy forces rapidly.
17. Transit rights and logistic bases are essential in Japan, Okinawa 
and the Philippines for the timely and sustained support of operations in 
the Western Pacific. In addition, similar rights are essential in Thailand, 
Laos and South Vietnam for successful operations in Southeast Asia.
18. Existing logistic support facilities and air bases in Southeast 
Asia are inadequate to support sustained operations of U.S. and allied 
forces. The timing and extent of operations in this area are almost 
entirely dependent upon the effectiveness of corrective measures to 
rectify deficiencies.
19. In all cases studied, some degree of mobilization was required, 
ranging from a modest mobilization of selected reserve units in the 
Berlin case to a total mobilization of the 1,000,000 man Ready Reserve 
for Korea.
20. An expansion of the war production base would be required in 
the event of hostilities in Korea, the Offshore Islands or Laos in order 
to prevent a dangerous degradation of war reserves in PACOM and 
CONUS. In the case of Korea and Laos, six months would be required 
to re-­establish these reserves to required levels. In the case of Berlin and 
Iran, it would be desirable to make preparations for the rapid expan­
sion of the war production base.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the study.]
Enclosure A
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR STUDY OF CAPABILITIES OF FORCES 
FOR LIMITED MILITARY OPERATIONS (C)
1. To review and update the joint study of United States and Allied 
capabilities for limited military operations from the present to 1 July 
1962.
THE PROBLEM
2. Limited military operations could be in progress in more than 
one area of the world simultaneously.
ASSUMPTIONS
3. The U.S. military posture will remain substantially unchanged 
through 1 July 1962.
