1518  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
it clearly involves a greater risk that the Soviet Union might attempt 
clandestine tests than either Alternative No. 1 or No. 2. The extent to 
which such a system would in fact deter tests is a complex judgment 
which cannot be made on technical grounds alone.
Alternative No. 4—Permit Underground Testing Below a “Threshold”.
The present “Geneva” system as well as the modification of it sug­
gested in Alternative No. 2 and No. 3 can clearly provide much more 
secure control of nuclear testing if underground tests are permitted 
below a “threshold” yield. This procedure would minimize the intan­
gible factor of deterrence upon which a complete prohibition must ulti­
mately rest. There is no unique “threshold” yield to associate with any 
of these systems. The level of the threshold might vary between 1 and 
20 KT and would be set by the objects sought in negotiating an agree­
ment and the amount of risk deemed “acceptable”. A 20 KT threshold 
would involve relatively little risk of violation but also would per­
mit substantial weapon development and would provide little basis 
for inspection. A 5 KT threshold would involve greater risk of viola­
tion, assuming it was not subject to 100 percent inspection; however, 
it would permit less weapon development, probably would exclude 
“n”th power tests, and would provide the basis for extensive inspection. 
A 1 KT threshold would involve substantially greater risk since clearly 
only a small fraction of events in 1 to 5 KT range could be inspected; 
however, such a threshold would permit only limited weapon devel­
opment in areas probably primarily of interest to U.S., would almost 
certainly exclude “n”th power tests, and would provide the basis for 
very extensive inspection.
Alternative No. 5—No Restrictions on Nuclear Tests.
A policy decision to avoid any agreement which would prohibit 
nuclear testing in any form would permit unrestricted weapon devel­
opment and would accomplish none of the objectives of a test sus­
pension. It would avoid the risk, considered substantial by some, that 
underground testing will in fact prove inadequate both for large yields 
and for diagnostic measurements at all yields.
Tab C
Letter From Vance to Herter
Washington, December 23, 1958
My dear Mr. Under Secretary:
The seismological results from the underground nuclear weapons 
tests conducted in Nevada during October show that the conclusions of
