Afghanistan 219 acquired during his residence in our country.3 Amin made a particular point of drawing my attention to the DRA’s forebearance in refraining from public attacks on the U.S. Even when Afghanistan is attacked by VOA, he said, we have deliberately resisted the temptation to respond in kind. The DRA does not want to do anything to “blacken the name or fame of the U.S.” He said that each country must act in in its own interest but was confident that the U.S. and Afghanistan could continue to find ways and means that could serve their own interests but be of mutual benefit. 4. The DRA customarily publicizes the courtesy calls of foreign diplomats on Amin. My call was the first item on the English and Dari TV newscasts Oct. 27. 5. Development assistance. Amin made a strong pitch for U.S. “material assistance.” Afghanistan, he said, is in desperate need of foreign aid. Even a small portion of the development assistance which the U.S. provides worldwide would be of very great help to Afghanistan. The DRA would be grateful for any assistance, no matter how small. Amin said he would be happy to publicize U.S. aid to Afghanistan, adding that he would like to see more buildings in Afghanistan with plaques denoting that they had been built through U.S. aid. He allowed as how “your philosophy” can make it difficult for the U.S. to help in some areas and “our philosophy” makes it difficult for Afghanistan to accept some kinds of aid. Still, he said, we could doubtless find areas where we could work together. 6. Amin pretended to express bewilderment as to why more U.S. aid is not forthcoming. Referring to U.S. commercial investment in the Soviet Union, he said that surely the U.S. has more problems with the Soviet Union than with Afghanistan. Somewhat slyly he said the U.S. Congress is prepared to give ten million dollars to so-called Afghan refugees in Pakistan but is not willing to contribute to alleviating the root cause of the problem, poverty and underdevelopment in Afghanistan itself. 7. When I noted the practical barrier posed by the Pell-Stone Amendment to the continuation of U.S. development assistance, Amin said he had felt great animosity on the part of the Americans with whom he had talked in the days after Ambassador Dubs’s death.4 It was unfortunate, he said, how much misunderstanding had arisen, 3 Amin’s desire to improve U.S.-Afghan relations was also conveyed to Peck during a meeting with Victor Trifonov, Political Counselor of the Soviet Embassy, October 25, in Washington. This meeting was reported in telegram 277944 to Kabul, October 25. (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, USSR in Afghanistan (10–31 Oct 79) 4 See footnote 4, Document 68.
