National Security Policy  959
sentiment among the continental countries for some form of European 
continental military grouping, possibly related to NATO. Over the next 
few years, we believe that basic military dependence on the US will 
keep the alliance together. Nevertheless, its effectiveness will probably 
be somewhat reduced, and this reduction could attain serious propor­
tions if European confidence in the will and ability of the US to protect 
Europe from the Communist threat should decline markedly. In any 
event, unless there is a renewed sense of urgency, Western Europe’s 
increased strength will probably not be applied as fully and cohesively 
as it might be to the key problems now confronting the West, of main­
taining an effective military posture and of providing large-­scale aid to 
the underdeveloped countries. (Paras. 41, 44–45, 49, 54, 59)
8. In countries of the underdeveloped world, the complex force of 
nationalism and growing desires for a better life will be powerful factors 
shaping the course of events. These countries will continue to expect 
help from the richer countries, and they will be inclined to accept such 
help regardless of whether it comes from the East or the West. Inasmuch 
as these countries generally lack the experienced leadership, the stable 
political and social institutions, and the material resources to cope with 
their many problems in orderly ways, there will remain the possibility 
of violent upheavals and local conflicts. While these outbreaks may not 
stem from the East-­West struggle, they can be expected often to involve 
the interests of the two sides and to afford opportunities for exploita­
tion. Thus, the underdeveloped world will continue to be a principal 
area of the contest between the Bloc and the West. (Para. 80)
9. The outlook in the various underdeveloped areas (apart from non-­
Communist Asia, covered in Conclusion 6 above) is mixed. The Middle 
East will remain very unstable. In South Asia, the future of Afghanistan, 
in particular, is uncertain. While trade and other economic relations 
with the Bloc will increase in Africa, and there will be many opportu­
nities for the spread of Communist influence, we do not believe that 
local Communist-­controlled groups will become strongly entrenched in 
power in any country at least over the next few years, given a reasonable 
degree of effective attention from the West.4 (Paras. 73–76)
10. In Latin America as a whole, we do look for some expansion in 
Communist influence over the next few years, although such an expan­
sion will probably not be widespread, especially in view of the possi­
bilities for US action. However, there is a possibility that one or another 
country, notably Cuba, could fall under Communist control. Moreover, 
4 The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, the Assistant Chief 
of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department of the Navy, and the Director for Intel­
ligence, The Joint Staff, believe that the prospects for Communist groups should be lim­
ited further by substituting after “Communist-­controlled groups” in the last sentence the 
words: “will become a major political force in any country. . . .” [Footnote is in the original.]
