886  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Tab 5
Paper Prepared in the Department of State60
Washington, October 3, 1990
Elements of Common Ground
1. There shall be no requirement under the START Treaty to destroy 
ICBMs or SLBMs when their associated launchers are eliminated. 
Instead of being destroyed, such ICBMs and SLBMs will be transferred 
to the category of non-­deployed missiles.
2. There shall be a limit of 250 non-­deployed ICBMs for mobile 
launchers of ICBMs, of which no more than half may be non-­deployed 
ICBMs for rail-­mobile launchers of ICBMs.
A. This limit shall apply to silo-­based and mobile Peacekeeper 
ICBMs, silo-­based and mobile SS–24 ICBMs, and silo-­based and mobile 
SS–25 ICBMs, as well as to both silo-­based and mobile variants of any 
future type of ICBM for mobile launchers of ICBMs.
B. Non-­deployed ICBMs of types subject to numerical limits on 
non-­deployed missiles which exceed those numerical limits shall be 
converted or eliminated.
3. All non-­deployed ICBMs, whether or not subject to numerical 
restrictions, and all non-­deployed SLBMs will be subject to the appro-
priate locational and reporting requirements now being worked out in 
Geneva.
4. When non-­deployed ICBMs of types subject to numerical lim-
its on non-­deployed missiles are eliminated, they shall be converted 
or eliminated using the procedures now agreed in the Protocol on 
Conversion or Elimination.
5. Perimeter and Portal Continuous Monitoring (PPCM) shall 
apply to all types of ICBMs subject to numerical limits on non-­deployed 
missiles. Details, including what specific facilities shall be subject to 
monitoring, shall be agreed.
6. ICBMs or SLBMs subject to the Treaty which have been converted 
for space launch shall not be used after their conversion to deploy in 
orbit ABM interceptor missiles or components capable of substituting 
for ABM interceptor missiles. Such ICBMs or SLBMs may be used for 
any other purposes, consistent with existing international treaty obliga-
tions. Launches of such converted ICBMs or SLBMs shall only be made 
from space launch facilities.
60 Secret.
