132  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
President address their concerns about our D&S positions before nego-
tiations resume in Geneva. We expect Adm. Crowe may raise the issue 
during the Wednesday NSC meeting.
Defense and Space Issues for Discussion
Our current Defense & Space position builds on the December 
1987 Washington Summit Joint Statement. In essence, it trades a com-
mitment not to withdraw from the ABM Treaty for a specified period of 
time, in return for freedom to deploy defenses at the end of that period. 
During the non-­withdrawal period, the U.S. claims the right to con-
duct ABM tests in space based on “other physical principles,” under 
the broad interpretation of the ABM Treaty.
Review of our Defense & Space position has been divided under 
two broad headings—­options for assuring U.S. testing rights during 
the non-­withdrawal period (DST 001), and options with respect to 
the deployment rights of the parties after the non-­withdrawal period 
(DST 002).
During the non-­withdrawal period. Our current position (Option 1) 
provides a unilateral U.S. assurance that the number of ABM test sat-
ellites orbited at any one time will not exceed 15. Further, the Parties 
would agree to specific notification procedures regarding tests involv-
ing those satellites. The proposal is intended to address stated Soviet 
concerns that U.S. ABM testing in space could become de facto deploy-
ment. It would also, if the Soviets agree to the notification provisions, 
obtain implicit Soviet acceptance of ABM testing in space, without sub-
jecting the broad interpretation to negotiation. The position is designed 
to be fully consistent with the ABM Treaty. Option 1 is supported by 
State, OSD, Energy, ACDA, and the Defense & Space Negotiator.
Option 2 would negotiate an explicit agreement based on the terms 
of what is now the U.S. unilateral assurance. Moreover, it would go 
beyond the ABM Treaty, inasmuch as it would permit testing in space 
of all ABM weapons, whether or not they are based on “other physical 
principles.” The JCS believe that this would provide better protection 
of U.S. testing rights and bind the Soviets to identical standards. Other 
agencies worry that willingness to explicitly negotiate on the right to 
test in space would cast doubt on the legitimacy of the broad interpreta-
tion of the ABM Treaty, and risk losing rights we now believe to be ours.
Also during the non-­withdrawal period, all agencies agree that we 
should retain our proposal to allow unlimited development, testing, 
and deployment of space-­based sensors. This proposal is an attempt to 
reconcile the increasing needs and capabilities of both sides for warn-
ing and attack assessment, with the fact that there will be no way to 
distinguish with NTM whether or not certain sensor satellites violate 
ABM Treaty provisions.
