Chapter 2, January–June 1989  63
The Secretary said he had mentioned the 19th as well, and agreed 
that speaking of the second ten-­day period would provide needed 
flexibility.
Shevardnadze commented that one week was not crucial. Turning to 
specifics, Shevardnadze said these would be taken up by the working 
group. He did want to offer some overall comments, however. First, he 
wished to stress the point that the sides should stick with agreements 
that had already been reached. Through common efforts, a great deal 
of work had been done to draft the basic elements of a treaty involv-
ing 50 percent reductions in strategic weapons, provided that the ABM 
Treaty were observed. The treaty covered different weapons—­ballistic 
missiles, including heavy ICBMs (which would be cut 50 percent), air-­
launched cruise missiles, etc. We had made considerable headway on 
mobile ICBMs in terms of limiting their range of operational activity 
and methods of verification. We had agreed on numerical limits for cer-
tain types of weapons, or at least had defined overall limits. Much prog-
ress had been made on verification, building on the experience of the 
INF Treaty. That was a unique effort, but serious problems did remain, 
and he did not rule out the possibility that these would be discussed 
by Gorbachev at his meeting with the Secretary the following morning.
One of the basic issues, Shevardnadze continued, was the preser-
vation of the ABM Treaty as signed in 1972—­in other words, the nar-
row interpretation. This was the understanding reached in Washington 
and Moscow. The Soviet Union intended to stick by this. Shevardnadze 
added that both sides had concerns about violations of the ABM Treaty. 
This was a serious issue. The Soviets were prepared to act in a more 
efficient way to apply existing mechanisms like the SCC. Moreover, if 
we saw the need, we could send high-­ranking military officials and 
diplomats to participate in the work of the SCC. Shevardnadze noted 
that he had once suggested that we hold an SCC session at the level of 
Chief of Staff or Defense Secretary to improve the quality of the orga-
nization’s work.
Krasnoyarsk Radar
Shevardnadze said the U.S. had expressed concerns about Soviet 
ABM Treaty violations, such as the radar station at Krasnoyarsk. A spe-
cific explanation had been given by Gorbachev at the United Nations 
in December to the effect that the Soviets were prepared to hand every-
thing there over to scientists—­not only Soviet scientists but those of 
other countries—­so that the facility could be used for the peaceful 
exploration of outer space.
If there were firm agreement on the observation of the ABM Treaty 
as signed in 1972, Shevardnadze continued, the Soviets would be pre-
pared totally to dismantle the facility at Krasnoyarsk. If the U.S. viewed
