3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
47
Congress in Moscow. Thus he would not repeat what he had said on
those two occasions. It seemed to him that first of all, the two sides at
this meeting should exchange views on the general state of relations be-
tween our two countries, and discuss prospects of their future develop-
ment. It was his hope that he and his colleagues could have a chance to
hear at first hand how the new U.S. Government approached the ques-
tion of relations with the Soviet Union. He was saying this because he
considered these relations to be the most important thing to be dis-
cussed. When someone had an objective, he was determined to move
toward it, without turning aside. There had been many contacts be-
tween Soviet and American leaders before the Secretary’s arrival and
many inter-relationships between our two countries, which had
emerged in recent years, and had played an important role in working
out major understandings and agreements between the Soviet Union
and the United States in the course of the past several years.
Referring to the present stage of relations between our two coun-
tries, Brezhnev said that they had acquired certain specific distinctive
features. On the whole, these relations continued to develop under the
impact of those efforts which were quite justifiably made to introduce
positive changes. Truly great, and he would even say titantic, efforts
had been required at times in order to arrive at very complex decisions.
Brezhnev wanted to draw the Secretary’s attention to the fact that
one could approach the process of relaxation of tensions and improve-
ment of Soviet-American relations in different ways. The two sides
might agree on some things and disagree on others. However, if one
were to take a look at the work that had been accomplished in recent
years without bias (he repeated “without bias”), if one were to take a
look at the foundations of that process which undoubtedly was fur-
thered by the steps the two sides had taken to reduce the risk of out-
break of nuclear war, one could arrive at only one conclusion: the work
accomplished, and what had been achieved as a result of that work,
was equally important and beneficial, not only for our two countries,
but objectively for all the peoples of the world. In brief, this represented
a gain for all those who not only in words but in deeds desired peace
and wanted to see fruitful cooperation develop between our two coun-
tries and peoples. At this point Brezhnev deviated from his prepared
text to stress that whenever he talked to someone, he always did so in a
frank and sincere manner, and he wanted to be sure that his partner in a
conversation realized this well. In saying that the developments in re-
cent years represented a gain for all those who desired peace not only
in words, but in deeds, he would have to add quite directly that during
the past twelve to eighteen months the further development of our bi-
lateral relations had slowed down to a certain extent, and in some
sectors had come to a complete halt. There was no need to dwell on the
