726 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the Cabinet. Secretary Vance can say that after signing the peace treaty, and after the normalization of relations, anybody is free to visit anybody, we can go see the pyramids, Egyptians can go to Jerusalem, and they can visit Gaza as we can visit Luxor. This shows our complete good will. There will be no special deal for Egyptian liaison officers in Gaza. Annex 1 provides for entry points, and there will be free entry subject to normal checks. This is agreed. President Carter: I don’t want to pass over this. This is crucial. Your response is not adequate. Only once in the negotiations has the United States taken a position that we consider important to our own integrity. We are a signatory . . . Prime Minister Begin: It is not written in Camp David. President Carter: Unless there are clear assurances that the negotiating teams can have access to the inhabitants of Gaza and the West Bank, I don’t feel that I can carry out my commitment to Camp David. Prime Minister Begin: We will sign only what we agreed to. President Carter: But I am asking you to agree. Prime Minister Begin: We won’t sign if we don’t agree. We will carry out every word of Camp David. It is not written in Camp David that there should be Egyptian liaison officers in Gaza or in Judea and Samaria. There is specific language. We will be faithful to Camp David. On the question of oil, we agree that Egypt must supply 2.5 million tons of oil at market prices. They will get the oil wells that we developed. We want access to this oil through Egypt. If Egypt doesn’t keep its agreement, then the U.S. should guarantee the oil. President Carter: To use your words, this is not in Camp David. There will be differences from Camp David as we work for a peace treaty. I have made our position clear. Israel has the freedom not to sign an agreement and you can insist upon your position. But this is so important that I think you should designate someone to work with Secretary Vance on this. I don’t want the negotiations to break down over the negotiators having access. Prime Minister Begin: I can bring this again to my Cabinet. I can’t do more. I can only speak about the decisions that were made today. If you wish to bring it up again, I will. On oil, there is no misunderstanding. I thought we had a complete agreement. I thought there would be an Israeli-Egyptian agreement with a U.S. guarantee. We don’t want to turn to the United States. Your Sinai II commitment3 will be honored. But we don’t want this matter of oil to hurt our relations. We don’t want Americans to complain about Israel. We haven’t used the 1975 3 See footnote 3, Document 201.
