Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX good relationship with Jordan. For there to be divisions among Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan causes us deep concerns. It makes the achievement of our common purposes more difficult, especially when Egypt and Saudi Arabia are in disagreement. My feeling is that President Sadat has not consulted enough with Saudi Arabia, and this makes my job more difficult. I asked President Sadat to talk with Crown Prince Fahd. Sadat said that he is punishing Saudi Arabia. I understand his concern, but I hope that you can keep in mind the concept that we have of the United States cooperating closely with Morocco, Sudan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Iran, and perhaps Jordan. This could form a strong, continuing alliance of friendly countries which would present a common front. We have very good relations with each of these nations, as do you. Divisions among these countries could weaken our cause. Beyond this, we believe that all of the Arab nations and Israel need protection against the Soviet Union and their hired help in North Africa and the Middle East. In the past, the priority among the Arabs was to fight Israel. Their secondary concerns were with the Soviet Union. President Sadat has helped me to understand that the stability of the entire Middle East and North Africa could depend upon the achievement of an Arab-Israeli peace. Your five divisions in the Suez Canal area could be relieved and they could help to balance threats elsewhere. So much has already been accomplished, and there is now a feeling of common purpose between Egypt and Israel. You can’t expect to get the approval now of Syria, Iraq, and Libya. Vice President Mubarak: Not even of Jordan. The President: Jordan is weak, but we can’t get the Iraqis, the Syrians, and the PLO to approve what we are doing. President Sadat has shown great courage. There is no way that I could violate my commitments to President Sadat, and to others, by approving a separate treaty between Egypt and Israel. We didn’t need to go to Camp David if we were just seeking a separate agreement. If we had been willing to abandon the West Bank and Gaza and the Palestinians, then we had no need of Camp David. We don’t want a separate peace treaty. We cannot abandon the West Bank and Gaza and the Palestinian question. The Israelis have already made great concessions. It is hard for you and President Sadat to know how difficult these decisions are for Prime Minister Begin. He gave more in Sinai than the Labor Party would have given. They wanted to keep a corridor to Sharm el-Sheik, and they wanted to keep the settlements. They would not recognize the Palestinians’ right to self-government. Begin has made tremendous concessions, and President Sadat has also made generous concessions, but there is a tendency in Egypt not to see how far Begin has come. In the Camp David agreements, linkage is clearly spelled out. Camp David dealt not only with Sinai, but also with the West Bank, Gaza, and
