United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  65
Your views and the forthright manner in which you expressed 
them made a deep impression on me. I truly regret that your telegram 
did not reach me until after the working group made its decision on 
Washington as the site for the new institution.
Although this circumstance precluded my consideration of your 
message before the decision was taken, your Government’s views were 
well known to our representatives, and I assure you that those views 
were given most careful consideration.
But after study of all factors, the United States Government felt 
obliged to conclude that the technical and practical advantages of hav-
ing the institution located in Washington, at least in its initial stages, 
would greatly facilitate the successful establishment of this import-
ant venture in hemispheric cooperation. In reaching that conclusion, 
we had in mind the desirability of selecting a site that would be near 
the New York money market and existing banking and financial 
institutions, including the International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development, the International Monetary Fund, and the Export-Import 
Bank of Washington.3
I know that you share my deep personal interest in supporting 
measures which contribute to the general welfare of all of the people of 
this hemisphere. I look forward to the continued association of our two 
nations in such important projects as the Inter-American Development 
Bank as a means of achieving the objectives we consider essential to the 
peace and prosperity of the Americas.
Thank you for making your views known to me in such a friendly 
fashion; I hope that you will not hesitate to communicate with me in a 
similar manner in the future.
Sincerely,
Dwight D. Eisenhower
3 Department circular telegram 1092 to all diplomatic missions in Latin America, dated 
March 26, 1959, discussing the location of the Bank, stated that a U.S. site would facilitate 
the sale of bonds necessary to increase the Bank’s resources in the future. (810.10/3–2659)
ETA–24.	
Editorial Note
The Articles of Agreement establishing the Inter-American 
Development Bank were formulated and signed on April 8, 1959, by 
representatives of the United States and the twenty other American
