1186
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
strument. For the latter purpose, UNSYG’s current military expendi-
ture reporting initiative seems the most hopeful.
Possible US approaches range from SSOD endorsement of mutual
obligations, as principles, through increased openness and standard-
ization of military expenditure reporting, to proposals establishing spe-
cial development and security funds. These will be reviewed on an in-
teragency basis (at NSC staff suggestion), under ACDA chairmanship,
to identify those that have enough merit for SSOD consideration.
Whatever proposals we can come up with in linking disarmament
and development are likely to be too watery a gruel even for the under-
nourished world. I believe, therefore, that we should plan on making
our presentation as a response to LDC initiatives, rather than as a US
initiative, although our initial general presentation in the SSOD should
stress our sympathetic concern about the problem.
2. Comprehensive Test Ban and CW Treaty. You are familiar with the
issues involved in presentation of a CTB to the Special Session. This
possibility should be borne in mind, but cannot presumably be re-
solved until late winter or early spring, depending on the progress of
the negotiations and the reactions of the CCD after it convenes at the
end of the month.
If a CW Treaty emerges from the CCD in time, the question of how
it should be brought before the Special Session will need to be ad-
dressed—but not yet.
3. Conventional Arms Transfers. Restraint is a major Administration
initiative, which we will have to pursue in the SSOD, both to maintain
our credibility and to sustain our multilateral restraint efforts outside
the UN. Many LDC’s object to restraint as a discriminatory echo of the
NPT and a way of limiting Third World arms acquisitions while devel-
oped countries remain free to produce arms for their own needs. Our
options for meeting this LDC objection without inhibiting our own de-
fense are very limited. We will acknowledge the Third World concern
that their legitimate defense needs must be met, and we will argue that
restraint serves LDC interests, such as lowering tensions and pro-
moting development. A realistic SSOD objective would be to seek some
recognition in the conference documents (i.e., Declaration of Principles
and Program of Action) that restraint is desirable.
We are working with PM on an intensive series of bilateral consul-
tations to take place before and during the SSOD to develop greater in-
terest in and support for the Administration’s policies. The success of
this effort will presumably be reflected in the SSOD’s final documents,
as well as in continuing negotiations.
4. Further Encouragement for Nuclear Weapons Free Zones. The United
States has already approached the French and the Soviets to encourage
