Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I We will continue to compete peacefully with the Soviets. In this competition, we hold many cards—not only our military aid but our economic ties, our understanding of diversity, and, most of all, our support for the determined sense of independence in emerging nations around the world. But as we compete, we must also cooperate to limit the most dangerous competition—nuclear weapons. This is in our calculated selfinterest. SALT is not a reward for Soviet good behavior. It is a benefit for ourselves and for mankind. With or without SALT, competition with the Soviets in many areas will continue. We will respond to any Soviet behavior which adversely affects our interests. Without SALT, that competition becomes more dangerous, and the possibilities for cooperation are dimmed. We must recognize our overwhelming strengths as a nation. We must see the future not as a threat but as an opportunity to make our children’s lives safer and more rewarding than our own. The emerging SALT agreement represents such an opportunity. Military competition today is carried out in highly technical terms. The debates on SALT will be very complex. Let us not, as we explore the technicalities in all the detail they deserve, lose sight of these simple truths: A nuclear war would destroy much—if not all—of what we love. We must do everything in our power to see that it never happens. We prevent it today with a military defense strong enough to deter our potential adversaries. We will maintain that deterrence. But that alone will not make us secure. We must also, at long last, reverse the dangerous race in nuclear weapons that each year increases nuclear stockpiles and each year makes us less safe. That is what SALT is about. With the vision that set him apart from other men, Hubert Humphrey defined our present challenge over a decade ago. He not only cared deeply, he thought deeply about the nature of America’s security in a nuclear world. Nuclear power has placed into the hands of men the power to destroy all that man has created. Only responsive statesmen—who perceive that perseverence in the pursuit of peace is not cowardice but courage, that restraint in the use of force is not weakness but wisdom— can prevent international rivalries from leading to an incinerated world. Let us have Hubert’s wisdom—and summon Hubert’s courage— as we set the course which will help define our future for years to come.
