118
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
4. Dobrynin responded by asking what kind of consultations the
US had in mind. The Secretary replied that the Delegations at the
present ASAT session in Vienna should set up procedures. Dobrynin
then asked what the problem was with the Soviet formulation on hos-
tile acts. The Secretary noted plainly that the formulation would totally
undermine the agreement. Dobrynin, asking personally and noting
that he was expressing no preference, asked whether the agreement
would be a treaty or an executive agreement. The Secretary replied that
this decision could be deferred for the the time being.
Vance
50.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and the
Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
(Seignious) to President Carter1
Washington, May 18, 1979
SUBJECT
Anti-Satellite Negotiations
Considerable progress has been made in the current round of ne-
gotiations on limitations on ASAT systems. An agreement, however,
will require resolution of several differences between the U.S. and So-
viet approaches.
The U.S. has proposed an initial agreement consisting of a Treaty
prohibiting damaging, destroying, or changing the trajectories of satel-
lites, and a one-year suspension of ASAT interceptor testing. We would
pursue a more comprehensive agreement in follow-on negotiations.
The Soviets would go beyond our proposal to prohibit additional
actions against satellites, in particular the use of electronic counter-
measures. The U.S. wants to avoid this subject. Another troublesome
issue, whether satellites used by the U.S. together with third countries
are to be protected by the Treaty, is now close to resolution by the Dele-
gations in Vienna.
A potentially serious problem is a Soviet proposal to exclude from
coverage satellites which engage in “hostile” or “illegal” acts. Soviet ex-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 4, Anti-Satellite System (ASAT): 7/77–10/80. Secret.
