280
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
junction or intersection between East-West and North-South issues in
Southern Africa, or in the Middle East, or even potentially in Central
America if the Panama Canal [Treaty] is rejected.
“Finally, we have to respond to the new issues that are truly for the
first time global in character, global in character in terms of such issues
as nuclear proliferation, arms transfers and, last but not least, human
rights.
“All of that is part of a process of responding to altogether new cir-
cumstances in which the very character of the international system is
changing. The President’s trip is part of our effort to respond to that. It
is designed to show that we recognize this change, that we want to be
associated with it, and that we want to give it positive direction.
“This is why he is visiting some advanced industrial democracies,
notably France and Belgium; a relatively more open communist
country involved in East-West relations—Poland; richer but still devel-
oping countries, Iran and Saudi Arabia; and a developing democracy,
India.
“Similarly, Brazil, Venezuela, Nigeria fit these categories.
“In effect, we want to demonstrate that the time has come for a
wider American foreign policy in its scope, a foreign policy which rec-
ognizes ideological pluralism and which is willing to work towards a
broader political and economic international system.” (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Schecter/Friendly
(Press) File, Subject File, Box 1, Brzezinski Briefings and Backgrounders
(Press and Public): 10/77–1/78)
61.
Editorial Note
On December 28, 1977, President Jimmy Carter participated in an
interview with Tom Brokaw of NBC News, Bob Schieffer of CBS News,
Robert MacNeil of the Public Broadcasting Service and co-host of “The
MacNeil–Lerher Report,” and Barbara Walters of ABC News. The in-
terview took place in the Red Room of the White House, beginning at 8
p.m., and was broadcast live on radio and television. The President
began the broadcast by noting:
“This year we have had fireside chats and television programs and
telephone call-in shows and press conferences twice a month from al-
most every State in the Nation. And I’ve been very pleased to stay in
touch with the American people.
