121.57/14
[Document 188]
The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular
Officers90
WASHINGTON, December 24, 1925.
SIRS: Reference is made to previous instructions relative to the Act of Congress,
approved January 13, 1925, providing, inter alia, that officials of the Treasury should
be regularly and officially attached to American Diplomatic Missions abroad in the
capacity of “Customs Attachés.”
Pursuant to this Act, the Department instructed the Chiefs of the appropriate
Diplomatic Missions to request recognition for the “Customs Attachés” assigned to
duty at their Missions. These requests for recognition have been almost universally
refused by the governments concerned, and it is obviously inadvisable for further
efforts to be made by this Government to bring about recognition of a diplomatic status
for “Customs Attachés.”
It may be pointed out here that no foreign government has refused to permit the
“Customs Attachés” to reside at their posts of duty and to carry out their duties under
the Tariff Act of 1922. Therefore, the “Customs Attachés” are, from the point of view
of their duties under that Act, unaffected by the refusals of foreign governments to
accord them diplomatic status.
According to the opinion of the Treasury, the officials in question possess the legal title
of “Customs Attaché”, and their reports to the Treasury, as well as their vouchers and
other official documents, must bear this title. However, in view of the refusal of foreign
governments to accord them diplomatic status, the Treasury has agreed that the further
public use of the title “Customs Attaché” in foreign countries would be inadvisable.
Therefore, instructions have been transmitted to all “Customs Attachés” directing them
to avoid the use of their legal title on letterheads, correspondence, or business cards,
and to adopt for these purposes the former title of “Customs Representative”. A copy of
the Treasury’s instructions, dated December 10, 1925, is transmitted herewith for your
information.91
You will also observe that these officials will hereafter be furnished Special Passports
in which they are described as: “. . . . Name . . . . an Official of the United States
Treasury Department, Customs Service, travelling abroad on Official Business of the
United States Government.”
