Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  363
1987 at the Washington summit, namely to observe the Treaty as signed 
in 1972.
I wish to propose the following: Let us set aside, for the time being, 
our conceptual argument about whether the placing of weapons in 
outer space and the deployment of ABM systems will strengthen stra-
tegic stability or have an opposite effect. Let us not make more difficult 
the already complex NST talks by pressing this issue. We could go back 
to it at the talks on strategic stability, right after the signing of the treaty 
on strategic offensive arms. We have already agreed to hold such talks.
We also continue to differ in our understanding of what is prohib-
ited and what is permitted by the ABM Treaty. Even though I am con-
vinced that our interpretation is correct, we will evidently fail to make 
headway if we continue arguing along old lines. The way out, as we see 
it, would be to attempt to define specifically what can be done within 
the framework of the ABM Treaty.
The discussion of the question of establishing a period of non-­
withdrawal from the ABM Treaty has also taken on the character of a 
conceptual debate. In order to facilitate the solution of other issues at 
the talks we could drop our insistence on our proposal for such a fixed 
period of non-­withdrawal.
The Soviet Foreign Minister and the US Secretary of State could, 
if the above considerations prove to be acceptable, work out on their 
basis appropriate instructions for our delegations at the NST talks.
As we understand, difficulties remain in connection with the so-­
called issue of the Krasnoyarsk radar. On several occasions I offered 
various solutions which, in our view, could remove the concerns of the 
US side. Unfortunately, they have failed to reach their goal. In order to 
clear up completely the path toward the early conclusion of a treaty 
on strategic offensive arms, we have taken a radical decision—­to com-
pletely eliminate that facility. We would expect that the US side will 
reciprocate so as to remove our concerns related to the US radars in 
Greenland and Great Britain.
As regards the questions related directly to strategic offensive 
arms, the greatest difficulties concern long-­range SLCMs. Breaking the 
deadlock in this issue is long overdue. This, as I see it, calls for a major 
political decision to trade off our mutual concerns. This problem should 
be analyzed jointly once again, among other things from the standpoint 
of a broader approach to the problem of naval armaments.
A productive dialogue on that problem should begin at long 
last at the NST talks. Your side is invoking the difficulties of verifica-
tion. Why not focus at these talks on the problem of verification with 
regard to nuclear SLCMs, while the problem of limiting them could be 
solved taking account of the results of the work on verification. Eduard 
Shevardnadze is prepared to discuss this matter in greater detail with
