74  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
20.	
Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the Nuclear 
and Space Talks (Burt) to Secretary of State Baker1
Washington, May 17, 1989
SUBJECT
The Bush Approach to START
As we begin active interagency consideration of new START initia-
tives leading to NSC meetings in early June, I want to lay out for you 
my views on how we should put a Bush stamp on START.
The Current Situation
As I indicated when I briefed you2 recently, our key task in START 
is to seek a good treaty that will avoid a regeneration of the anti-SALT II coa-
lition, where those who opposed any arms control agreement were 
joined by moderates who objected to technical flaws in the Treaty. To 
prevent such an occurrence, we should focus on improving the current 
START framework in a way that will win the allegiance of the moderate 
center. This means generating an appealing theme and then devising 
proposals to give that theme real substance.
The Theme
Our theme should be reducing the risk of nuclear war, by promoting the 
evolution of more survivable and predictable force structures that lessen 
incentives to conduct a first strike. During the Reagan era, the public was 
often given the impression that the US sought to reduce nuclear arms 
as an end in itself. Thus, the theme of nuclear risk reduction will help 
to put a Bush stamp on START while returning the public focus to the 
proper objective.
In fleshing out this theme, we should ensure that our package of initia-
tives is more than cosmetic. Tinkering on the margins of our START position—­
­as some in State want to do—­will not give our new approach credibility. There are 
real opportunities to improve our position, in ways that would not only 
enhance our security, but which could also improve the chances for START 
ratification by responding directly to criticisms that have been directed at 
the existing START framework by influential experts.
A weighty package would also help the President politically, by 
demonstrating that this Administration is pursuing ambitious objec-
tives, and not just, a “status quo-­plus” policy, toward the Soviets.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, STARS, Document 
Number 89170489. Secret; Exdis.
2 Not further identified.
