976 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement divisive. He concluded by saying that if it were decided to fly the flag he thought emotions would be minimized both in the United States and in Panama by flying it only on holidays. There followed a prolonged discussion pro and con in which General Persons and Mr. Merchant also participated. The President at the conclusion of the discussion decided as follows: (1) The Panamanian flag should be flown together with the American flag in Shaler’s Triangle on Panama’s Independence Day, November 3, and on other days of special significance to Panama and to the United States. The United States flag would not fly in that place except on days the Panamanian flag was flown. Two flag poles would be erected (the source of funds was left undecided), but no elaborate steps at this time would be taken to create a formal plaza. (2) The decision should be announced as late in the fall as it was deemed possible to do without risking the building up of public pressures in Panama for agitation on the issue. September 20 was suggested as the general time period in which this condition might be met. (3) The announcement should be made by the Governor of the Canal Zone in a public statement to the press to the effect that the President had approved the flying of the Panama flag with the American flag on holidays and other days of special significance to Panama and to the United States. The Panamanian Government would be informed by formal note of this forthcoming statement two hours or so before it was given to the press. An announcement before October l was desirable in order to avoid the implication that this was an action directly tied to the inauguration of a new President in Panama. (Theodore Roosevelt’s birthday on October 27 was incidentally mentioned as one day suitable for flying of the flag.) Discretion was left to the Secretary of State as to the determination of the date for the announcement but the President requested that he be given adequate advance warning before such an announcement was made. (4) A statement elaborating on and justifying the announcement should be prepared by the State Department and furnished the White House for Mr. Nixon’s and Mr. Lodge’s use if questions arose after the announcement during the course of the election campaign. (5) The American Ambassador in Panama should promptly institute the practice of flying the U.S. flag in front of the U.S. Embassy without reference to or other connection with the impending action on the flying of the Panamanian flag.
