354 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 tempt to see more of the Shah and less of Mossadeq, although here again (as in paragraph 7(a) timing would be all-important. Moreover, nothing should be done by U.S. officials, after Allen’s visit, to suggest that the U.S. is in any way responsible for the Shah’s actions. (b) The U.K. should be induced by all possible means to remain as inconspicuous as possible. At the same time an attempt should be made to draw up with the British proposals for an oil settlement which the Shah would be likely to approve. 9. Covert Contact with Army: The Teheran Field Station should establish contact with influential Army leaders. The initial purpose of this operation would be to develop a network within the Army dedicated to maintaining the loyalty of the Army to the Shah. [3 lines not declassified] 10. Intermediate Approach to the Shah: (a) This approach should be made only after the earlier phases of the program had developed according to plan. (b) The Shah should be secretly informed what the U.S. and U.K. would be prepared to do in the event a “responsible” Government came to power. He should be informed of the “reasonable” oil settlement already agreed to by the U.S. and U.K., but that the proposals would be communicated only to a “responsible” Government. (c) He should be informed that in the event a “responsible” Government came to power, it would be provided with emergency aid until an oil settlement could be negotiated. 11. Decisive Action to Establish New Government: (a) The Shah should be urged to use constitutional prerogative to establish a new Government. (b) If under suitable circumstances the Shah fails to act, military leaders should be induced to carry out a coup in the Shah’s name, even if they do not have his authority for such action. (c) As soon as the situation is under control, the Army should turn back to the Shah the responsibility of forming a new Government and directing its policies. (d) The U.S. and U.K. should scrupulously avoid giving any indication that: (1) they had anything to do with the coup; or (2) they considered the coup a development favoring their interests. (e) After some weeks a U.S.–Iran loan of substantial proportion should be negotiated and the first installment paid. While the Shah would understand that further installments would be contingent on a satisfactory solution of the oil issue, there should be no public indication that the loan and the oil controversy were in any way connected.
