September 18–December 16, 1978
249
part of this, but bulk of time was spent on Camp David Agreements. At
end of my presentation, Assad called for his copy of Agreements and
began long list of penetrating questions about documents. He and
Khaddam had obviously given close and careful scrutiny to the docu-
ments and in course of our discussion they asked questions designed
both to zero in on certain aspects of the Accords which are particularly
important to him. i.e., Jerusalem, the Palestinian question, etc., as well
as many points on which he felt genuinely in the dark, or confused.
2. Assad raised so many points it is impossible to mention them all
in this initial report, which I want to get off to you quickly. But I will
touch on what appeared to be the main areas of his concern. He ex-
pressed keen interest at several points which were “not in the Agree-
ments.” He asked whether there had been any discussion of where final
borders would be on West Bank (I said this had been left to negotiations
for final status of this area). He asked what discussions there had been
on Jerusalem. I reported that there had been areas of agreement but that
final agreement had foundered on issue of sovereignty. He asked me to
restate US position on Jerusalem. I did and he seemed reassured.
3. I discussed at length the outcome on West Bank settlements
issue in which Assad was keenly interested. I explained at length our
agreement with Begin that new settlements would be frozen during ne-
gotiations for the transitional regime, and that those negotiations
would also deal with question of future settlements. Again this was a
point on which it appeared possible to reassure Assad. On another
point, Assad seemed puzzled by provisions at end of general frame-
work agreement in which we invited the Security Council to endorse
the peace treaties, and the permanent members to underwrite the
treaties and conform their policies thereto. I explained that the latter
provision only requested the permanent members to act and that this
provision was included with the Soviets in mind.
4. Assad asked some penetrating questions about our view of
Jordan’s role in any West Bank settlement. Did we feel Jordan had same
kind of role in West Bank situation as Syria was playing in Lebanon? I
explained that Jordan had profound interest in peace settlement with
Israel and that we did not think problem of determining final status of
ities,” citing his visits with Lebanese Christian leader Camille Chamoun. In response,
Vance countered that the United States “fully” supported the “unity and territorial integ-
rity of Lebanon,” adding that he believed that Parker’s meetings with Chamoun “have
been aimed at persuading the Chamounists to terminate their resistance and to cooperate
with the Central Government.” A summary of this exchange is in telegram 5655 from
Damascus, September 25. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780391–1017) Assad reportedly replied to Vance’s explanation, “I did not know that.”
(Telegram 5696 from Damascus, September 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D780394–0430)
