Message of the President of the United States to
Congress, December 3, 1924
TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES: The present state of the Union, upon which it is
customary for the President to report to the Congress under the provisions
of the Constitution, is such that it may be regarded with encouragement and
satisfaction by every American. Our country is almost unique in its ability
to discharge fully and promptly all its obligations at home and abroad, and
provide for all its inhabitants an increase in material resources, in
intellectual vigor and in moral power. The Nation holds a position
unsurpassed in all former human experience. This does not mean that we do
not have any problems. It is elementary that the increasing breadth of our
experience necessarily increases the problems of our national life. But it
does mean that if we will but apply ourselves industriously and honestly, we
have ample powers with which to meet our problems and provide for their
speedy solution. I do not profess that we can secure an era of perfection in
human existence, but we can provide an era of peace and prosperity,
attended with freedom and justice and made more and more satisfying by
the ministrations of the charities and humanities of life.
Our domestic problems are for the most part economic. We have our
enormous debt to pay, and we are paying it. We have the high cost of
government to diminish, and we are diminishing it. We have a heavy burden
of taxation to reduce, and we are reducing it. But while remarkable progress
has been made in these directions, the work is yet far from accomplished.
We still owe over $21,000,000,000, the cost of the National Government is
still about $3,500,000,000, and the national taxes still amount to about $27
for each one of our inhabitants. There yet exists this enormous field for the
application of economy.
In my opinion the Government can do more to remedy the economic ills of
the people by a system of rigid economy in public expenditure than can be
accomplished through any other action. The costs of our national and local
governments combined now stand at a sum close to $100 for each
inhabitant of the land. A little less than one third of this is represented by
national expenditure, and a little more than two-thirds by local expenditure.
