250 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 90. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State1 Kabul, December 20, 1979, 1206Z 8566. Subj: (LOU) Possible Motivations Behind Arrival of Soviet Troops. Ref: (A) Kabul 2778 (Notal),2 (B) Kabul 7326 (Notal).3 1. (S—Entire text) 2. Summary: The recent arrival of three battalions of Soviet combat troops at Bagram Air Force Base has raised many questions here, especially since the insurgency does not appear to have dramatically worsened to the point that it threatens the regime of President Hafizullah Amin. To the much asked question of, “Why did the Soviets send the troops in now?”, I can suggest a few answers: Moscow and Amin hope to “preempt” the growth of any direct threat to the regime by injecting an immediate “stiffener” of Soviet troops, particularly should any DRA corps or division disintegrate; the troops are here to protect the safety of Soviet citizens should the security of Kabul collapse; the troops can play a key role in domestic politics should further splits in the leadership occur; and, the troops are merely the vanguard of a larger intervention which will eventually lead to a direct combat role by Soviet forces, a thesis I consider unlikely based on evidence available so far. Motivations behind this move by Kabul and Moscow could well be a combination of these and others, but whatever the case, Afghan claims to “independence” have been further eroded by this development. Moreover, the presence of Soviet troops will undoubtedly heighten domestic opposition to the Amin regime and his Soviet mentors, and in the longrun further destabilize the region. My NATO colleagues here generally accept our assurances that the Soviets have installed combat troops at Bagram Air Base, but they are as puzzled as we, if not more so, as to why the Soviets have taken this step now. End of summary. 3. Why did Soviet troops arrive now? Eight months ago (reftel A), we concluded here that an Afghan SOS to Moscow for direct military help would probably be sent only in face of a seriously deteriorating security situation. We believed at that time that lack of control of most 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800012–0699, D790585–0980. Secret; Immediate. Sent for information to Ankara, Athens, Beijing, Islamabad, Jidda, London, Moscow, New Delhi, USNATO, Paris, Athens, CINCPAC (also for POLAD), and CINCEUR (also for POLAD). A copy of this telegram was found in the Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, folder 1. 2 Telegram 2778 from Kabul is dated April 10. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790164–0676) 3 See Document 72.
