September 18–December 16, 1978 309 PLO if it publicly accepted U.N. Resolution 242 with appropriate reservations on the inadequacy of the refugee language and explicitly recognized the right of Israel to exist. I recalled that we, working with the Egyptians and the Saudis, had last year developed a fair formula for this purpose. Unfortunately, although the Egyptians had told us that ‘Arafat favored the formula, he could not obtain the acquiescence of the PLO Executive Committee and the effort aborted. Shawqat should know that our offer still stands, but in the absence of such public acceptance by ‘Arafat and the PLO of U.N. Resolution 242, it is not possible for the U.S. Government to engage in a direct dialogue with ‘Arafat. I suggested that the best thing Shawqat could do was to urge the PLO leadership to reconsider their rejection of this earlier U.S. offer. Shaw-qat agreed that the PLO leadership, thanks largely to the Rejectionists and negative Syrian counsel, had been shortsighted, but seemed uncertain whether the PLO Executive Committee was likely to adopt a more positive stance in the present circumstances. The whole thrust of Shawqat’s comment, reported in Cairo Embassy message number 22724,2 was on the importance of PLO acquiescence if West Bank/Gazan leaders are to be willing to stick their necks out and participate in the negotiations.) 5. According to information [1 line not declassified] an American of Arab extraction has been instructed by the PLO to meet quietly with Secretary of State Vance to ask if the Secretary would be willing to meet secretly with Shafiq al-Hut, who is in the U.S. as a member of the PLO delegation attending the U.N. General Assembly. Al-Hut apparently has instructions from ‘Arafat to attempt to meet secretly with Secretary Vance to convey Palestinian views on the Camp David Accords to the U.S. Government as well as what in their opinion, the proper role of the PLO should be in future negotiations or in a peace settlement. No other members of the PLO delegation know of ‘Arafat’s instructions that al-Hut attempt to meet with Secretary Vance. 2 Telegram 22724 from Cairo, October 12, conveyed a conversation between Eilts and Shawqat regarding PLO participation in West Bank/Gaza negotiations. Eilts reported that Shawqat told him that he had sent a colonel with Egyptian military intelligence to meet with “second level” PLO leaders in Beirut in order to ascertain whether they would “be willing to cooperate” in negotiations. Shawqat “noted that GOE has little influence with influential West Bankers or with Gazans;” therefore, “Egyptians must be armed with strongest possible arguments,” a task made “much more difficult” by “recent Begin and Dayan statements.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850067–1850)
