1955  537
39. Wang replied I had said US had taken embargo measures out 
of security considerations. However in actual situation in relations 
between China and US, it is precisely China’s security that is threatened. 
Thus it can be seen measures of embargo are unreasonable and without 
basis. Disputes between us should be settled by peaceful means and 
for this end favorable atmosphere should be created. If embargo can be 
lifted at present time, it would contribute to such peaceful atmosphere.
40. Wang said we are in agreement on principle of advisability of 
making public statement. It should be possible agree on text. However, 
any discussion of text must be based on points of view acceptable to 
both of us. Draft proposed by his side October 27 has precisely met this 
spirit. He believed points enunciated that draft acceptable both sides.
41. Wang said, could it be that US objects to provisions UN Char­
ter? Or that US opposes peaceful settlement international disputes? 
Again, could US object to making concrete arrangements for peaceful 
settlement existing disputes between our two countries?
42. Wang said as to US draft, he had already expressed his views on 
every paragraph. He had explained that he could not accept US draft 
as basis for discussion because it involved Chinese internal matters. 
Chinese people will not give up determination liberate Taiwan. That is 
within scope China’s internal affairs and is unshakable determination 
Chinese people. Chinese people convinced they will achieve this end.
43. Wang said PRC side not opposed principle of individual and 
collective self-defense. That is inherent right of every state. However, 
with respect to Taiwan area side which is on defensive is Chinese side. 
In Taiwan area China is entitled to this right exclusively, US can of 
course claim right of self-defense but only after it has withdrawn from 
Taiwan area. Under present circumstances in which US occupies Tai­
wan China cannot accept what I had termed self-defense by US in this 
area. This another reason why US draft unacceptable his side.
44. Wang said he again requested and hoped I would agree adopt 
his draft proposal as basis for discussion.
45. I said last paragraph his draft mentioned Taiwan area. I took it 
that he did not consider this to prejudice his position concerning nature 
of dispute there. I did not understand why if he willing say that, he 
not willing say Taiwan area situtaion should not be cause war between 
us. I did not see how that would prejudice his position any more than 
mention of Taiwan in PRC draft.
46. Wang said I should be reminded there are actually two points 
in question that must not be confused. First, in Taiwan area there exists 
matter of China’s internal affairs—that is, question of China’s exercise 
of sovereign rights in liberty of Taiwan. This falls within scope Chinese 
internal affairs.
