1978 465 I. Preface In response to the NSC Directive of August 24, 1977, subject: “Follow-On Studies for PD/NSC–18,” the Secretary of Defense initiated a DoD study to address the following related issues: —­modernization of the ICBM force, —­the future of the Triad concept, and —U.S. requirements for hard-­target kill capability. This two-­volume study attempts to illuminate these and related issues of policy by focusing on broad cost-­effectiveness considerations and the factual basis underlying arguments about military requirements. With only a few exceptions, the study does not examine alternative designs for specific systems; nor does it explore the full range of conceivable strategic systems. Instead, we have focused primarily on the relative merits of illustrative forces with various deployments of MAP-­based MX, Trident II, and Cruise Missile Carriers. Volume II has been printed as a separate document; it contains: (1) the full text of the study’s technical papers, (2) discussion of the analytical methodology used in the cost-­effectiveness analysis, and (3) detailed information and results from that analysis, including background material on costs and special nuclear materials.6 This study was conducted by the Strategic Forces and Arms Limitation Division in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Program Analysis and Evaluation). Although the study team was assisted by a working group comprised of representatives from the Services, OJCS, DIA, and a number of OSD offices, this report is a PA&E product and has not been coordinated within DoD. II. General Observations This section describes a number of observations drawn from the study, but avoids conclusions on matters of policy. Section II.A summarizes observations of a general nature traceable to the technical papers contained in Volume II. Section II.B describes the observations from the study’s cost-­effectiveness analysis. A. From the Technical Papers: 1. The ICBM force has played a dominant role in the targeting of our strategic forces against the Soviet Union, [1 line not declassified] our forces will still be well-­hedged in their ability to destroy economic targets; however, we face a significant decrease in our counterforce capability until ALCMs are deployed in the mid-1980s. At that time, 6 Volume II of the report is in Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 14, PD–18 Folder #2 [1].
