1977  83
3. Trends which could prove more troublesome in the next five 
years, without US action (e.g., in mobilization capabilities, erosion of 
US diplomatic position [especially if ties to local leviathans are eroded], 
a “one-­way-­street” in transfers of technology and capital to the East, 
covert action capabilities, Soviet action in Africa).
4. Trends on which US direct impact is limited (e.g., political uncer-
tainty and weakness in Europe, China, Third World).
D. The advantages on which the United States can capitalize. There are 
five general areas in which the United States can exploit its opportuni-
ties to further advantage in the US–SU competition:
1. Economic strength—­the general level of US productivity as well 
as the attraction it possesses for the East, the regional influentials, and 
the more developed states of the Third World.
2. Diplomatic resources—­the large number of stable relationships 
the US has and can continue to have with the trilateral states, the local 
leviathans, and its regional clients.
3. Technological capacity—US technological dynamism and broad 
across-­the-­board lead in areas relevant to both the Soviet’s and Third 
World states.
4. Political-­ideological action—­the US ideological initiative and 
overall capacities—­both public and private plus those of our allies—­for 
influencing political attitudes and processes in other societies.
5. Force projection capabilities—­the superior “global reach” of the 
US.
E. Outcomes and strategies of Era II. Given the existing balance, the 
possible outcomes of Era II US–SU competition can be analyzed in 
terms of two basic questions:
1. Whether US–SU relations become more competitive, more coop-
erative, or stay about the same.
2. Whether the global power balance shifts toward the SU or the 
US, or remains about as it is now.
The nine possible outcomes are presented in the following chart. 
Outcome A1 would be most desirable but probably impossible. Out-
comes C2, C3, and B3 are clearly undesirable. Each of the remaining 
five outcomes could be feasible and could be reached by one of the 
alternative strategies outlined: condominium, cooperative, status quo, 
initiatives and preeminence.
Any discussion of these outcomes and strategies in detail is clearly 
premature. It is, however, appropriate to elicit agreement now on the 
desirability of attempting to develop a national strategy; presumably at 
a SCC meeting to follow PRC consideration of the force posture ques-
tions and packages.
