400 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III tional economic stimulus action if German growth appears to be falling short of the earlier FRG forecast of 3.5%.9 Although most German estimates suggest that 3.5% growth will not be achieved without further stimulus, there is little political pressure in Germany for expansionary action. Moreover, there are substantial differences of opinion in Germany as to the form that any action should take. Thus it will be easier for Schmidt to act if he can present his actions in the context of international cooperation, including action by the US. Schmidt may elaborate to you on his difficulties, indicate that he doubts more than a small stimulus—if any—will be needed, suggest that he would like to make up his mind only after the Summit, and add, as in his last letter to you, that the Summit should focus on underlying structural issues (i.e., inflation, energy, and trade, where the action would come from others), rather than on short-term issues (i.e., growth, where the action would have to come from him).10 He may also make clear that if he does take stimulus action he will insist on reciprocal action by others, including US action on inflation and energy. As in his conversation with Owen,11 he may say that it makes no sense for Germany to accelerate its growth unless the dollar is strengthened by such US action, ask when you will take administrative action on energy if the Congress does not act, and urge on you the merits of raising the US crude oil price to the world level. 4. Our Position. We want the Summit to develop an economic package along the lines that you and Callaghan discussed: US action on 9 In a May 10 memorandum to Carter, Owen relayed a U.K. report on a Schmidt-Callaghan meeting, in which Schmidt appeared “prepared to participate constructively in a concerted plan of action for the Summit, and he told the Prime Minister explicitly that if President Carter would act on inflation and energy, then he would act (notwithstanding his lack of intellectual conviction) on stimulating the FRG economy. We do not think that he intends to take any such action until July, and the size of what he will do will no doubt be influenced by how he judges the rest of the package. Nevertheless the readiness seems to be there, though he hoped we would not press him too much publicly between now and July.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 111, President’s Europe Trip: 4–5/78) 10 In a May 17 message to Carter, Schmidt suggested that it was “extremely important that at the July summit we should devote special attention to the long term structural aspects of economic development.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German Federal Republic: 4–6/78) In a May 18 letter to Carter, Trudeau also stressed the importance of addressing the Summit agenda “in a way that brings clearly to our minds the longer-term, structural nature of the forces with which our policies must contend.” Owen noted in a May 18 memorandum to Carter Johnstone’s belief that Schmidt’s message and Trudeau’s letter “were both the result of a phone conversation between Trudeau and Schmidt.” (Both in Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 3, Canada: Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau, 1/77–8/78) 11 See Document 125.
