1980  807
beams, and nonnuclear electromagnetic pulse generation. The mag-
nitude, scope, and variety of these programs suggest that the Soviets 
are actively exploring ways by which they might use directed-­energy 
technology to overcome or alleviate major weaknesses in their strategic 
defenses.
—The Soviets may now have a ground-­based laser capable of dam-
aging some satellite sensors and may have a space-­based antisatellite 
weapon under development. With a successful high-­priority effort, the 
Soviets might be able to have ground-­based laser air defense weapons 
ready for operational deployment to strategic air defense forces in the 
middle-­to-­late 1980s. The Soviets evidently are also investigating the 
feasibility of a laser weapon for ballistic missile defense. We believe 
that such a weapon, if feasible, could not be ready for operational 
deployment before 1990.
—The Soviets probably have the capability to develop, by the mid-
dle 1980s, a ground-­based nonnuclear electromagnetic pulse weapon 
designed to disrupt or destroy the electronic circuitry of enemy deliv-
ery systems.
—Soviet research programs applicable to particle beam weapons 
(PBW) may permit the USSR to determine the feasibility of such weap-
ons several years before the United States. If feasibility is proved, the 
Soviets probably could begin testing a prototype short-­range (about 
3 km) PBW system for air defense by about 1990. There is an alternative 
view that Soviet research in technologies applicable to PBW could be 
sufficiently advanced to allow the USSR to begin prototype testing by 
the middle 1980s, if feasibility is proved.14 All agree that development 
of long-­range PBW weapons would take much longer.
Civil Defense
70. We have reassessed the ability of Soviet civil defenses to reduce 
casualties from a US retaliatory attack following a Soviet first strike. 
Casualties and fatalities would vary greatly depending on the extent of 
civil defense preparations. Our findings indicate that, at present.
—Prompt Soviet casualties would be about 120 million (including 
85 million fatalities) in the case of little or no preparation, about 100 
million (60 million fatalities) if urban shelters were fully occupied, and 
about 40 million (15 million fatalities) if both sheltering and evacuation 
plans had been fully implemented.
—With a few hours warning, a large percentage of the Soviet lead-
ership at all levels of government probably would survive. With several 
additional hours for preparation, about one-­fourth of the work force in 
key Soviet industries probably would also survive.
—Civil defense could not prevent massive damage to the Soviet 
economy.
14 The holder of this view is the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air 
Force. [Footnote is in the original.]
