Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 307 will deny this means of improving ICBM survivability. Whichever way the President ultimately goes, the decision will draw criticism. Indeed, many of those favoring mobile ICBMs will still be critical of mobile ICBM verification, and many who oppose mobile ICBMs will criticize START because it won’t solve the ICBM survivability problem. Nevertheless, the President and the United States could be well-­served by taking an initiative on mobile ICBMs in the START negotiations early which would clarify what the US position would be “if mobile ICBMs were permitted.” A sound proposal would permit the President to gain support from the Congress for his strategic modernization program and once again place the arms control “ball” squarely in the Soviet court, thus enhancing our leverage. At the same time, the proposal must be carefully designed to avoid disrupting the momentum of the negotiations or fueling a backlash from the Hill either from liberals or conservatives. Below I offer a package which I believe could gain broad support within the Administration, build bridges with a number of diverse Congressional constituencies, and enhance negotiating momentum and leverage in START. (S/NF) After, or if necessary during upcoming congressional action on ICBM funding, the President should meet with Congressional leadership again and state that in START he is prepared to permit a limited number of warheads on mobile ICBMs, assuming that verification provisions can be agreed and that the overall package enhances stability. The President should make clear that in so doing he expects the Congress to continue to support his two-­missile mobile ICBM modernization program so that the United States will be able to deploy as many warheads on mobile ICBMs as the Soviet Union is permitted to deploy under the treaty. The President should also make clear that although he believes that we can effectively verify a limited number of mobile ICBMs, the Congress must understand up front—­before the ratification debate—­that the verification of mobile ICBMs will not be as tight as the verification of some other central provisions. Finally, the President would make clear that as part of the package permitting mobile ICBMs he will propose additional measures designed to enhance stability, while maintaining momentum in the negotiations. (S/NF) Specifically, the President would propose to the Soviet Union that, if conditions for permitting mobile ICBMs were met, i.e., verification resolved and US modernization assured, the sides could then agree to a ceiling somewhere between 400 and 800 warheads on mobile ICBMs, but that MIRVed mobiles would also count against the 15402 ceiling 2 Davis underlined “MIRved mobiles” and “would also count against the 1540,” drew a vertical line in the right-­hand margin beside the portion of this sentence that begins with “assured, the sides” and ends with “the 1540 ceiling on,” and wrote: “hardly compelling.”
