3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
432
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
tions. He said they agree that a fractionation limit was a sound prin-
ciple and should be included, but was linked to a solution of the major
issues, i.e., their acceptance of our position on freedom to choose a
MIRVed or single RV ICBM in return for our acceptance of their posi-
tion on cruise missile fractionation, timeline of reductions and Backfire.
Limits on numbers of SLBM RVs was similarly a side question that
could be discussed by delegations.
C. The Soviet proposal for handling exceptions (one ICBM, no
limit on SLBMs) was linked only to U.S. acceptance of Soviet positions
on the three items specifically identified—Backfire, ALCM limits per
aircraft, and timing of reductions. There is, as he put it, “no etcetera.”
He said the Soviets could not retreat on Backfire—ALCM numbers, but
sounded a little more flexible on timing of reductions. On Backfire,
however, he repeated that while they “could not add one comma, they
could make it more compact” eliminating some matters, if that was
what we wanted.
D. The aggregates referred to are the 2400, 2250, 1320, 1200, 820. On
what he called the “secondary issues” i.e., those not listed, he seemed to
want to suggest that the Soviets could be flexible, saying that the other
matters were open for discussion by the delegations and all they had
said was that they should be settled “on the basis” of their proposals.
2. In side conversation, Dobrynin said that “because of China”
there could never be limits on air defenses, and suggested Soviets had
come to Geneva with their proposal and had not considered our new
proposal in great detail.
3. On CTB, the discussion was general. Gromyko said the Agree-
ment should be “comprehensive,” without going into details. On dura-
tion, he suggested that there might be arguments for a five-year dura-
tion, to which Warnke countered that he was beginning to find the
arguments for three years more convincing. Gromyko seemed to re-
treat from the Soviet acceptance of the concept of National Seismic Sta-
tions, saying that national technical means should suffice. His remarks
were, however, somewhat inconsistent with the comments of Petro-
syants, chairman of the Soviet CTB delegation. Petrosyants, said that
verification could be “divided”, with initial reliance on NTM and then
phasing in of National Seismic Stations. Warnke will clarify this issue
with Petrosyants, stressing that we will discuss the number, location
and timing but will insist on the principle of NSS.
Vance
