Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Amendment, which is law, directs the U.S. Executive Director in the Inter-American Development Bank to vote against extending international financial assistance to countries that engage in consistent human rights violations unless such assistance directly benefits “the needy people in such countr(ies).” The Badillo Amendment closely parallels the Harkin language, extending the Harkin provisions to all IFI’s.) The Senate will be considering this issue next week in Committee. Senator Humphrey is sponsoring language that closely parallels the Reuss language, allowing greater flexibility for the Administration than the Badillo Amendment. Senator Humphrey believes that his language will pass the Senate only if it receives strong Administration support. NSC, State, AID, Treasury and Export-Import Bank representatives met on April 11, to discuss ways to improve our increasingly weak and defensive posture on the Hill. There was consensus at the meeting that the major reason for the defeat of the Reuss language and the adoption of the Badillo Amendment was that the Administration never adopted a strong clear position during the debate.5 There was also consensus at the meeting that the Humphrey language is far preferable to the Badillo language and that in order to achieve success in the Senate, the President will personally have to voice both his support for Humphrey and his opposition to the Badillo-Harkin approach.6 Attached at Tab A is a Treasury paper which outlines the proposed Administration position on Human Rights amendments, citing arguments for the Humphrey amendment and against Badillo-Harkin language. 5 In an April 11 action memorandum to Christopher, Bennet described the interagency meeting and added: “The consensus of the group was that the Administration can not afford to go any farther than the Humphrey amendment, and that the Administration should support Humphrey, and oppose Badillo-type amendments. Treasury, which has the lead on this bill, is (a) leading an inter-agency effort to prepare a cogent and simple argument for this position, and (b) checking out the possibility of floor amendments.” (Ibid.) Tuchman also provided a synopsis of the meeting in the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s April 11 evening report to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Re- 6 In his April 6 briefing memorandum to Vance, Bennet commented that the Badillo amendments “were as popular as motherhood and passed as voice votes. Reuss was not able to stave off a Rousselot–Badillo squeeze from right and left. If we had been prepared to take a firmer stand against Harkin rather than simply supporting the committee bill, it is possible that we could have avoided any amendments. I continue to believe, however, that the damage to the President’s credibility as a human rights champion would have been very substantial, and that our chances of removing the language in conference are substantial.” (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Chron and Official Records of the Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Lot 85D366, Harkin)
