Dominican Republic 521 unprecedented steps earlier this year by publicly criticizing the regime. The Nuncio’s statements to me at the time implied: “Well, we have done our part, now it is your turn”. I do not believe Wilbur Morrison would be a happy choice either. He would be running a great risk since if the Generalissimo should publicize the approach, Pan American’s reputation all over Latin America might suffer. None of the governments like Trujillo, but I suspect they would like even less the idea of a high official of a U.S. enterprise seeking to overthrow even Trujillo’s government. I regret that I cannot propose a likely name for you, but I think you will see why from comments on the embarrassment which I believe any approach of ours might cause us. Getting away from an approach by a U.S. agent or the Nuncio, the type of approach I think we could make without coming off second best would be one we might make in concert with other countries. The preferable approach would be by the OAS itself, ourselves participating. Next best would be an approach by, let us say, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico and the U.S. If we could include Canada this would be very helpful indeed. An approach of this sort might stand a chance of convincing the Generalissimo that the jig was up and the countries involved would be numerous and powerful enough so that Trujillo could not saddle any one of them with the onus of intervention. While this tack might have the advantage mentioned, I suppose the greatest obstacle in using it would be the unlikelihood that the countries named would participate owing to their non-­interventionist commitments. The approach by the OAS itself would perhaps be the most likely and certainly the most legally defensible—­but I do not suppose that we could obtain concurrence even there. As I mentioned, I believe the only reason the Generalissimo might leave is fear of imminent death—­and this is not certain. For this reason I think the Dominicans themselves have got to do the persuading. We can help them to do it in a number of ways, some of which are probably not legally possible for us. The best way would be to stop buying sugar, coffee, cacao and beef from this country. This would hit Trujillo and those around him. His own henchmen might then turn against him as their pockets would be affected. We should try to hasten the day when his own men will refuse to obey his orders and will tell him there is a plane waiting for him at the airport. Other measures which would help toward this result would be an embargo on exports of petroleum products, especially lubricants to the D.R. The country runs on these products and if we could make it impossible or highly expensive for Trujillo to obtain them we would be contributing to dissatisfaction among those dependent on him. Another helpful measure would be to induce Canadian and U.S. banks to stop loaning money to the D. R. [text not declassified] Anything we can do to show the Dominicans that Trujillo is losing his grip may at some point
