1955 121 political ramifications. It will be looked into by Office Legal Adviser but it is doubtful we can come up with anything which would be helpful to you in context present talks. If no concrete problem this sort arises we anticipate you will be able continue parry Wang’s thrusts along lines already established. Dulles 98. Telegram 542 to Geneva1 Washington, August 17, 1955, 7:31 p.m. 542. For Johnson. Your 499, 500, 504, 516. Department agrees with your analysis situation following sev­ enth meeting. You are authorized in your discretion at eighth meeting tomorrow agree insert phrase QUOTE as a result of official action taken in accordance with its governmental process UNQUOTE in numbered paragraph 1 both sections of draft QUOTE Agreed Announcement UNQUOTE, following words QUOTE and declares that UNQUOTE. Our only reservation on this language stems from fact that US has no exit permit system and statement on US side does not seem com­ pletely consistent with our position that no US Government approval ordinarily necessary in order for alien depart from US. However, this objection not fundamental and can be disregarded if you believe incor­ poration of phrase might be helpful. It would seem undesirable for you take initiative in proposing recess at next meeting. Our position is that no reason exists for delay in settling all matters under item 1. Therefore, if recess needed it would be only because required by Chinese Communists, and they should take responsibility for proposing it. We should be prepared meet again on item 1 after usual two-­day interval if other side does not propose recess. Proposal of recess by us except in case of threatened break would not be consistent with our desire maintain continuous strong pressure on Wang and encourage general impression that action by Chinese Com­ munists to match ours is awaited and expected. FYI Our 496 was designed primarily to enable you demonstrate to Wang that we were in a strong public relations position. If matters 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–1755. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Dulles and McConaughy; cleared in draft by Sebald.
