570 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement period will probably stress a number of studies related to the Soviet missile and space programs, and will also include theoretical antigrav­ ity investigations, work in plasma physics, and elaboration of present theories of ion, photon, and free radical propulsion. Of great aid to research in physics and mathematics is the considerable Soviet capa­ bility in the design, development and application of computers with larger memory capacity and increased operation speeds, as well as small computers suitable for mass production and usable in small com­ putation centers. 94. Geophysics. Soviet performance in the geophysical sciences is believed to be generally equal to that of the US, and superior in some fields, particularly polar geophysics. The large and comprehensive Soviet IGY program is expected to have a considerable effect on the develop­ ment of geophysics in the USSR. The orbiting of earth satellites carry­ ing heavy payloads of complex instrumentation probably has already given the USSR a lead in these methods of upper atmosphere and space research. The USSR probably will make advances comparable to those of the US in meteorology and oceanography. It will probably continue to be among the world leaders in seismology, gravimetry, geomagnetism and geoelectricity, and will add to its already considerable achievement in permafrost research and geochemical prospecting. 95. Chemistry and metallurgy. The USSR lags behind the US in the magnitude and level of research effort in most fields of chemistry and metallurgy; however, Soviet research in certain areas continues to be of high caliber. A major strength will continue to be in the theoretical aspects of some fields of chemistry. There will probably be a major expansion of all chemical research, with particular emphasis on fields where the West now leads, such as in petrochemicals, new plastic mate­ rials, and synthetic fibers. In metallurgy, research will be especially pushed in the high temperature field and in those areas of metallurgy related to solid state physics, particularly in semiconductors and ther­ moelectric power generation. 96. Medical sciences. With some exceptions, Soviet medical research is still behind that of the US. Soviet research assets, however, are expanding rapidly and will continue to be concentrated in areas of high economic and military priority. The Soviets are conducting an advanced program in space medicine and astrobiology. The availabil­ ity of rocket vehicles and effective propulsion systems has enabled the Soviets to use animals to test life-­sustaining systems in space and under space equivalent conditions to a greater degree than has been possible in the US. We believe that they lead the US in rocket flight physiology, studies of possible forms of life on other planets, and in the techniques and equipment for recovery of test subjects from extreme altitudes. However, there are no indications that they have conducted prolonged
