Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX (C) Economic: (1) Establish a U.S. position on what we require from GOH in way of MFN assurances on emigration policy. (2) Continue to encourage exchange of senior economic policy officials, including Havasi and Biro, between U.S. and GOH. (3) Promote exchange of views between American economists and officials and their Hungarian counterparts. (4) Encourage expansion of American-Hungarian trade, business contacts, and joint ventures, with special attention to agriculture and livestock development. (5) Undertake additional market-oriented reporting. (6) Annual participation in one of Budapest trade fairs. (7) Conclude double taxation agreement. (8) Attempt to facilitate activities of U.S. businessmen in Hungary by seeking GOH cooperation in providing trade directories of potential contacts, getting GOH to agree to expand number of direct contacts with Hungarian firms, and by obtaining multiple entry visas for businessmen. (D) Informational, cultural, and scientific: (1) Continue building exchanges and cultural and scientific program in accordance with recently concluded Cultural/Scientific Agreement and program document. (2) Continue to explain U.S. foreign policy to media leaders through regular briefings and distribution of background materials and policy statements. (3) Expand program of distribution of information materials in political, cultural, academic, and economic fields. (E) Consular: (1) Continue present effort to resolve divided family cases by quiet diplomacy. (2) Seek Hungarian agreement that multiple entry visas of oneyear duration be issued to official personnel of each government whose duties require them to travel frequently on TDY to host countries. (3) Where feasible, develop other proposals to facilitate visa issuance and eliminate or reduce visa fees. (4) Where necessary, obtain GOH cooperation in protection and welfare services to American citizens. (F) Administrative: (1) Obtain FBO team immediately to advise on value and disposal of U.S. Government excess properties in Budapest. (2) Begin negotiations, by early September at latest, for indemnification of UST for nationalized properties, resolution of squatter problem,
