890
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
338.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
Islamabad, December 11, 1980, 1053Z
12795. Subject: Afghanistan and Pakistan/U.S. Relations.
1. (S) Entire text.
2. Summary: The end of 1980 and the current transition period
leads us to take another look at some fundamental issues which are
key to U.S./Pakistan relations during the coming years. For simplicity
of presentation we have divided these concerns into (A) Afghanistan-
related issues, (B) U.S./Pakistan bilateral issues and expectations, and
(C) South and Southwest Asia security concerns. This telegram,
addressing the Afghanistan question, is the first of three which we
are submitting and which are intended to stimulate a dialogue with
Washington and other concerned posts aimed at a more precise defini-
tion of options available to us. The Afghanistan situation remains cen-
tral to our relationship with Islamabad and to Islamabad’s relationship
with many of the nations of Southwest, if not South, Asia. Pakistan’s
firm stance on Afghanistan continues to be fundamental to our own
policy. We think it behooves us to take a look ahead—possibly at some
unthinkables—so that our policies will at least attempt to influence the
course of events rather than the other way around. End summary.
3. In the midst of a major transition between administrations and
as we near the first anniversary of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan,
we think it opportune to suggest that the Department and other mem-
bers of the foreign affairs community in Washington take a look at the
Afghan situation and the policy options it presents us. Some of those
options bear directly on the future of our relationship with Pakistan
and other countries in this region, and we would like to offer a few
thoughts from this vantage point.
4. We start with a few basic assumptions derived from our reading
of the current situation in Afghanistan and the likely course of events
over the next year; these we regard as “givens”:
—(A) Soviet troops will remain in Afghanistan as long as Moscow
deems it necessary to secure a sympathetic regime in Kabul and to
remold Afghan institutions along Communist lines;
—(B) Soviet pressures, including cross-border attacks on Pakistan,
will continue and probably escalate as Moscow seeks to intimidate
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800590–0379.
Secret; Immediate; Eyes Only. Sent for information to Karachi, Beijing, Moscow, New
Delhi, London, Kabul, and Jidda. Pouched for information to Peshawar and Lahore.
