March 27–December 31, 1979 1029 Should a visit to Beirut eventuate I also think that Phil should come here—to do otherwise would feed Israeli suspicions that we are cooking up something behind their backs. In addition, while Israeli restraint in the aftermath of the November 18 Palestinian seaborne attack6 indicates that the lid Weizman put on the IDF is still firmly in place, Phil’s presence here could only be helpful in reinforcing the current Israeli policy of “not hitting until hit.” 3. This being said, however, such a visit would need to be handled carefully, and keyed just about as low as possible. As in the case of Phil’s late October visit here,7 it will be difficult at first to turn the GOI—and contain the Israeli media—from the suspicion that the purpose of the visit is not “fact-finding”, but to advance a substantive U.S. initiative. And those we do convince will again be likely to scorn our effort as bereft of accomplishment or solid prospects for progress in any way that can benefit Israel’s security. Although the Israelis are not yet as informed as we about the events or outcome at Tunis, they have digested enough of its product to have concluded that, at the least, the PLO gave up nothing while GOL hopes to bolster its integrity and authority were rebuffed. While it may be useful to explore with the GOL whether there is anything positive that can be built upon the “few elements” cited in ref A, I believe we should be very circumspect about presenting these to the Israelis as causes for even slight optimism. From what we now know of the Arab Summit’s handling of the Lebanon problem it does not appear even remotely in line with the four foundation-stones of “the Lebanon initiative” as understood by the Israelis: an evolution from cease-fire to truce; removal of PLO and unauthorized fighting elements from UNIFIL’s AO; a measured expansion of GOL authority; and no impingement on Haddad’s area for the time being. An illustrative footnote to the Israeli attitude is the statement which Ciechanover and others made during Phil’s last trip: that it would help if the PLO in Beirut would cease taking credit for terrorist attacks initiated inside Israel. This idea was put forward as something that would, in the context of an initiative such as that sketched above, help Israel maintain the ceasefire as part of an overall movement toward a truce. In context of the negative Tunis Summit outcome, howponed pending “indication” from the Lebanese “that such a trip would be useful.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790570–0246) 6 On the night of November 18–19, an Israeli patrol boat intercepted a rubber boat piloted by Palestinian infiltrators off the Israeli coast near Nahariyya. In the exchange of fire which followed, two Palestinians were reportedly killed and two captured. (Telegram 24566 from Tel Aviv, November 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790532–0996) 7 For a summary of Habib’s October 24–November 1 visit to the region, see Document 306.
