March 27–December 31, 1979
1029
Should a visit to Beirut eventuate I also think that Phil should come
here—to do otherwise would feed Israeli suspicions that we are
cooking up something behind their backs. In addition, while Israeli re-
straint in the aftermath of the November 18 Palestinian seaborne at-
tack6 indicates that the lid Weizman put on the IDF is still firmly in
place, Phil’s presence here could only be helpful in reinforcing the cur-
rent Israeli policy of “not hitting until hit.”
3. This being said, however, such a visit would need to be handled
carefully, and keyed just about as low as possible. As in the case of
Phil’s late October visit here,7 it will be difficult at first to turn the
GOI—and contain the Israeli media—from the suspicion that the pur-
pose of the visit is not “fact-finding”, but to advance a substantive U.S.
initiative. And those we do convince will again be likely to scorn our ef-
fort as bereft of accomplishment or solid prospects for progress in any
way that can benefit Israel’s security. Although the Israelis are not yet
as informed as we about the events or outcome at Tunis, they have di-
gested enough of its product to have concluded that, at the least, the
PLO gave up nothing while GOL hopes to bolster its integrity and
authority were rebuffed. While it may be useful to explore with the
GOL whether there is anything positive that can be built upon the
“few elements” cited in ref A, I believe we should be very circumspect
about presenting these to the Israelis as causes for even slight opti-
mism. From what we now know of the Arab Summit’s handling of the
Lebanon problem it does not appear even remotely in line with the four
foundation-stones of “the Lebanon initiative” as understood by the Is-
raelis: an evolution from cease-fire to truce; removal of PLO and unau-
thorized fighting elements from UNIFIL’s AO; a measured expansion
of GOL authority; and no impingement on Haddad’s area for the time
being. An illustrative footnote to the Israeli attitude is the statement
which Ciechanover and others made during Phil’s last trip: that it
would help if the PLO in Beirut would cease taking credit for terrorist
attacks initiated inside Israel. This idea was put forward as something
that would, in the context of an initiative such as that sketched above,
help Israel maintain the ceasefire as part of an overall movement
toward a truce. In context of the negative Tunis Summit outcome, how-
poned pending “indication” from the Lebanese “that such a trip would be useful.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790570–0246)
6 On the night of November 18–19, an Israeli patrol boat intercepted a rubber boat
piloted by Palestinian infiltrators off the Israeli coast near Nahariyya. In the exchange of
fire which followed, two Palestinians were reportedly killed and two captured. (Tele-
gram 24566 from Tel Aviv, November 19; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D790532–0996)
7 For a summary of Habib’s October 24–November 1 visit to the region, see Docu-
ment 306.
