January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1319 —Lewis (and other USG officials) will not be going to East Jerusalem. However (one variant would state), we will not go public with this until the move actually takes place; and5 —we share Sadat’s dilemma on the continuation of the autonomy talks, but believe on balance it would be better to keep them going.6 (S) At the same time, Begin has complained7 to Sam about press stories (in Israel, before the Gwertzman piece8) about Muskie’s remarks to the Cabinet. Muskie has asked that a response9 go to Begin about our efforts to keep this out of the press; recounting what our approaches had been to Israel on this; and indicating that the Cabinet session was private—but the Prime Minister will understand how leaks in a democracy can happen! (S) Clearly, of course, we remain in a reactive position—though we have little choice, and USG has collectively been doing a good job lately in managing a complex effort. (The UNGA speech10—which everyone but Vanden Heuvel liked—drew praise both from Begin and from Essafi (Tunisian Permrep), who also said that the PLO “understood” that we had to make such a statement. We must be doing something right/ wrong!). (S) There is no easy way out of the reactive position. One suggestion, however: that Muskie go out to Egypt and Israel to talk over the situation, in general—not keyed to Jerusalem (since that is virtually a fait accompli, etc.), but rather to go over the whole complex of issues, au- 5 In the right-hand margin next to this point, Brzezinski wrote: “yes.” 6 In the right-hand margin next to this point, Brzezinski wrote: “yes.” 7 In a telephone call to Lewis on July 29, Begin requested confirmation of media reports that Muskie used “sharp expressions” when speaking to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and Senate regarding the transfer of the Israeli Prime Minister’s office to East Jerusalem, particularly the alleged use of the word “provocation” in characterizing the Israeli action. (Telegram 13785 from Tel Aviv, July 29; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P890005–0410) 8 Reference is presumably to The New York Times reporter Bernard Gwertzman’s May 27 article in which he reported that Carter administration officials viewed Weizman’s resignation as a setback to the autonomy negotiations. Gwertzman added that senior administration officials believed that domestic politics in Israel might lead Begin to “surprise us and demonstrate more give” in the next round of talks.” (Bernard Gwertzman, “In Washington, Officials Express Optimism in Talks,” The New York Times, May 27, 1980, p. A18) 9 The response to Begin, stating that the United States has made “every effort to avoid public confrontation” and that Muskie’s briefing for the Cabinet was “confidential and not intended for publication,” was conveyed in telegram 200886 to Tel Aviv, July 29. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880143–1093) 10 On July 24, before an Emergency Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly called to consider draft resolutions A/RES/ES–7/2 and A/RES/ES–7/3 on Palestinian rights, Vanden Heuvel delivered a statement of the U.S. position, which he confirmed in a second statement on July 29 following the passage of the two resolutions. The texts of both statements are printed in the Department of State Bulletin, September 1980, pp. 66–69.
