3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 916 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI Secretary Muskie cautioned that Political Directors should not be called together until we knew what we were going to do. (C) Admiral Turner suggested the mini-SCC should discuss [text not declassified] particularly means aimed at building up sentiment in Europe against an invasion. (S) Dr. Brzezinski asked the group to look at the President’s debrief of Reagan. He felt the mini-SCC should be sure to deal with the question of the (1) meeting of the Political Directors; (2) economic sanctions; and (3) military measures. (C) [Omitted here is discussion of Korea.] 312. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to President Carter, Vice President Mondale, Secretary of State Muskie, Secretary of Defense Brown, and the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, December 5, 1980 SUBJECT Plans for Warsaw Pact Intervention in Poland 1. The following information was received [1 line not declassified] The date of the information is 4 December. a. Moscow has developed a plan for intervention in Poland which was delivered to the Polish General Staff and agreed to by Polish military leaders. The intervention is to take place under the pretext of joint Soviet, East German and Czechoslovak exercises in Poland. Readiness to cross the Polish frontiers was set for 8 December. b. The plan calls for forces to include three armies comprising 15 Soviet divisions, and one army comprising two Czechoslovak divisions and an army staff and one division from East Germany. Altogether, the intervention forces in the first phase will comprise 18 divisions. An additional four divisions will be attached to the Czechoslovak and East German armies. [less than 1 line not declassified] these are four Polish divisions located along the border with East Germany.) c. Warsaw Pact officers in civilian dress are currently surveying the march routes and areas where future actions are contemplated. The 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 65, Poland: 11/80–1/81. Top Secret.
