January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1359 Options: 1. Stand on our previous position. (No agency recommends) 2. Adopt the liberalized position recommended by State and Energy, as outlined above.6 3. Adopt the State-Energy proposal except authorize our negotiators to liberalize the spot market purchase criterion to 60% and, in light of Modai’s reaction, to indicate that we are prepared to review our position further in the course of continuing negotiations; direct our negotiators to seek your further instructions if it appears that this round of negotiations will end in acrimonious disagreement. (Owen recommends; State and DOE do not object.) 4. Direct our negotiators to begin with the positions outlined above, but then to bargain for the best compromise they can reach with Modai next week, consistent with the concept of a supply assurance, including acceptance of the Israeli position that either the price test or the spot market test must be met. (No agency recommends) 6 Carter approved options 2 and 3, though he crossed out the phrase, “Adopt the State-Energy proposal except authorize our negotiators to liberalize the spot market purchase criterion to 60% and, in light of Modai’s reaction, to indicate that we are prepared to review our position further in the course of continuing negotiations,” in option 3. Carter did not approve options 1 and 4. 407. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, October 8, 1980, 9:33–10 a.m. SUBJECT Summary of the President’s Meeting on Oil Negotiations with Israel PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Vice President Walter F. Mondale Secretary of State Edmund Muskie Secretary of Energy Charles Duncan Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Stuart Eizenstat, Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs and Policy 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 86, Sensitive XX: 10/1–15/80. Secret. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room.
