of all political parties. It is true the United States did not ratify the Versailles
Treaty and the League of Nations. It is unnecessary for me to review the
history of this struggle which did to some extent become a political issue.
One thing might be said in passing—that the United States was unwilling to
commit itself to the application of sanctions or to use force against any
belligerent country, that is, it cannot pledge its armed forces in advance.
There were other objections to the Treaty which do not in my judgment
bear upon the present Treaty at all.
A brief history of these negotiations might be useful to you although I
présumé you are very familiar with them. As you know, M. Briand made a
public speech in April, 1927 in which he announced that France would be
willing to enter into a treaty agreeing that the two countries should never go
to war with each other. On June 27, 1927, he sent me a note containing the
form of a treaty proposed which is exactly in the language of the present
Treaty with the exception of the preamble and such changes as were
necessary to make it applicable to all the nations of the world. This
proposition was given the most careful consideration not only by myself but
by the President and many Senators, especially those of the Foreign
Relations Committee, and on the twenty-seventh of December, 1927, I
replied to Briand’s note accepting the principle but suggesting that it be
applied to other nations. The intention then was and always has been that
the Treaty should ultimately, if possible, be signed by all countries in the
world thus making a notable declaration against war as a means of settling
international disputes. I think some misunderstanding has occurred by
reason of the fact that negotiations were not opened with all the countries in
the world and especially with the leading nations of South America. There
were no secret communications between the French Government and the
United States or between the United States and any Government pertaining
to this Treaty. I did not then believe, and do not now, that there was the
necessity for such a treaty in Central and South America as in Europe. That
was the seat of the last great war and the seeds of war were existent in
Central Europe to a greater extent than in any other place in the world. I
think it is an acknowledged fact that there is little danger of war in South
America or anywhere in the Western Hemisphere. Nevertheless, it was my
opinion then, and still is, that a declaration signed by all the countries in the
world would have a greater influence, especially a greater moral influence,
