Eastern Europe Region
121
The area-wide measures we recommend in pursuit of such a pol-
icy are:
—Differentiate between U.S. export licensing treatment for the
Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact countries of Eastern Europe. [N.B.
A decision on the implementation of such a policy must await a final
decision on a new area-wide export control policy.]8
—Inform Eastern European governments that any diversion of
grain or technology to the Soviet Union would lead us to immediately
cut off such exports to them.9
—Consult with the West Europeans, as appropriate, in NATO, the
OECD, the European Community, and bilaterally, to pursue our shared
objectives throughout Eastern Europe and to focus particularly on
policies that would support Yugoslav and Romanian independence.
—Reaffirm US policy of encouraging trade and financial ties with
CEMA countries other than the USSR in view of the fact that some
members of the US banking community are uncertain about our policy.
The country-specific measures we would take in pursuit of this policy
would depend to an important degree on the given country’s behavior
concerning Afghanistan and Iran. Therefore, a brief discussion of each
country’s reaction to these two issues precedes the catalog of measures
which might be taken.
YUGOSLAVIA
Yugoslavia has strongly and publicly condemned the Soviet inva-
sion of Afghanistan and worked with a number of nonaligned countries
to obtain a UN General Assembly resolution censuring the Soviets.
Tito has publicly opposed the taking of the hostages in Iran, and the
Yugoslavs are cooperating quietly in working on the Iranians to secure
their release.
We should intensify our efforts to strengthen all aspects of our
relations and encourage our NATO allies to do likewise. Over the near
term, we should give priority to the following steps:
—Military Sales. Improve our responsiveness to Yugoslav requests
for purchases of military hardware.10
8 All brackets are in the original.
9 On January 4, 1980, President Carter cancelled the sale of 17 million tons of grain
to the Soviet Union in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Faced with a
projected shortage of grain, the Soviet Union sought to obtain replacement grain from
the world market. As sales of U.S. grain to Eastern Europe were not affected, the adminis-
tration stressed to Eastern European Governments that any diversion, transshipment,
or replacement of grain to the Soviet Union would be dimly viewed in Washington.
10 See Document 285.
