Afghanistan 157 2 CIA is authorized to explore with the [less than 1 line not declassified] government its reaction to utilization of its broadcasts into Afghanistan. (Option 1) (S) 3 CIA was also given approval to expand psych efforts to support the insurgency and to unite the Afghan dissidents. Authorization was also given to work with an existing Pakistani agent asset with ties to Afghanistan dissident groups. (S) 4 Options 4 and 5 (which were defined as alternatives, and not separate options) will be considered after Pakistani reactions and other political fallout are taken into account.4 (S) 5 It was also agreed to tell the government of Saudi Arabia of the US decision to give covert non-military support the Afghan dissidents. The Saudis will also be encouraged to put some of their own funds into similar covert aid projects. (S) CIA was asked to draft a Presidential Finding which would cover implementation of the first five options of the CIA proposal on a stepby-step basis, with as much flexibility built into the plan as possible.5 [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] 4 Attached at Tabs E and F, respectively. Option 4, entitled “Humanitarian Support,” called for approval to use “a third country as a front for providing humanitarian aid to the insurgents.” The paper proposed that countries such as Saudi Arabia, Oman, or Egypt might act in such a capacity, given that “politically, this may be more acceptable to Pakistan than becoming directly involved with the U.S. in insurgent support.” On the other hand, “U.S. control of the program would be reduced” with participation of a third country, “which may intimate the ultimate source of such support to the Pakistanis,” which could in turn result in complications that might deprive the Afghan insurgents of support in the time frame they required. At a cost of [amount not declassified] (divided among medical supplies, food, clothing, transportation, and cash to insurgent leaders), the option posed moderate risk of linking the United States to the program. The USSR and DRA might take notice of such involvement, but if not, Soviet reaction would be minimal and Pakistan “would be able to maintain deniability.” Option 5, also entitled “Humanitarian Support,” called for approval to “provide humanitarian supplies to the insurgents through the Government of Pakistan.” The objective and cost were identical to Option 4, while the projected risk of Option 5 was slightly lower, and if Pakistan agreed to act as a conduit to the insurgents “this option would likely be the most efficient means of providing such support.” Option 6, attached but not printed at Tab G, was not discussed at the SCC meeting. It called for approval “to provide limited military supplies to the insurgents through the Government of Pakistan,” at a cost of [amount not declassified] and with moderate to high risk of exposure. 5 The SCC meeting led to two Presidential Findings on Afghanistan, both signed by Carter on July 3. The first, whose scope covered Afghanistan, provided authorization to “support insurgent propaganda and other psychological operations in Afghanistan; establish radio access to the Afghan population through third country facilities;” and “provide unilaterally or through third countries as appropriate support to Afghan insurgents, either in the form of cash or non-military supplies.” The second finding, whose scope was worldwide, provided authorization to “expose the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and its leadership as despotic and subservient to the Soviet Union” and to “publicize efforts by the Afghan insurgents to regain their country’s sovereignty.” (Carter Library, Staff Office, Counsel, Cutler, Box 60, Central Intelligence Agency Charter: 2/9–29/80)
