At the Sixth Session of the Fourth Commission, held the morning of April
14, the subcommittee in charge of the Mexican proposal reported that the
Mexican Delegation had eliminated the clause in its proposal regarding Pan
American migration (see above) but that the subcommittee had been unable
to agree whether the Conference should do more than note the Mexican
proposal on the official record.
No further meetings of the Fourth Commission took place and accordingly
the Cuban and Mexican proposals as to declarations of principles were next
discussed at the third plenary session of the Conference on April 17. After a
heated discussion the Mexican Delegate succeeded in having the
Conference take official note of the resolutions on emigration and
immigration adopted by the Sixth Pan American Conference, and in having
his declaration of principles referred to the Third International Conference
on Emigration and Immigration by a vote of seventeen ayes and no noes
with fifteen abstentions. (It was in course of this vote that Dr. Long made
the declaration noted above). At this juncture the Cuban Delegation
withdrew its own declaration of principles which was to have been referred
to the consideration of the Third Conference and the session adjourned,
having only the question of the resolution as to the holding of a Third
Conference to be passed upon by the Conference.
This was speedily accomplished at the final plenary session of April 17 by
the adoption of a resolution based upon the Spanish proposal. (The text of
that resolution is given in an earlier portion of this report) The attitude of
the American Delegation regarding the vote of acclamation in favor of this
proposition has been described elsewhere in this report.
The business of the Conference being then concluded, the closing session
took place in the afternoon on April 17 with Dr. Rafael Martinez Ortiz,
Cuban Secretary of State, presiding, and appropriate addresses were
delivered by Dr. Sánchez de Fuentes, President of the Conference, Dr. Long
of the American Delegation (see above), Signor Vivaldi of Italy, Señor
Vicente Palmaroli of Spain, Señor Pérez Alfonseca of Santo Domingo,
Señor Grandi of Argentina, Mr. Aoki of Japan, Mr. Gawronski of Poland,
and finally by Dr. Ortiz, who, in the name of the President of Cuba,
declared the Conference at an end.
