National Security Policy  1115
(1) That the study does not contemplate limited military opera­
tions against Soviet Armed Forces; because, under the current strategic 
concept, overt military engagement of USSR and US Armed Forces is 
deemed to be general war;
(2) That the study, by agreement, does not include US and allied 
capabilities for covert military operations and psychological warfare;
(3) That the study has not been given formal Departmental or 
Agency clearance.
3. At the last Planning Board meeting a number of questions were 
raised concerning the study, with considerable emphasis on the prob­
lem of the possible use of nuclear weapons by both sides in limited mil­
itary operations. Mr. Irwin will touch upon this and other issues in his 
presentation. With your permission, however, following his presenta­
tion I may wish to return to certain of the Planning Board questions and 
suggestions.
Mr. Irwin.
(CALL ON MR. IRWIN)
(After Mr. Irwin’s presentation)
Thank you, Mr. Irwin.
4. Before asking for comments, I would like to suggest a sort of 
ground rule. I think it fair to say that the one clear point of agreement 
that emerged from the Planning Board discussion of this subject was 
agreement that the paper is a useful vehicle for raising problems con­
cerning our posture for limited military operations but that decisions 
on those problems should await further and more detailed study of 
each. If you agree, Mr. President, I propose that we proceed on that 
basis: to identify major issues that require further study.
May I now ask the Secretary of State for comments and perhaps 
questions.
(CALL ON THE SECRETARY OF STATE)
And now may I call on the Secretary of Defense for his views.
(CALL ON THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE)
I understand that the Chiefs have certain reservations about the 
study. Perhaps the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff would care to 
present them in greater detail.
(CALL ON THE CHAIRMAN, JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF)
The importance of prompt action regarding mobilization and an 
expansion of the war production base has been sharply illustrated. May 
I ask the Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization for his 
views, particularly on these two problems.
