National Security Policy  767
should be used in limited hostilities, but only as a last resort. The President 
expressed the opinion that State was perhaps over-­cautious. He also felt 
that the matter of word changes in Basic Policy was not important.
The question was raised as to the possibility of limited war in 
Europe. Mr. Gray suggested that there was some opinion in the State 
Department that this was possible. Secretary Herter said, “yes, that 
only recently Mr. Murphy had said that he thought there could be lim­
ited hostilities over Berlin with the matter being referred to the UN. The 
President said that that would only be a barroom brawl. There was then 
some discussion as to whether there could be a limited war with China.
Secretary Gates then said some people were concerned that the 
emphasis on strategic retaliatory forces would squeeze out funds for 
and interest in conventional weapons.
Admiral Radford pointed out that never before in peace time did 
we have such large forces for Latin America type of operations.
The President pointed out that if the Soviets wanted to take Europe 
they would have to blast out positions with nuclear weapons, in which 
event the size of our forces there would not make much difference.
Secretary McElroy said that his discussions with the military com­
manders indicated that they feared that nuclear weapons would not be 
used.
The President then gave an analogy of the use of a pistol in retali­
ation for an attack by a hoodlum in the street. One is justified in using 
the pistol if one’s life is really endangered, but not if the circumstances 
indicate that no such danger exists.
The President said we cannot organize now for the situations that 
may take place in 1965. We should go carefully and wisely. We should 
try to use the necessary degree of force without starting a war.
Secretary Herter said that he agreed that if it was essential we 
should use nuclear weapons. He pointed out, however, how fear­
ful world opinion was of any use of nuclear weapons. The President 
expressed the view that world opinion was wrong.
The President then speculated that a very low yield nuclear weapon 
would not be worth its cost and that if we used nuclear weapons we 
should use large enough ones to do the job.
Mr. Smith then pointed out that one matter had not been men­
tioned. All of our assumptions about the use of nuclear weapons in 
limited war start with the proposition that they will not be used against 
us. Admiral Radford and Secretary McElroy denied this with some 
heat. It was pointed out that the limited war study of 1958 had made 
this assumption and that the Joint Chiefs had refused to study limited 
war with the State Department on any other basis. Mr. Gordon Gray 
confirmed accuracy of this. Admiral Radford said the military actually 
were prepared for two way use of nuclear weapons in limited war.
