1979 731 problem did not start last year or the year before, nor will it be cured in the next five. We must broaden the horizon from such a narrow concentration on this budget year. The situation in Europe, in my opinion, is far from satisfactory. The OMB paper, on the other hand, states that the military balance will show continued improvement even at the Minimum budget level. That is correct but—­because it deals only with trends in the balance, rather than the balance itself—­is seriously misleading. The trend in the balance—­now badly adverse—­will improve; the balance itself will remain adverse and by many measures will not improve. In the material we prepared for the PRC last week on the Defense budget4—­ which I take to be the source of the OMB’s statement—­there was only one indicator in which NATO showed a superiority in 1985, given the Minimum level program. That was in the maximum number of air-­to-­ ground capable aircraft, where we showed a superiority of 1.3:1. However, under the same conditions, we would also be outnumbered in air-­to-­air capable aircraft by 2.3:1, raising a serious question as to the survivability of our superior number of air-­to-­ground aircraft, and the significance of that sole area of superiority in Europe. In all the other measures we calculated, the Warsaw Pact would have an advantage over NATO: a slight advantage in total number of tactical aircraft, a 10% faster rate of tactical aircraft modernization, a 70% advantage on the ground on the Southern Flank, a 100% advantage on the Central Front, a 180% advantage on the Northern Flank, and a 3:1 or 4:1 advantage in sustainability. Those balances are what we will face in 1985, in spite of the “improvements” that the OMB has highlighted. In my opinion, they are seriously unfavorable. I also caution you not to be misled by OMB’s table showing that “our projections of Soviet forces’ readiness against NATO has declined sharply as more and better intelligence has become available.” What you see there is not a marked reduction that has occurred in the readiness of Soviet forces, but a marked increase that did not occur. Actually, part of that is because we have changed our counting rules. The OMB comparison also fails to note that in 1970 we predicted that the effectiveness (i.e., measured in Armored Division Equivalents) of a Soviet division would increase by about 15%; now that 1979 is here, we find that it has increased by twice that much. But all of that is quite beside the point. No matter who predicted what how long ago, today NATO is at a disadvantage on the ground in Central Europe at M+10 by a factor 4 See Document 162.
