1979  731
problem did not start last year or the year before, nor will it be cured in 
the next five. We must broaden the horizon from such a narrow concen-
tration on this budget year.
The situation in Europe, in my opinion, is far from satisfactory. 
The OMB paper, on the other hand, states that the military balance 
will show continued improvement even at the Minimum budget level. 
That is correct but—­because it deals only with trends in the balance, 
rather than the balance itself—­is seriously misleading. The trend in 
the balance—­now badly adverse—­will improve; the balance itself 
will remain adverse and by many measures will not improve. In the 
material we prepared for the PRC last week on the Defense budget4—­
which I take to be the source of the OMB’s statement—­there was only 
one indicator in which NATO showed a superiority in 1985, given the 
Minimum level program. That was in the maximum number of air-­to-­
ground capable aircraft, where we showed a superiority of 1.3:1. How-
ever, under the same conditions, we would also be outnumbered in 
air-­to-­air capable aircraft by 2.3:1, raising a serious question as to the 
survivability of our superior number of air-­to-­ground aircraft, and the 
significance of that sole area of superiority in Europe.
In all the other measures we calculated, the Warsaw Pact would 
have an advantage over NATO: a slight advantage in total number of 
tactical aircraft, a 10% faster rate of tactical aircraft modernization, a 
70% advantage on the ground on the Southern Flank, a 100% advantage 
on the Central Front, a 180% advantage on the Northern Flank, and a 
3:1 or 4:1 advantage in sustainability. Those balances are what we will 
face in 1985, in spite of the “improvements” that the OMB has high-
lighted. In my opinion, they are seriously unfavorable.
I also caution you not to be misled by OMB’s table showing that 
“our projections of Soviet forces’ readiness against NATO has declined 
sharply as more and better intelligence has become available.” What 
you see there is not a marked reduction that has occurred in the readi-
ness of Soviet forces, but a marked increase that did not occur. Actually, 
part of that is because we have changed our counting rules. The OMB 
comparison also fails to note that in 1970 we predicted that the effec-
tiveness (i.e., measured in Armored Division Equivalents) of a Soviet 
division would increase by about 15%; now that 1979 is here, we find 
that it has increased by twice that much. But all of that is quite beside 
the point. No matter who predicted what how long ago, today NATO is 
at a disadvantage on the ground in Central Europe at M+10 by a factor 
4 See Document 162.
