102 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 2130–240074 President Carter President Sadat Vice President Mondale Secretary Vance Subject: Watched Muhammed Ali/Spinks fight. September 16, 1978—Saturday 0800–090075 President Carter President Sadat Subject: During early morning walk, the two Presidents discussed 1015–113076 Secretary Vance Defense Min. Weizman Subject: 1130–133077 Vice President Mondale Foreign Minister Dayan Secretary Vance Professor Barak 74 Carter discussed this meeting in White House Diary, p. 238, and Keeping Faith, pp. 393–394. Before the start of the boxing match, Carter and Mondale discussed the negotiations with Sadat: “I [Carter] recapitulated the situation in Fritz’s [Mondale’s] presence, to make sure that all of us had the same understanding of the terms under which we would work for the last few crucial hours. “I said, ‘Sadat has been the linchpin in the negotiations. Provided the rights of the Palestinians are protected, I have maximum flexibility on the West Bank and Gaza. In Sinai, we must preserve the integrity of sovereignty and land. We are determined to put together a document that we can both sign, and we’re still hopeful that Prime Minister Begin will be willing to sign it too. If not, then my hope is that the only remaining issue will be the Israeli settlements on Egyptian territory.’” “Sadat agreed, which reconfirmed his promise to me earlier that day.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 393) 75 In his personal diary, Carter wrote of this meeting: “I got up early and listed all the things that the Israelis could possibly use as arguments on the Sinai document, and then went for a walk with Sadat. I told him that I needed him to give me some flexibility on the Sinai settlements. He said he would be willing to accept UN forces in the settlements area, agree not to dismantle the settlements, be flexible on the time of withdrawal of Israeli settlers—but he could not be flexible on the principle of their withdrawal.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 238) See also Keeping Faith, p. 394. 76 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found. 77 For Lewis’s handwritten notes of the meeting, see Document 53. In his memoirs, Dayan described the meeting as focused on the “contentious Article which dealt with the Palestinian issue.” “After comparing our proposed formula with theirs,” he wrote, “I explained that in our view there should be a clear distinction between the principles which should serve as a negotiating basis for autonomy for the Arabs of the territories, and the basis for any future negotiations with Jordan which should have as its objective a peace treaty with that country.” Dayan continued, “Vance said the Americans held a different position, but it seemed to have been arrived at for practical considerations rather than for reasons of principle. It was impossible, he said, to reach agreement with the Egyptians over autonomy if it applied only to people and not to boundaries.” He noted: “Each side kept explaining its position, and then we pulled a rabbit out of the hat—the working paper which had been produced and agreed to by the Americans and ourselves in talks that had preceded Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem. In that memorandum, there was a clear dis-
