International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
191
54.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, September 16, 1977, 10:34–11:35 a.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting with French Prime Minister Raymond Barre
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Vice President Walter F. Mondale
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance
Secretary of the Treasury Michael Blumenthal
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Arthur A. Hartman, U.S. Ambassador to France
George Vest, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs
Henry Owen, NSC Staff Member
Robert Hormats, NSC Staff Member
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Alec Toumayan, Department of State Interpreter
Raymond Barre, Prime Minister of the French Republic
Louis de Guiringaud, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Jacques Kosciusko-Morizet, Ambassador of France to the United States
Francois de Laboulaye, Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Henri Froment-Meurice, Under Secretary for Economic Affairs
Jean-Claude Paye, Advisor to the Prime Minister on International Affairs
Gabriel de Bellescize, Counselor, French Embassy
The President began by saying that he had phoned Chancellor
Schmidt.2
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to economic policy.]
The President said he understood that Barre and Secretary Vance
had discussed some items.3 If Barre liked, he would go into SALT,
MBFR, the UN disarmament conference, or to economics. He is at their
disposal.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 35, Memcons: President: 9/1–18/77. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the
Cabinet Room. Carter and Barre also met on September 15; a memorandum of conversa-
tion is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Of-
fice File, Country Chron File, Box 12, France: 1977.
2 Carter spoke to Schmidt by telephone on September 16 from 9:30 until 9:40 p.m.; a
summary of their telephone conversation is in the Carter Library, National Security Af-
fairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 35, Memcons: President: 9/1–18/77.
3 Vance and Barre met on September 15; a memorandum of conversation is in the
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West,
Hunter/Rentschler Trips/Visits File, Box 27, Brown (Harold) 11/21/77 Meeting with
French Defense Minister: 11/77.
