792  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
realization desire for peaceful settlement disputes between China and 
U.S. in Taiwan area.
10. Wang said at last meeting he had asked me whether it intention 
my side following making of our declaration to preserve status quo our 
occupation Taiwan and our interference China’s internal affairs while 
refusing a Foreign Ministers’ conference. He had not yet received clear­
cut reply this regard. His side considers this question very important to 
present stage our talks. For if it should turn out that my intention was 
indeed so, then his side sees no point in continuing these talks. If how­
ever this not my intention then my side has no justification whatsoever 
to keep insisting his side abandon its position, thus preventing us from 
making progress.
11. Wang, turning back to his notes, said in statement I had made 
this morning I had stated that if their objections to self-­defense clause 
were based on belief that this self-­defense clause prejudiced their posi­
tion and their views with respect to disputes and if this the fact, then 
their objections could certainly have validity and I would be entirely 
prepared recognize them. In other words, did I mean that in recog­
nizing validity their objections that I prepared withdraw self-­defense 
clause from draft announcement?
12. I said his statement this morning here, including his question 
which he had asked at last meeting and again repeated this morning, 
seemed to me to be still confusing the situation. I had tried at previ­
ous meetings and had tried again this morning to keep very strictly to 
immediate and first task in front of us. He had said I had not changed 
my position with respect to our declaration. That was true, insofar as 
principles which I had enunciated first here on October 8, were con­
cerned. That principle was sound and could not be changed. I had 
thought and he had often stated here, that he had accepted that princi­
ple. That principle was that we each make clear that we renounced use 
force to make policies of either prevail over other. I had characterized 
that as an essential foundation and preliminary of success in discussion 
other items.
13. I said we both recognized that area in which our policies con­
fronted each other most seriously was the Taiwan area. I had also 
made it clear that the enunciation this principle did not mean either 
us were giving up what we considered to be our legitimate rights self-­
defense. That is, if we were attacked we would defend ourselves. All 
this comes down to simply saying in a clear and unequivocal form 
that we were determined to use only peaceful means in settlement 
our disputes.
14. I said recognizing that there was a difference between us 
regarding character of dispute between us in Taiwan area, and recog­
nizing the interpretation placed by his government on character that
