Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Your Decision on FY 1982 Concessional Aid Funding Goals Low Option: Maintain FY 1978 aid levels in real terms.32 Moderate Option: An increase of one-third in total concessional aid over FY 1978 in real terms. (Supported by Treasury, the NSC staff, and OMB as the most appropriate target, in view of likely relevant circumstances at home and abroad. Supported by State, subject to upward revision if it is demonstrated that increased aid can be used effectively.)33 High Option: A rough doubling of total concessional aid over FY 1978, in real terms. (Supported by AID, which believes it essential that the President approve a planning figure consistent with the enormous political and economic stakes that the US has in the future growth of the developing world. The Brookings study recommends a large increase in concessional aid, and notes that various estimates of future aid needs converge around this high option.)34 Whatever your choice among these strategies and funding levels, we face a difficult task in carrying it out—in making needed improvements in bilateral development aid, and in selling both bilateral and multilateral aid to the Congress. But we can address both these tasks more effectively if we have a clear sense of your long-range goals.35 32 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this option. 33 Owen wrote “Supported by Peter Bourne” at the end of this paragraph. Carter indicated his approval of this option and initialed “J.” 34 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this option. 35 At the end of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Need to sell to people—Develop comprehensive PR effort—Needs to sound conservative & idealistic—Use popular persons from movies, sports, etc.—Also, we do not need to use World Bank measurements which minimize importance of PL 480.” On November 29, Erb forwarded to Brzezinski a paper that he and Thornton had prepared entitled “Public Presentation of a North-South Strategy.” According to Erb’s cover memorandum, a meeting was to be held on the issue on November 30. No memorandum of conversation of the meeting was found. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 108, North-South Policy: 1977)
