880
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Your Decision on FY 1982 Concessional Aid Funding Goals
Low Option: Maintain FY 1978 aid levels in real terms.32
Moderate Option: An increase of one-third in total concessional aid
over FY 1978 in real terms. (Supported by Treasury, the NSC staff, and
OMB as the most appropriate target, in view of likely relevant circum-
stances at home and abroad. Supported by State, subject to upward re-
vision if it is demonstrated that increased aid can be used effectively.)33
High Option: A rough doubling of total concessional aid over FY
1978, in real terms. (Supported by AID, which believes it essential that
the President approve a planning figure consistent with the enormous
political and economic stakes that the US has in the future growth of
the developing world. The Brookings study recommends a large in-
crease in concessional aid, and notes that various estimates of future
aid needs converge around this high option.)34
Whatever your choice among these strategies and funding levels,
we face a difficult task in carrying it out—in making needed improve-
ments in bilateral development aid, and in selling both bilateral and
multilateral aid to the Congress. But we can address both these tasks
more effectively if we have a clear sense of your long-range goals.35
32 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this option.
33 Owen wrote “Supported by Peter Bourne” at the end of this paragraph. Carter in-
dicated his approval of this option and initialed “J.”
34 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this option.
35 At the end of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Need to sell to people—Develop
comprehensive PR effort—Needs to sound conservative & idealistic—Use popular
persons from movies, sports, etc.—Also, we do not need to use World Bank meas-
urements which minimize importance of PL 480.” On November 29, Erb forwarded to
Brzezinski a paper that he and Thornton had prepared entitled “Public Presentation of a
North-South Strategy.” According to Erb’s cover memorandum, a meeting was to be held
on the issue on November 30. No memorandum of conversation of the meeting was
found. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office
File, Subject Chron File, Box 108, North-South Policy: 1977)
