944 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement to constitute an unqualified renunciation of force with respect to all our disputes including our dispute in Taiwan area. My draft of April 19 was second successive attempt I had made arrive formulation which took account his views. With regard to aspect prejudicing his position, I was satisfied it met every essential requirement both sides in this regard. However, if his purpose in this declaration was retain his ability use threat of initiating use of force in Taiwan area, I agreed it did not meet his position and I never could meet his position in that regard. To do so would be complete perversion of entire purpose this declaration. 23. Wang said I had said I had made so much effort in order meet their views; however, my draft actually did not make such provisions as I had said. On contrary, my draft of April 19 still retained those points to which they objected and which they could not accept. If one could be credited with making genuine effort achieve a declaration it was his side which had made such an effort, as manifested in his December 1 draft. To speak about the threat of armed force, he could say actual problem we now facing [garble] US threat of force against his side and not his armed forces occupying US territory. Nothing could obscure this fact. 24. I said if had nothing further I would like speak again about our September 10 announcement on civilians. I wished tell him very plainly, very bluntly, that sense of outrage in my country over what I could only term the premeditated and malicious failure of his government release remaining Americans as agreed in our announcement of September 10 was growing. His government should know this was particularly true of all members of both parties of both Houses of our Congress. This was an urgent and serious situation. I would be doing a disservice if I minimized or attempted gloss over the growing feeling in my country with respect to what everyone regarded as a very straightforward case of failing carry out the pledged word of his government. It was going on eight months since we made that announcement of ­September 10 and it was over four months since any Americans had been released. I asked he impress upon his authorities urgent importance of immedi­ ately doing something about this matter. 25. Wang said if we were to speak about dissatisfaction concerning the civilian question, it was his side which was dissatisfied about the situation. He had made so many representations concerning the return of Chinese from the US. But so far had not received any resonable reply from me. Just how many Chinese were there in prison in US—he had raised this question many months ago and I had not bothered reply this simple question as to how many Chinese were in prison in US. Could I say this attitude my side conformed with September 10 announce­ ment? He had given me names 49 Chinese whose departure being obstructed in spite of fact these people innocent and had not committed
