September 18–December 16, 1978
311
3. Boutros remains concerned about this aspect, however, and
claims instructions he is getting from Sadat put more and more em-
phasis on correlation between the two. When subject of what should go
into contents of letter exchange came up with Dayan, Boutros Ghali
also preferred language saying two sides would discuss freeze on West
Bank settlements and Jerusalem. He told us Dayan balked sharply at
this saying such letter could include only language in Camp David
Framework, but nothing new.
4. Discussions also continued between military experts on map,
and good progress has been made. Two sides feel they are close to
agreement on final withdrawal aspects, including size of UN controlled
areas. Interim line poses somewhat greater problem, with Israelis
asking for westward adjustments in our line to take care of one of their
settlements and certain communication facilities, as well as resisting
idea of buffer zone on Israeli side of interim withdrawal line. Neither
side, however, feels insuperable obstacles exist on military issues.
5. Despite Israeli religious holiday Monday,2 we agreed drafting
group will meet all day, consulting principals as necessary in effort to
conclude treaty text or at least narrow differences to minimum. We
have also urged military group to speed up pace of their talks and have
reminded both delegations of need to move quickly to get technical
talks started on transfer of oil fields.
Christopher
2 October 16. In 1978, the date fell within the Jewish holiday of Sukkot.
87.
Memorandum From Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L.
Atherton, Jr. to President Carter1
Washington, October 16, 1978
SUBJECT
Status of Egypt-Israel Negotiations
We have reached the stage in the talks where the issues we will
have to contend with are coming into clear focus. They can be grouped
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presiden-
tial Advisory Board, Box 77, Sensitive X: 10/78. Secret; Nodis. Printed from an uninitialed
copy. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the memorandum.
