38 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ETA–11. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Secretary of State1  Washington, November 24, 1958. SUBJECT Inter-American Development Institution Problem To identify the United States with Latin American aspirations for this Institution, within reasonable limits, and to obtain Treasury support in the NAC for the kind of Institution which will attain our objectives. Discussion On Tuesday, November 25, the NAC is meeting to adopt the U.S. position to be taken regarding the Inter-American Development Institution. A considerable amount of staff work has already been done by the technicians in State and Treasury, and we have until January 8, at which time the Special Committee of the Inter-American Economic and Social Council will convene to chart the outline of the Institution, to complete our work. As we were plainly told in advance, the special Committee of the Council of the OAS which began its sessions in Washington last Monday, November 17, has spent about half of its time so far discussing the general outline of the proposed Development Institution, even though we had made clear in advance our inability to make any commitments regarding it and our strong feeling that discussion of the Institution should be in the other forum. While the delegates last week also stressed intro-­regional and international trade, and technical cooperation, their main thrust has been to overcome the shortage of development capital. While the principal countries having convertible currencies state that the new entity should be both sound and permanent and, hence, operate on a basic of repayment of loans in the currency borrowed, all emphasized that the U.S. must be the major contributor. I would think that any contribution less than $100 million would be out of the question. Eventually, such a hard loan institution might be able to sell bonds in the investment market and grow to substantial proportions as has the World Bank. 1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Inter-American Regional Development Inst. Confidential. A hand-­written notation on the source text, which is on unsigned carbon copy of the original, states that this memorandum was not sent forward. A typed note indicates that the original bore the following hand-­written notation, dated November 24, by Under Secretary Dillon, through whom it was routed: “Mentioned orally to Secretary and received guidance.”
