704 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement memorandum previously circulated to the Council. The State position was summed up at the Planning Board as follows: a. The risk of clandestine introduction of nuclear weapons into U.S. ports via merchant vessels is less than it once might have been, in view of developments which have taken place subsequent to the adoption of the Port Security Program during the Korean crisis. b. Some of the broader objectives of over-­all national security pol­ icy, particularly with respect to increased peaceful trade with the Soviet Bloc, are being made difficult of achievement as the result of our pres­ ent Port Security Policy which should, therefore, be relaxed. c. Although internal security is an important element of national security, it is but one segment of over-­all policy and must be viewed in focus. 4. Considerations in opposition to the State-­Treasury proposal were raised in the Planning Board discussion as follows: a. No basis has been produced for considering that there has been any reduction in the threat of clandestine delivery of nuclear weap­ ons via vessels entering U.S. ports—a threat which is recognized in our present Basic National Security Policy (NSC 5810/1, Par. 44). b. Rescission of the present denial policy and removal of the require­ ment for the boarding and searching of suspect vessels, will withdraw our only defense (the Commandant of the Coast Guard states that it is a minimum defense) which we now have against the destruction of U.S. ports by means of nuclear weapons clandestinely introduced via ves­ sels. If the policy is revoked, the Coast Guard would not feel justified in continuing harbor patrols. c. In view of the forthcoming international conferences it is argued that this is probably not a propitious time for the United States to indi­ cate a relaxation of policy toward the Soviet Bloc by removing Port Security controls. 5. CALL ON: Secretary of State Secretary of the Treasury Chairman, IIC (Mr. J. Edgar Hoover) Chairman, ICIS (Mr. J. Walter Yeagley). 6. With regard to the proposed change in our Polish policy, I am committed to inform the Council as to the following: Subsequent to agreeing on this recommendation, Commerce directed to the Planning Board’s attention a CIA report to the effect that a number of vessels fly­ ing the Polish flag are actually under the joint ownership and control of Poland and the Government of Communist China. Commerce believed that this situation would make more difficult the enforcement of Export Control and Foreign Assets Control regulations. Treasury and State, however, have informed the Planning Board that (1) these controls rest on authorities other than Port Security denial policy, (2) any Chinese Communist–­owned vessels entering U.S. ports would be controlled under the Trading with the Enemy Act which prevents trade or finan­ cial transactions in which Communist China has any beneficial interest,
