Arms Control and Disarmament  1305
corresponds to compression while the first pulse from an earthquake 
is compressive in two quadrants, while it corresponds to dilatation in 
the other two. It is estimated in Appendix A that there will be about 
300 earthquakes of strength equivalent to 1 kiloton or over which will 
give signals in the proposed seismic detection net which cannot be dis­
tinguished from nuclear explosions and therefore will require further 
investigation on the spot. If the limit is set at 5 kilotons the number of 
unidentifiable earthquakes will be about 35.
It should be pointed out that 1 and 5 kilotons refer to the size of the 
seismic signal, not to the actual yield. By proper choice of the medium 
as discussed in Section IV, tests of 10 kilotons might be made to look 
like a normal 1-­kiloton explosion, and perhaps, with more difficulty, 
50 kilotons to look like 5. According to seismologists, it is unlikely that 
a nuclear explosion could be so conducted (by proper shaping of the 
explosion chamber) that the signal is dilatational in some directions.
The seismic signals would locate the source within about 5 miles. 
Investigation on the spot will then be necessary to decide whether the 
signal could be due to a test, this is described in Section 3e of Appendix A.
One would presumably try to find the entrance to the tunnel which 
was used for the test. The experiment could be carried out in a remote 
area, where there would be no people to give away the game, but then 
such indicators as roads, unusual human activity, etc., might make the 
inspection team dispatched on receipt and study of the seismic signal 
suspicious. They would still have to find the entrance (say a 6 foot hole, 
since covered up), proceed to the correct part of the tunnel, and drill 
successfully to get proof. This is made difficult by the small radius of 
the shell in which the radioactivity is concentrated (55 feet for Rainier). 
Alternatively one might use an area of substantial human activity, thus 
producing less unusual change in what is going on, but perhaps requir­
ing more local people to know about what was going on or become 
suspicious about it.
To summarize:
1. Detection of underground shots depends entirely on a seismic 
net. Identification depends on local investigation.
2. Adequate proof of violation probably depends on location of 
the debris, which is confined to a shell whose radius is of the order 
of 40 W1/3 feet where W is in KT, and whose depth is of the order of 
400 W1/3 or larger as desired. Within the five mile radius circle of uncer­
tainty identified by the seismic signals, the entrance to the tunnel or 
hole must be found as a beginning in finding the activity. Broad access 
is required to have a good chance of locating the debris and thus pro­
viding proof.
3. Adequate diagnostic information for weapon development can 
almost certainly be obtained at no great increase (and perhaps some 
decrease) in cost by testing underground. It has not been proven that 
radiochemical detectors can be used, but it appears possible that some
