392  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Unit of Account
5. The sides are now deadlocked on a broad front on how to imple-
ment the new unit of account. My comments in the last O-I2 remain 
valid, except that Soviet resistance has stiffened in the last week. They 
have now agreed to accept our formulation in Article III, which con-
tains the legal obligation. The problem centers on how one views the 
origins of the unit which is subject to treaty limitations. Neither side 
wants to end the round with this issue unresolved, but some skillful 
footwork will be required to avoid that. Jim Medas and I are to meet 
informally with the Soviets November 21 to explore what might be 
done to break the deadlock.
6. As I understand it, the key to winning the essential parts of our 
position on unit of account may be our acceptance in some form of 
the concept of a “deployed” launcher. The Soviets insist (correctly) that 
the “launcher” in “deployed missile and its associated launcher” must 
mean a deployed launcher. They have made clear that their military 
would feel better about the new unit of account if we would agree on 
this point. Their approach to the new unit seems to run as follows:
— One establishes that a deployed launcher exists;
— Through the agreed counting rule, one assumes the deployed 
launcher contains a deployed missile;
— This defines the unit of account—“deployed missile and its asso-
ciated (deployed) launcher”—­which is the entity limited in Article III. 
The Soviets have agreed to omit the word “deployed” before “launcher” 
in Article III based upon our assurances that the language does refer to 
those launchers the soviet side considers “deployed.”
This seems perfectly reasonable, but there is one catch—­the U.S. 
has never accepted the concept of deployed and non-­deployed launch-
ers (and heavy bombers). Like certain other theological aspects of our 
position, the reasons for this have been lost in the mists of time. My 
understanding is that it was simply a concern that a category of non-­
deployed launchers or heavy bombers could lead to large numbers 
of uncounted systems. There was never much danger of that and any 
possibility that this could happen was ruled out long ago. At the same 
time, we now have categories of “spare” launchers, test launchers, 
training launchers, launchers under construction and test heavy bomb-
ers, which are not counted in the 1600 aggregate, but limited separately 
in satisfactory ways.
7. It seems to me that the new unit of account makes the concept 
of a deployed launcher containing a deployed missile perfectly logical 
and almost inescapable. This is the unit counted in the 1600 aggregate. 
2 Reference is to telegram 9619 from NST Geneva, October 31. (Department of State, 
Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D890948–0015)
