Chapter 4, February–April 1990  629
Koltunov: It would never exceed 250 square kilometers or ten mis-
siles. The minimum would be 125 square kilometers for 10 missiles. 
However, if a restricted area contains fewer than 10, the total territory 
of the restricted area becomes smaller. If the restricted area contains 1–2 
launchers, its size would be 25 square kilometers, not less.
Burt: Your old position was that the restricted area should be 
100 square kilometers, with notification of all out of area deployments.
Koltunov: Yes, but there was no deployment area. We have 
accepted the deployment area, and are trying to solve the problem with 
notification.
Burt: The restricted area is far too large.
Ifft: What is the relationship between the existence of a deploy-
ment area and deployment out of the restricted area.
Koltunov: The same as before. There is no change in our position.
Ifft: But when a launcher comes out of the restricted area, it has to 
stop at the edge of the deployment area, or if there is no deployment 
area, it can go further. What does that have to do with notification out 
of the restricted area?
Koltunov: In this option, if the number of launchers outside the 
restricted area is greater than 50%, each next launcher leaving the 
restricted area would have to be notified. I emphasize that all routine 
movements would be covered under the MOU; the launchers would 
not leave the confines of the deployment area. But you’re right—­no 
deployment area means no confines on movement.
Burt: I note that in your old position, you would give notification 
prior to movement from the restricted area; in this option, after.
Koltunov: You are right. The purpose of the notification is to verify 
the number of launchers in any restricted area. If notification is done 
before, then for one reason or another, launchers would not leave the 
deployment area. The notification process would be encumbered. It’s 
better to provide notification after.
Ifft: Would notification also be possible after the launcher returns 
to the restricted area?
Koltunov: In principle, we do not exclude that type too.
Brooks: If a side has 10 launchers in the deployment area and 4 
were outside the restricted area and 2 more go outside for 24 hours 
we would be notified—­that I understand. But suppose you go out and 
come back within 24 hours—­would there be notification?
Koltunov: You would be notified of their departure if at that 
moment in time over 50% of the launchers of that restricted area were 
outside of it—­for the 6th, 7th, 8th launchers, etc.
