4. They are to bear interest at the rate of five and one-half (5½) per cent, per
annum and are to be paid principal and interest in gold coin of the United
States of the present standard of weight and fineness at the offices of Lee,
Higginson & Company in Boston, New York and Chicago, at the option of
the holders. They shall be exempt from any taxes or impositions now or
hereafter to be established or levied by or within the Dominican Republic
against the notes or the income arising therefrom or the holders thereof.
5. Interest is to be payable semi-annually on the first days of March and
September.
 
6. The notes, bonds and legal instruments connected therewith are to be in
form appropriate to carry out the above provisions, and they and the
governmental authority therefor are to be satisfactory to counsel of Lee,
Higginson & Company. The Dominican Republic agrees to make provision
for the payment of these notes, principal and interest, in accordance with
their terms, and to have on deposit with Lee, Higginson & Company funds
sufficient for the payment of each instalment of interest and of the principal
amount at least eleven days before such payment is due.
7. A temporary note or notes and a temporary bond in form satisfactory to
counsel for Lee, Higginson & Company, without coupons may be issued in
anticipation of the definitive notes and bonds and to be exchanged therefor.
8. Lee, Higginson & Company may associate with themselves in the
disposal of these notes, such banks, banking firms, and other agencies as
they may in their discretion deem desirable. They may issue their own
interim receipts to purchasers of the notes.
9. All expenses in connection with the printing, engraving, and executing of
said notes and of said pledged bonds, and all expenses including legal
expenses incidental to their preparation shall be paid forthwith as they
accrue by the Dominican Republic, but Lee, Higginson & Company and
their associates shall bear all expenses in connection with the advertising
and sale of said notes.
