Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  351
on the Soviet side while keeping it for ourselves. The U.S. proposal did 
not cover all types of threat, but it did deal with one specific concern 
which, as the Soviet side was aware, had been registered by some influ-
ential members of the U.S. Congress. Burt said that the sides’ ability 
to reach an understanding regarding STOF tests and launches would 
be seen as a positive step to achieve greater strategic stability between 
the two sides. Recalling the U.S.-­proposed declaration handed over the 
previous day, Burt said that under the U.S. approach the sides would 
make parallel declarations. Burt asked whether the Soviet side was 
prepared to discuss the more limited U.S. approach. If not, he said he 
would inform Secretary Baker and suggest that this issue be taken off 
the agenda for the time being.
25. Nazarkin said he appreciated very much the relationship which 
Burt had correctly characterized as honest and straightforward. In that 
spirit, he said, he would explain the Soviet position on this issue and on 
the U.S. proposal. He said the U.S. paper contained an absolutely new 
idea. It was interesting—­he did not deny that it was interesting—­but it 
was new. The Soviet side had reported it to Moscow, but there had been 
no time to analyze it; the Soviet delegation was awaiting Moscow’s 
reaction. Nazarkin said he had listened with interest to Burt’s obser-
vations with regard to the Soviet presentation the previous day of a 
broader approach; he said the Soviet side would study Burt’s observa-
tions very attentively. At this point Nazarkin said the Soviet side could 
not offer any more definite reply regarding the U.S. proposal. They 
were not rejecting it, he said, and would listen with interest if the U.S. 
side had any more ideas to clarify and support its proposal. This was all 
Nazarkin could say for the present; a more conclusive reaction would 
have to await the arrival of the main Soviet delegation.
26. Burt asked Brooks whether he would like to add anything. 
Brooks said that Ambassador Burt had expressed the U.S. view the pre-
vious day: this was a confidence-­building measure under which both 
sides would make a public statement of what the U.S. believed was 
both sides’ private intentions. The U.S. thought this would be a good 
thing. At the same time, in studying Soviet questions from the previous 
round the U.S. side had become convinced that there was no way to 
meet this objective in a completely verifiable way; thus the U.S. had 
conceived the idea of reciprocal declarations as a symbol of the confi-
dence the sides are trying to build as they move toward a more stable 
relationship.
27. After Nazarkin had thanked Brooks, Burt expressed his own 
understanding that this proposal would not alter in any significant 
degree the existing operational practices of the two sides. The Soviet 
side might ask why, in that case, was an agreement necessary? The 
answer, Burt said, was that this proposal stemmed from a desire to deal
