876  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Tactics:
 Open with heavy ICBMs and push flight test limits, try to pin 
down the other heavy-­related issues, then move on leaving flight test-
ing on the table.
 Return to heavy ICBMs after Backfire and Non-­circumvention. 
Play falling-­off flight testing in that context.
Talking points:
 Heavy ICBMs are a major strategic problem and a major political 
problem for us as well as for you.
 We have backed away from bans on production and flight test-
ing, big steps for us. We accept the Mod 5 and Mod 6 programs.3
 But we need provisions to prevent further development of 
even more capable versions. No justification for still more threatening 
missiles.4
 We propose 7 flight tests/year.5 If you have a better way to 
achieve this objective, we would like to hear it.
 In addition there are a number of other important provisions 
related to heavy ICBMs:
— Ban new silos for heavy ICBMs.6 No justification for new silos.
—  Ban downloading of heavy ICBMs.7 Heavy ICBMs have an 
inherent capability to carry at least 10 warheads, we cannot agree to 
attribute fewer.
— No increase in launch weight or throw of weight of heavy 
ICBMs.8 This is already part of the Soviet position in Geneva, we told 
you in Washington we agree with it.
2. Backfire9
US position:	
250 air force, 200 naval (currently about 210 air 
force and 160 naval).
Sov positon:	
350 air force, 200 naval. (Nazarkin told Rick they 
could accept 325 air force if we drop heavy ICBM 
flight testing.)
Bottom line:	
500–525 total.
3 Baker underlined “We accept the Mod 5 and Mod 6 programs.”
4 Baker underlined “even more capable versions” and “No justification for still 
more threatening missiles.”
5 Baker circled this sentence and added “over 3” before “year,” which he changed 
to “years.”
6 Baker underlined this sentence.
7 Baker underlined this sentence.
8 Baker underlined this sentence. He also bracketed this point and the previous two 
points, in the left-­hand margin, and wrote: “No new types of heavy ICBMs.”
9 Baker circled the number 2.
