268  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
face by following through; (b) the vulnerability of the US bases in the 
Far East; (c) on the Soviet side, the importance of supporting their 
chief ally; and (d) the damage to the Soviet deterrent posture if the 
USSR failed to respond.
15. The manner in which the US employed nuclear weapons 
could have a critical bearing on whether or not the Communists made 
a nuclear response. If such use were highly selective, and above all if 
confined to the immediate area of hostilities, the Communists might 
not respond with nuclear weapons. But especially if the US launched 
nuclear strikes deep into Communist China, Peiping would almost cer­
tainly appeal desperately for Soviet assistance, and we believe that the 
Soviets would feel compelled to come to the support of their chief ally. 
They would probably calculate that they could not afford the loss to the 
Bloc and the blow to their own prestige and position of a crippling of 
Communist Chinese power.
16. The Communist reaction would also be conditioned by their 
appreciation of the general US posture at the time. They would look 
to other US military movements, the degree of alert in the US, and US 
statements for evidence of whether the US was preparing to fight a 
prolonged local war if necessary, to expand the conflict, or to accept a 
return to the status quo. In this connection US statements of the limited 
nature of our objectives, if consistent with our military actions, might 
have considerable impact. Such statements might tend to reassure the 
Communists that a negotiated termination of the conflict on an accept­
able basis was feasible. On the other hand, these statements might reas­
sure them that their use of nuclear weapons locally would not lead the 
US to broaden the conflict.
17. If it appeared to the Communists that the US was not prepared 
to expand the conflict or to conduct a prolonged war, they would prob­
ably be more inclined to continue the fighting using nuclear weap­
ons selectively. If on the other hand the US, while limiting its initial 
nuclear response, nevertheless appeared determined to press on to vic­
tory, and prepared to expand the conflict in the Far East if necessary, 
the Communist reaction would tend to be more cautious. They might 
still launch some nuclear attacks to reduce US strike capabilities in an 
attempt to achieve a stalemate, but they would probably also move to 
secure an early end to the conflict.
C. The Modes of Sino-Soviet Nuclear Response
18. In case the Communists decided to react with nuclear weapons 
if the US had used such weapons in the Far East, Peiping and espe­
cially Moscow would nevertheless do so in such a manner as to limit 
the risks that hostilities would expand into general war. For this rea­
son we believe that the Soviets would be loath to intervene directly
