618  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
probably also believe that the Western Powers in most instances would 
be restrained from such action by the unfavorable political reactions 
that would follow, both in the area and in the neutralist countries 
throughout Asia and Africa. Nevertheless, the intervention of the US 
and UK in Lebanon and Jordan demonstrated that there are circum­
stances in which Western powers would be willing to use military 
force. If the Western Powers became involved in conflict in the area, the 
Soviet leaders would probably not engage Soviet forces openly or take 
other actions which involved in their view serious risk of expanding 
hostilities. However, we believe that the Middle East is one of the areas 
where the danger of war by miscalculation has increased.
244. While Soviet policy in the Middle East is not aimed primarily 
at military gains, the Soviet leaders probably view the developing situ­
ation there as offering opportunities to build potential military assets. 
They undoubtedly calculate that in the event of Soviet military opera­
tions in this area they would benefit from their earlier peacetime intro­
duction of military technicians, Soviet type weapons, fuel and materiel, 
from their increased capabilities for espionage and subversion, and 
from the improvements which have been made in local airfields, har­
bors and other facilities. The Soviet leaders probably also contemplate 
the eventual achievement of a long-­sought Russian goal—­land access 
to the strategic areas of the Middle East. To this end, they will continue 
to encourage and support such movements as that for an independent 
pro-Soviet Kurdish state and for a pro-Communist government in Iraq, 
and will also continue pressures against Iran and Turkey.
245. Asia. The USSR will probably rely on its current policies—­
propaganda about the successes of Communism, support of national 
independence against Western imperialism, and offers of trade, aid, 
and cultural exchange—­to sustain and deepen neutralism, promote 
pro-Soviet alignments, and gradually to erode Western influence in 
Asia. Further increase in the strength of the Communist parties in 
Indonesia and India might induce the Soviet leaders to switch to open 
support of them, but it is more likely, in the case of India at least, that 
for the next several years Soviet policy will find greater advantage in 
cultivating the existing governments. In Asia, it is probably these two 
countries which are of primary interest to Communist policy at present.
246. Policy toward Japan will probably continue along the routine 
line laid down over the last several years—­propaganda to stimulate 
Japanese neutralism, disturb Japanese-American relations, and main­
tain pressure for denial of bases to the US. The Soviet leaders probably 
do not believe that they have the means to alter the situation in Japan in 
any important way for the present. Likewise, they probably regard the 
situation in Korea as stalemated, although they will continue to agitate 
for withdrawal of US forces.
