1032 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III beyond its position on the scope of activities for the second window.6 (Perez Guerrero also expressed appreciation for the forthcoming position the U.S. showed in Geneva in November.) Some clarification of these points should emerge at the OECD Executive Committee meeting next week.7 Regional meetings of G–77 countries have now begun in preparation for the G–77 meeting at Arusha, February 6–16, when the G–77 will set their position for the next round of negotiations and for UNCTAD V. We have already dispatched a message to selected Asian countries, who are caucusing through the middle of next week, and will do so with other regional groupings of G–77 countries prior to their caucuses. African countries, who view success in the Common Fund in terms of a broadly mandated and well-funded second window, will be key to a successful negotiation. Yet, there are major problems in dealing with the Africans. First, they are poorly organized; there are no two or three individuals who can speak for the African countries as a group. Second, many African countries do not understand the issues, and outside of their Geneva representatives who frequently act on their own authority, attach great importance to the negotiation but cannot address the vital details. Third, we have little leverage that we can exert. We can point out to the Africans that we can do more through the African Development Bank to meet their needs on some of their concepts of second window activities than we can through a Common Fund, and that the Bank’s ability to do so will increase significantly as the U.S. and other non-regional countries subscribe to the shares of the Bank. Cameroon Finance Minister Yondo will be here later in January. He is capable and is respected in African financial circles, so that will provide a useful occasion for detailed discussion.8 We should not, however, delude ourselves into thinking that this linkage alone will do the trick. What may be necessary is a well-coordinated political approach by Foreign Ministers of selected developed countries with their counterparts in Africa. If in the course of our meeting you concur, I can initiate this at the OECD Executive Committee meeting next week. 6 Telegram 122 from Caracas, January 5, reported on Luers’ January 3 discussion with Pe´rez Guerrero. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790007– 0926) 7 The OECD Executive Committee met in Paris on January 17. Telegram 2196 from USOECD Paris, January 22, reported on the discussion of North-South issues. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790032–0724) 8 A memorandum of conversation of Cooper’s January 26 meeting with Yondo, during which they discussed the Common Fund and financial and monetary issues, is in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot 81D134, Box 5, Memorandum of Conversation, Jan–June ‘79.
