Under the orderly processes of our fundamental institutions the Constitution was lately
amended providing for national prohibition. The Congress passed an act for its
enforcement, and similar acts have been provided by most of the States. It is the law of
the land. It is the duty of all who come under its jurisdiction to observe the spirit of that
law, and it is the duty of the Department of Justice and the Treasury Department to
enforce it. Action to prevent smuggling, illegal transportation in interstate commerce,
abuse in the use of permits, and existence of sources of supply for illegal traffic is
almost entirely imposed upon the Federal Government.
Through treaties with foreign governments and increased activities of the Coast Guard,
revenue agents, district attorneys, and enforcement agents effort is being made to
prevent these violations. But the Constitution also puts a concurrent duty on the States.
We need their active and energetic cooperation, the vigilant action of their police, and
the jurisdiction of their courts to assist in enforcement. I request of the people
observance, of the public officers continuing efforts for enforcement, and of the
Congress favorable action on the budget recommendation for the prosecution of this
work.
 
WATERWAY DEVELOPMENT
For many years our country has been employed in plans and operations for the
development of our intracoastal and inland waterways. This work along our coast is an
important adjunct to our commerce. It will be carried on, together with the further
opening up of our harbors, as our resources permit. The Government made an
agreement during the war to take over the Cape Cod Canal, under which the owners
made valuable concessions. This pledged faith of the Government ought to be
redeemed.
Two other main fields are under consideration. One is the Great Lakes and St.
Lawrence, including the Erie Canal. This includes stabilizing the lake level, and is both
a waterway and power project. A joint commission of the United States and Canada is
working on plans and surveys which will not be completed until next April. No final
determination can be made, apparently, except under treaty as to the participation of
both countries. The other is the Mississippi River system. This is almost entirely
devoted to navigation. Work on the Ohio River will be completed in about three years.
A modern channel connecting Chicago, New Orleans, Kansas City, and Pittsburgh
should be laid out and work on the tributaries prosecuted. Some work is being done of
a preparatory nature along the Missouri, and large expenditures are being made yearly
in the lower reaches of the Mississippi and its tributaries which contribute both to flood
control and navigation. Preliminary measures are being taken on the Colorado River
project, which is exceedingly important for flood control, irrigation, power
