March–August 1953 607 unwilling to accede to Mossadegh, and yet was unwilling to test his own power. He planned to leave the country on February 28. The Communists (Tudeh Party) put out anti-Shah leaflets. We believe that the Shah, despite his weaknesses, is a factor for Iranian stability. And so, as the hour for his scheduled departure came closer, I telephoned the Shah. He said he expected to leave in two hours. Then I called Mossadegh, and asked him to remove the pressure on the Shah to leave. Mossadegh charged me with interfering with Iranian internal affairs, but we both understood each other. Mossadegh did not budge. A large mob, favorable to the Shah, surrounded his palace, kept him from leaving, and then attacked Mossadegh’s residence. Mossadegh went to the Shah and asked him what they should do. The Shah decided to leave the question up to the Majlis and his indecision again cost him the situation. Mossadegh told me later that there had been an attempt on his life, but I don’t take this seriously as the Shah has “old-fashioned ideas against assassination”. After this crisis blew over, Mossadegh presented a memorandum to the Majlis transferring the powers of the Shah to him. It still has not been acted upon. An important time for Iran is near. Next month a new president of the Majlis is due to be elected. The incumbent president, Kashani, is opposed by Mossadegh. Having only 30 votes out of 80 in the Majlis, Mossadegh’s National Front is going to prevent a quorum by absenting themselves. I saw Premier Mossadegh the day I left and was asked for U.S. aid. This despite his previous declaration that he would never ask the U.S. for aid. The reason for this change of heart is that, while the internal situation in Iran is satisfactory, the foreign exchange balance is critical. Last year a good crop helped this foreign exchange picture. And Point Four has been very helpful to Iran, giving it sugar which otherwise would cost scarce dollars. It is impossible for the U.S. to give further aid to Iran at this time because of what it would do to our relations with the British. A real crisis again is impending. But it is hard to say what will happen, because the Iranians are very lucky. For the last hundred years they have made out somehow, despite their own ineptness. Right now the Communist “peace offensive” is helping them, since it is relaxing the pressure from the Tudeh Party. It is my opinion that there is no hope of settling the oil problem so long as Mossadegh is in power. [This concluded the statement by Mr. Henderson.]4 4 Brackets in the original.
