North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
997
arrangements satisfactory to us would run counter to the basic G–77
desire for a new institution controlled by the developing countries.
Second Window
We could now agree to a second window based on voluntary con-
tributions to finance such measures as commodity productivity im-
provements, research and development, and new product usage,
without agreeing to contribute to this window. Some other developed
countries are likely to contribute. The U.S. will be under increasing
pressure to do so as well. Many African countries and the Indian Sub-
continent believe they will not benefit from buffer stock financing ar-
rangements. To them the second window will be more important than
the first. Our willingness to make a contribution to it would signifi-
cantly improve prospects for success in the negotiations, and might
make it easier to reach agreement in a first window closer to our
objectives.
Terms of Reference
There is still a substantial difference of view over the appropriate
terms of reference for the Common Fund. Some LDCs would like it to
be very broad, permitting the Fund, for example, to intervene directly
into commodity markets even when there is no agreed International
Commodity Agreement for the Commodity in question, or permitting
the Second Window to finance manufacturing activities that use pri-
mary products. The developed countries want a much narrower term
of reference with respect to both windows. This can probably be
worked out in the negotiations.
Decision-making
Some LDCs see the Common Fund as a key element in the New In-
ternational Economic Order, as “their” institution which they will con-
trol. Needless to say, the developed countries want to maintain at least
a blocking minority. Moderate LDCs have indicated that the LDC posi-
tion here is negotiable, but at best we can expect some tough negotia-
tions on this.
Congressional Considerations
In view of the precedent of individual commodity agreements (all
of which have been treaties), the need for appropriations, and the na-
ture of the Fund as a major “umbrella” commodity institution, it seems
likely that the Senate would insist that it be presented as a treaty re-
quiring advice and consent to ratification. Some members of Congress
have told us recently that a Common Fund would be rejected by the
Congress. I do not share that view if we properly prepare the ground. A
major campaign on the Hill, supported by your strong personal in-
volvement, would be necessary. Even so, it might not succeed.
