846
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Most of the known Tudeh members and sympathizers who had infil-
trated government agencies have been purged. The Tudeh Party has
also lost much of its popular support. Its immediate capabilities for
exerting pressure on the government are limited, even if current efforts
to obtain the cooperation of die-hard nationalist and extremist groups
are successful. Tudeh retains, however, a capability for acts of sabotage
and terrorism.
11. Outside the security field, the Zahedi government has made
little progress. The Majlis has lacked a quorum since the withdrawal of
pro-Mossadeq members in the summer of 1953. Hence the government
is presently unable to obtain legislation needed to carry out its an-
nounced program. Moreover, the regime has reached no firm decision
on how and when to reconstitute a functioning legislature. Although
the Shah and Zahedi agree on the necessity of holding elections, they
apparently fear that new elections may cause a resurgence of extremist
sentiment, are uncertain how to insure the election of a manageable
Majlis, and have not yet definitely scheduled the holding of elections.
12. Meanwhile, the government has done little to strengthen its po-
litical position in preparation for new elections. Zahedi has enlisted few
if any real allies among the politicians formerly associated in opposi-
tion to Mossadeq. The present cabinet is dominated by members of the
old ruling class, many of whom have little genuine sympathy for re-
form, command little political support, or are suspect because of former
identification with the British. Zahedi himself has had little success in
convincing the public that he will not compromise the basic objectives
of the National Front, especially with respect to oil nationalization. Fi-
nally, the strength and standing of the Zahedi government is being im-
paired by friction between Zahedi and the Shah.
13. These developments have hastened the breakup of the loose
array of politicians aligned against Mossadeq and have encouraged an
early revival of factionalism and intrigue. Public criticism of the gov-
ernment and preliminary maneuvering to undermine Zahedi are al-
ready beginning to emerge. Nationalist and extremist elements are
most active in these respects. However, National Front leaders who
supported Mossadeq until the end are still publicly discredited, and
open opposition to the government in other quarters is not united. The
government’s strained relations with the Qashqai tribes, which have
been traditionally hostile to the present dynasty and were closely asso-
ciated with Mossadeq, are under present circumstances an irritant
rather than a major threat.
Economic
14. The Zahedi government faces serious budgetary and monetary
problems. Mossadeq’s oil policy resulted in reduction of public rev-
