3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
684
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Clear and frank communication between us is very important, I
continued. This was evident at the time of the Vlasova case.5 The Soviet
side should reflect on what would have happened had our authorities
not been vigilant enough to discover that Vlasova was already on an
Aeroflot plane in New York and about to depart for Moscow without
having made any statement to us. Had the Soviets gotten away with
this crude maneuver, the story in the press would have been that the
wife of a defector was forcibly spirited out of the country and sent back
to the USSR against her will. This action, in contravention of our kid-
napping laws, undertaken despite assurances to us that we would have
a chance to speak with Vlasova, would have been cited as evidence that
the Soviets cannot be trusted to keep an agreement. It would have im-
pacted very badly on US-Soviet relations and have offered real ammu-
nition to the enemies of SALT, who would have discoursed about So-
viet untrustworthiness. (C)
To my surprise, Bessmertnykh responded by stating that the Vla-
sova affair had been completely mishandled by the Soviet side. The
first thing the Embassy in Washington knew about the matter was
when Vlasova was actually on the plane, he said. The UN Mission in
New York was entirely responsible. “If I had been handling it”, Bess-
mertnykh said, “she would simply have had her interview and then left
quietly.” The one thing about the Vlasova case, which continued to
rankle, he said, is that in the letter to Brezhnev you said that you had
received assurances from the Soviet side on three separate occasions
that you would have an opportunity to talk with Vlasova. This was not
true. We never gave you any such assurances. (C)
While misunderstandings are always possible, I replied, the Soviet
side should understand that we would never make such a statement in
a letter from the President unless we were completely satisfied about
the accuracy of what we were saying.
In fact, I confessed that I was surprised when President Brezhnev
raised what was essentially a minor matter, and one which the Presi-
dent could not possibly satisfy, in correspondence with the President.
The Soviet side must realize that we are a nation of laws and that once it
appeared a reasonable assumption that a law might have been violated,
as was the case in this instance, even the President would be powerless
to stop our law enforcement officials from ascertaining the facts of the
case. (C)
Returning to the Cuban brigade crisis, Bessmertnykh said that one
of the results of that incident is that many analysts in Moscow in retro-
spect regarded various American statements about Cuba, which were
5 See Documents 213, 215, and 218.
