Human Rights 23 8. Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple Diplomatic Posts1 Washington, February 3, 1977, 1635Z 24394. Subject: United Nations Human Rights Commission Meeting—Geneva, February 7–March 11, 1977. Ref: State 137142 (Notal). 1. Action posts are accredited to governments of states members of the UN Commission on Human Rights, which will meet in regular annual session in Geneva February 7–March 11, 1977. The U.S. Government attaches importance to our participation in this Commission. President Carter has stressed the high priority which his administration will attach to the promotion of human rights. Prior to the Commission’s opening, Dept considers it would be useful if appropriate officials in host governments were apprised of the elements of the overall approach to international human rights matters which the Carter administration intends to follow. In discussion with appropriate host government officials, posts should be guided by paras 2–6. 2. In presenting the following outline of the emphasis and directions to be followed by the Carter administration in the field of promoting international human rights, posts should stress our desire that the renewed impetus which we hope to bring to human rights programs through the United Nations will be a collaborative effort carried out in close consultation with other governments. We will be fully receptive to new ideas which these governments may propose. We hope to work closely with them in the appropriate UN organs to maximize the opportunities which we feel are present in these bodies to strengthen respect for human rights in the world. 3. Throughout his campaign President Carter placed priority among his concerns that of human rights, not only for the American people but for the peoples of the world. A human rights theme flowed through the President’s inaugural address, as exemplified by his statement that “The world itself is now dominated by a new spirit. Peoples 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770039–0463. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Hewitt; cleared by Baker, Pascoe, Wilson, Whiting, Holly, Lake, Runyon, Bray, and Sebastian; approved by Habib. Sent priority to Bonn, London, Ottawa, Rome, Stockholm, Vienna, San Jose, Nicosia, Quito, Cairo, New Delhi, Tehran, Amman, Maseru, Lagos, Islamabad, Kigali, Dakar, Ankara, Ouagadougou, Tripoli, Damascus, Lima, and Belgrade. Sent for information priority to Brussels, Copenhagen, Dublin, Luxembourg, Paris, The Hague, the Mission to the EC, the Mission in Geneva, and USUN. Lowenstein served as head of the U.S. delegation to the HRC meeting. 2 Telegram 13714 to multiple diplomatic and consular posts, January 20, emphasized the desirability of communicating U.S. policy regarding human rights to the EC–9 political directors, who were scheduled to meet in London January 25–26. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770022–0119)
