Human Rights
23
8.
Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple
Diplomatic Posts1
Washington, February 3, 1977, 1635Z
24394. Subject: United Nations Human Rights Commission Meet-
ing—Geneva, February 7–March 11, 1977. Ref: State 137142 (Notal).
1. Action posts are accredited to governments of states members of
the UN Commission on Human Rights, which will meet in regular an-
nual session in Geneva February 7–March 11, 1977. The U.S. Govern-
ment attaches importance to our participation in this Commission.
President Carter has stressed the high priority which his administra-
tion will attach to the promotion of human rights. Prior to the Commis-
sion’s opening, Dept considers it would be useful if appropriate offi-
cials in host governments were apprised of the elements of the overall
approach to international human rights matters which the Carter ad-
ministration intends to follow. In discussion with appropriate host gov-
ernment officials, posts should be guided by paras 2–6.
2. In presenting the following outline of the emphasis and direc-
tions to be followed by the Carter administration in the field of pro-
moting international human rights, posts should stress our desire that
the renewed impetus which we hope to bring to human rights pro-
grams through the United Nations will be a collaborative effort carried
out in close consultation with other governments. We will be fully re-
ceptive to new ideas which these governments may propose. We hope
to work closely with them in the appropriate UN organs to maximize
the opportunities which we feel are present in these bodies to
strengthen respect for human rights in the world.
3. Throughout his campaign President Carter placed priority
among his concerns that of human rights, not only for the American
people but for the peoples of the world. A human rights theme flowed
through the President’s inaugural address, as exemplified by his state-
ment that “The world itself is now dominated by a new spirit. Peoples
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770039–0463.
Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Hewitt; cleared by Baker, Pascoe, Wilson, Whiting,
Holly, Lake, Runyon, Bray, and Sebastian; approved by Habib. Sent priority to Bonn,
London, Ottawa, Rome, Stockholm, Vienna, San Jose, Nicosia, Quito, Cairo, New Delhi,
Tehran, Amman, Maseru, Lagos, Islamabad, Kigali, Dakar, Ankara, Ouagadougou, Trip-
oli, Damascus, Lima, and Belgrade. Sent for information priority to Brussels, Copen-
hagen, Dublin, Luxembourg, Paris, The Hague, the Mission to the EC, the Mission in Ge-
neva, and USUN. Lowenstein served as head of the U.S. delegation to the HRC meeting.
2 Telegram 13714 to multiple diplomatic and consular posts, January 20, empha-
sized the desirability of communicating U.S. policy regarding human rights to the EC–9
political directors, who were scheduled to meet in London January 25–26. (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770022–0119)
