Covert and Overt Operations leaders, that the Islamic Conference could act as an intermediary in resolving the hostage crisis. The Islamic Conference’s role would be particularly important in providing the Iranians with credible assurances that the U.S. would not take retaliatory action against Iran or act against the Revolution once the hostages are released. The Saudis have hinted to other Islamic states that they might be interested in exploring such an initiative if others would join them. The French, Germans, Turks and possibly the British could also be persuasive with the various clerics with whom they maintain contact. 4. Richard Cottam is prepared to go to Iran for intensive discussions with Ghotbzadeh, Beheshti, and other contacts. 5. Archbishop Capucci is possibly the single most influential foreigner with the militants, Khomeini, and the Revolutionary Council. He can be especially helpful with the religious leadership and with the militants. There are other channels that could be developed, but these are the ones that we might start with. These approaches are laid out in the table at Tab 3.6 In engaging our allies, the best approach might be to share at high level the outlines of our strategy for the next two months on a bilateral basis, asking each government to designate one senior official in its capitals with whom we can discuss our plans in detail on a highly restricted basis. An important element in enlisting overall allied support and specific cooperation of some close allies will be our position on the use of military options. Understandably, we will not wish to tie our hands completely, but we can assure the allies that (1) we have no present plan to use force; (2) we are prepared to wait for a reasonable period after the Majlis is convened to determine if a peaceful resolution is possible and if our joint diplomatic/political/economic efforts can bring this about; (3) we will consult closely with our allies if we subsequently conclude that the use of force is necessary; and (4) for tactical reasons, we will continue publicly to leave the option of using force open in this interim period, and expect the allies not to criticize us publicly on this point. Public Affairs Strategy Because the crisis is likely to continue for some time it will be important to reduce the level of public expectations and to attempt to 6 Tab 3, an untitled and undated chart, attached but not printed, lists intermediaries used in various negotiations, their role or special message, the date and place of their meeting with U.S. officials, their primary Iranian contacts, the suggested duration of their stay in Iran, and their means of reporting.
