Afghanistan 55 again, I thank you for sharing your thoughts with me; I hope you will continue to do so on this and other matters. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter 24. Interagency Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 NI IIM 78–10015 Washington, July 1978 Afghanistan: Orientation and Policies of the Taraki Government [Omitted here are the cover page, title page, and a map.] PRINCIPAL JUDGMENTS The government of President Taraki that came to power in April 1978 is much more closely oriented toward the USSR than have been previous regimes in Afghanistan. The new government will attempt to preserve Afghanistan’s basic independence from Moscow, but it is not clear that it will be able to control the growth of Soviet influence in the country. We have no evidence that the USSR was directly involved in the coup that brought the new government to power, but Moscow has strengthened significantly its historically strong position in Afghanistan. The Soviets’ near-term aim is to solidify the new government’s control of the country and the expanded Soviet presence in Afghanistan—both steps to ensure against any backsliding in the bilateral relationship. Over the longer term the Soviets will seek to guide the new regime in the implementation of domestic and foreign policies compatible with those of the USSR. President Taraki’s strength derives from his control of the Marxistoriented Peoples’ Democratic Party and the support of critically placed leftist Army officers. The new government, like its predecessors, has no widespread popular support, however, and government control is 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 80R00779A, Box 25, NI IIM 78–10015, July 1978. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A typed note on the memorandum reads: “Note: This memorandum was drafted by [less than 1 line not declassified] of CIA’s National Foreign Assessment Center. It has been coordinated by working level representatives of the National Foreign Inelligence Board.”
