February 1951–February 1952
159
government to the extent that the latter could no longer raise effective
opposition to the Party’s extra-legal methods of terror and force.
In the event of the fall of Musaddiq and the advent to power of a
government opposed to the peaceful development of the Tudeh Party,
it seems likely:
1) that the Tudeh Party would adopt more vigorous tactics di-
rected against the government; and
2) that the government in its turn would adopt more vigorous
measures to implement the anti-Tudeh laws.
We believe that it is not yet too late for a resolutely anti-Tudeh gov-
ernment to take fairly effective security action to hamper the develop-
ment of the Party. The fact is, however, that no matter how anti-Tudeh
any government may be, it will in the long run play into the hands of
the communists if it engages in the corrupt practices and possesses the
reactionary outlook of most Iranian governments of recent years.
J. The present direction taken by Iranian nationalism, as exempli-
fied by its attitude towards the British oil interests, has served to de-
crease western influence, particularly the British. British influence has
been effective in the past in keeping the Russians from gaining control
of all of Iran, whereas Soviet policy has sought to eliminate western in-
fluence in Iran and to deny Iranian oil to the non-communist world ex-
cept on Soviet terms.
The present decline in western influence in Iran in turn weakens
Iranian resistance to communism and Soviet pressure. Iranians long ac-
customed to playing foreign powers against each other and over-fond
of hoping that their country can remain neutral may dangerously open
themselves to Soviet penetration to such an extent that, if or when they
turn later to the western world to save them from Soviet domination,
their position will already have become irretrievable. Hence, with this
prospect in view, the relative responsibility of the United States has in-
creased on behalf of the free world in preventing Iran from passing into
the Soviet sphere.
Despite the present outburst of anti-British feeling, the British still
have a body of opinion in their favor which, although temporarily sub-
merged, might be effectively mobilized in certain circumstances. For
instance, if the oil dispute could be settled in a manner inoffensive to
reasonable Iranian nationalist elements, or if the Russians or commu-
nists should make a misstep, the British might still stage a comeback.
