Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
337
70.
Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Staff1
Washington, undated
[Omitted here is the Table of Contents.]
I. INTRODUCTION
For a generation our nation’s foreign policy has reflected a strong
and outward looking America. In this tradition, and building upon the
achievements of previous Administrations, we have over the past year
formulated our policies on the critical issues that will shape the re-
mainder of our lives, and those of the next generation.
1. The Complex International Agenda
As we look ahead to the 1980’s our nation faces complex interna-
tional challenges:
—The strategic arms race with the Soviet Union increases super-
power tension and the risk of nuclear war.
—The widening use of nuclear energy, necessary to the economic
well-being of many nations, threatens at the same time to promote the
spread of nuclear weapons.
—Long standing regional disputes pose the constant threat of re-
gional wars, endangering world peace.
—Growing inventories of conventional weapons aggravate re-
gional tensions and waste scarce economic resources.
—Economic recovery in the industrial nations is not rapid enough;
economic development in the third world is a global concern; and both
require the strengthening of international economic cooperation.
—Fostering human rights in our own society and abroad is neces-
sary to a just international order and a measure of the vitality of our
most basic values as a nation.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Di-
rector, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981: Lot 82D298, Box 1, 3/2/78 2 Copies of Re-
port on 1977 prepared but not released. No classification marking. According to a Feb-
ruary 24 memorandum from Christopher to Lake, Lake drafted the paper. Christopher,
commenting on an earlier version of the paper, recommended that Lake rework the
format, send it to the bureaus to obtain updated comments, and then forward it to Vance.
He continued: “At that point, I would hope that, with an appropriately hedged cover
sheet, it would become a public document. But even if it does not, it will have served an
important purpose.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary, Records
of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980: Lot 81D113, Box 8, Memoranda from WC to Bu-
reaus—1978) Attached to the version of the paper printed here is a cover page indicating
that Vance had requested the paper and that the Bureau of Public Affairs planned to issue
it. Notations in an unknown hand on the cover page read: “Please return to S/P—L
Rowe” and “3/2 final 12:30 p.m. S/P.” An additional notation indicates that the paper
was not published.
