January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1381
Religious Affairs
Refugee Rehabilitation
Social Welfare
Taxation
Tourism
Other areas and functions in which the SGA (AC) would exercise
responsibility are under discussion and negotiation.
The parties anticipate that the SGA (AC) would have the powers
necessary and appropriate to the exercise of its responsibilities with re-
spect to the defined areas and functions. These would include the
power to formulate policies; to supervise implementation of the laws
and regulations relating to them; to decide upon the budget and deter-
mine the means of financing it; to employ staff; to sue and be sued; and
to enter into contracts.
Considerable attention has been devoted to defining the nature of
the legislative power appropriate for the SGA (AC) to fulfill its respon-
sibilities. While some differences remain on this issue, the parties have
made significant progress and both agree that the SGA (AC) must be
empowered to promulgate such measures as are necessary to the
proper fulfillment of its responsibilities. The exercise of power would
have to be limited to the defined responsibilities, could not impinge on
issues reserved for resolution in the final status negotiations, and must
be consistent with the transitional nature of the arrangement and all se-
curity provisions and mechanisms called for by the Framework.
In reaching agreement on the above powers and responsibilities, it
has been understood that coordination between the SGA (AC) and Is-
rael will be necessary in some specifically defined areas and the parties
have agreed that mechanisms to achieve this end will be worked out in
the course of the negotiations.
In connection with the issue of land, we can anticipate that lawful
private ownership of land in the territories will be protected during the
transitional period, based on the principle of equal protection under the
law. As to public lands, determination of their ultimate status and uses
will be addressed in the final status negotiations. While extensive nego-
tiations will still be required, proposals have recently been made by the
parties which may offer a basis for resolving the problem of public land
and Israeli settlements during the transitional period.
As to water, final arrangements will be determined in the course of
the final status negotiations. For the transitional period, Israel has pro-
posed that new developments and uses of water should be worked out
jointly between the SGA (AC) and Israel. For its part, Egypt has be-
lieved that the SGA (AC) must control its own water resources but has
recognized that development of water resources which underlie both
Israel and the territories will require substantial coordination between
the two. Both parties appear to favor the establishment of a regional
