First Responses
157
60.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, November 26, 1979
1. Meeting with Families of Embassy Tehran Hostages—I met with
about forty family members of Embassy Tehran hostages today in the
Department. I assured them that the release and safety of their families
is uppermost in our mind and that we will continue to work around
the clock. I described in particular our current efforts at the United
Nations to obtain their release.
Dave Newsom continued the session and spoke about our efforts
to ensure regular visitation and proper care for the hostages. He also
read a message to the families from Bruce Laingen praising the charac-
ter and conduct of the hostages and urging patience and restraint. The
tenor of the initial questions from the family members was disturbed
and many were particularly forceful in criticizing the decision to admit
the Shah. However, after they expressed their feelings and frustration,
there was a general recognition of the need for patience and restraint
aimed at securing the release of the hostages. The group decided to
draft a public statement along these lines. They also indicated interest
in having periodic meetings until the hostages are released, with the
next one possibly scheduled following the December 2 Iranian
referendum.
[Omitted here is material unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
4. Iran—Warren briefed the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
more than 100 House Members, and Tip O’Neill today on the situation
in Iran.2 A good deal of interest in the activities of George Hansen was
evidenced. Warren characterized them as unhelpful, and explained
that promises of Congressional hearings on the Shah before the hostages
are released undercut our efforts. Frank Church and Clem Zablocki
both issued statements after the meetings to the effect that hearings
would be considered only after release of the hostages.
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 14. Secret. Carter initialed “C” in the upper
right corner.
2 See footnote 8, Document 59.
