616  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
than covertly introducing illegal missiles into a trench system. Harold 
Brown said its fairly easy to imagine the construction of some extra 
missile silos.
Stan Turner said with multiple aimpoint systems, you have an invi-
tation for excess missiles. Harold Brown replied that the breakout prob-
lem exists now.
Frank Press said security against close-­in sensors would be a real 
problem for the open trench. Harold Brown asked how could a sensor 
transmit without betraying itself. Frank Press said Vietnam gave us a lot 
of experience with such sensors. The open trench system would require 
decoys. Harold Brown said why decoys be needed if the missile could 
move every 15 minutes. Frank Press asked if that was the plan. Har-
old Brown said it was if necessary. Frank Press said secret sensors could 
betray determined location just before an attack. Harold Brown said that 
would give us warning. Frank Press asked how we would know the 
sensors had transmitted? Davey Jones said simulators to beat sensors 
would figure in this concept. The simulators would be distinguishable 
to NTM’s.
Harold Brown said the systems could operate like Metro. Something 
would always be moving somewhere. A given missile could move 15 
minutes, stop 15 minutes, or any combination. The enemy’s intelligence 
cycle time could not be fast enough to beat such a system.
Frank Press said the tracks are soft. SLBMs could pin down the mis-
sile, and sensors could then see an ICBM attack to destroy our mis-
siles. Harold Brown doubted the practicality of such a scenario. Frank 
Press said the scenario was no less delirious than many in the strategic 
business. Harold Brown noted that a [less than one line not declassified] 
roof would protect the trench from ejecta. Harold Brown said that open 
trench concept had not been studied nearly as fully as had MPS, but 
that he had heard no new arguments against it. He asked if Frank Press’ 
critique in effect said MPS was better than open trench. Frank Press said 
perhaps yes for survivability, but no for verification.
Hamilton Jordan asked whether trench length could be reduced to 
reduce environmental impact. Harold Brown said about 5,000 miles of 
trench would be needed, but that it could be cut up almost any way you 
want. Hamilton Jordan said, “that is a lot of trench.” Harold Brown said 
military bases could accommodate it. Frank Press asked whether public 
access would in fact be disrupted except for places where public access 
is not now permitted such as bombing ranges. Hamilton Jordan asked: 
isn’t total mileage the key variable in public impact. Harold Brown said 
environmental impact can be reduced by laying track above ground.
Gen Jones commented broadly on the basing issue and then spoke 
to the question of missile size: He said the Chiefs definitely want a sur-
vivable ICBM, the AF prefers MPS but would “be cooperative” with
