1977  39
U.S. and allied sealines, challenging U.S. naval forces in the Mediterra-
nean, and gradually achieving the capability to project military power 
abroad.
These changes in the Soviet-American military relationship 
come at a time of major new uncertainties in international political 
alignments. Significant changes could occur in the European balance, 
given the potential impact of Eurocommunism, of political unrest in 
Portugal, Spain or post-Tito Yugoslavia, and of the difficulties in form-
ing effective governing majorities in democratic states. Africa faces 
the challenge of several new self-­styled Marxist-­Leninist regimes, 
the threat of racial conflict in Southern Africa, and the appearance of 
secessionist, revolutionary, and interventionist forces. Regional con-
flicts continue in much of Africa, the Middle East, South and South-
east Asia, and trends toward political fragmentation exist throughout 
the world. These instabilities could provide new opportunities for 
influence for a stronger Soviet Union. Yet the Soviet leadership also 
faces major domestic constraints—­persistent economic problems, 
nationality discontent, and shifting demographic trends, which 
should limit both their ability to exploit their increased strength, and 
their inclination to become directly involved in new, costly foreign 
adventures.
III. MAJOR ISSUES IN THE NET ASSESSMENT
In accordance with the Terms of Reference, the overall net assess-
ment will be broken down into a number of regional and topical net 
assessments. Cutting across these efforts, however, are a number of 
general issues which the overall assessment, as well as the regional 
and topical assessments, must consider. Five of these issues are iden-
tified here.
1. The Balance of Influence. As indicated above, the strength and the 
reach of Soviet power have increased significantly. To what extent does 
this increase in the resources of power lead to expanded political influ-
ence? The net assessment will consider:
(1) Trends in the expansion and contraction in Soviet and ­American 
influence abroad and the costs and benefits of these changes to both the 
USSR and the U.S.
(2) Regional priorities and targets. What is the relation between 
U.S. commitment or neglect and the Soviet propensity to enter a region? 
In which regions is the USSR likely to make the greatest gains and to 
suffer the greatest losses?
(3) The probable extent, timing, and strength of Soviet expansion. 
Is the threat greatest in the long or short term? Is there likely to be a 
period of “maximum danger” or a period of “maximum opportunity” 
in the next five to ten years?
