Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI will promote and advance respect for human rights in recipient countries. Further, an assessment will henceforth be made of the economic impact of proposed transfers of major defense equipment to those less developed countries which receive US economic assistance. In recognition of our special treaty obligations with NATO countries, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand, these countries will be exempted as appropriate from the dollar volume restraints and other controls established below: In furtherance of this policy of restraint, and except in extraordinary circumstances personally approved by me, I direct that: 1. The dollar volume (in constant 1976 dollars) of [Transfers of] new commitments under the Foreign Military Sales and Military Assistance Programs for weapons and weapons-related items in FY 1978 will be reduced from the FY 1977 total [(exempting transfers to NATO countries, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan in both cases)]. It will be our goal to continue to reduce total dollar volume [s approved] in each subsequent year. 2. With regard to newly-developed advanced weapons systems: a. [Except in extraordinary circumstances personally approved by the President,] The United States will not be the first supplier to introduce into a region an advanced weapons system which creates a new or significantly higher combat capability.6 b. Commitment for sale [, cooperative research and development,] or coproduction of newly-developed advanced weapons systems is prohibited until the systems are operationally deployed with US forces. c. The Secretary of State will establish more extensive guidelines for assessing requests for newly-developed advanced weapons systems, including requirements 1) that supplying the system would uniquely strengthen the requestor’s ability to perform military functions which serve US security interests, [and] 2) that less-advanced, existing systems with roughly comparable capabilities are unavailable from the United States, and 3) that providing these systems will not require the presence in country of large numbers of Americans for long periods of time.7 3. [Unless an exception is personally approved by the President,] Unique advanced weapons systems developed or significantly modified solely for export will be transferred only within the treaty relationships referred to above [only to NATO countries, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan].8 6 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “Too tight a restriction—why delete?” and then crossed the phrase out. 7 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “ok.” 8 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “ok.”
