676
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
will promote and advance respect for human rights in recipient
countries.
Further, an assessment will henceforth be made of the economic
impact of proposed transfers of major defense equipment to those less
developed countries which receive US economic assistance.
In recognition of our special treaty obligations with NATO coun-
tries, Japan, Australia, and New Zealand, these countries will be ex-
empted as appropriate from the dollar volume restraints and other con-
trols established below:
In furtherance of this policy of restraint, and except in extra-
ordinary circumstances personally approved by me, I direct that:
1. The dollar volume (in constant 1976 dollars) of [Transfers of]
new commitments under the Foreign Military Sales and Military
Assistance Programs for weapons and weapons-related items in FY
1978 will be reduced from the FY 1977 total [(exempting transfers to
NATO countries, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan in both cases)]. It
will be our goal to continue to reduce total dollar volume [s approved]
in each subsequent year.
2. With regard to newly-developed advanced weapons systems:
a. [Except in extraordinary circumstances personally approved by
the President,] The United States will not be the first supplier to intro-
duce into a region an advanced weapons system which creates a new or
significantly higher combat capability.6
b. Commitment for sale [, cooperative research and development,]
or coproduction of newly-developed advanced weapons systems is
prohibited until the systems are operationally deployed with US forces.
c. The Secretary of State will establish more extensive guidelines
for assessing requests for newly-developed advanced weapons sys-
tems, including requirements 1) that supplying the system would
uniquely strengthen the requestor’s ability to perform military func-
tions which serve US security interests, [and] 2) that less-advanced, ex-
isting systems with roughly comparable capabilities are unavailable
from the United States, and 3) that providing these systems will not re-
quire the presence in country of large numbers of Americans for long
periods of time.7
3. [Unless an exception is personally approved by the President,]
Unique advanced weapons systems developed or significantly modi-
fied solely for export will be transferred only within the treaty relation-
ships referred to above [only to NATO countries, Australia, New Zea-
land, and Japan].8
6 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “Too tight a restric-
tion—why delete?” and then crossed the phrase out.
7 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “ok.”
8 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “ok.”
