Yugoslavia
849
ship could not expand to its fullest overnight, but he said there has
been progress.
Brown acknowledged the value of personal visits, but noted that
Yugoslavia’s specific requests for military equipment were a very
important aspect of the improving relationship. He said that in response
to Yugoslav requests the USG has given approval except when there
were overriding policy considerations, such as the involvement of sensi-
tive technology. Brown stressed that the US favored this cooperation
for political and military reasons, not for economic benefits. He
explained that he believed an independent, unified and strong Yugo-
slavia contributed to world peace.
Ljubicic stated firmly that Yugoslavia would remain independent
and nonaligned and was a factor contributing to the stability of the
balance of power in that area of the world. He cited signs of unrest
between the big powers and said that deterioration of US-Soviet
relations affected Yugoslavia. Yugoslavs, he said, did not want the
balance upset. He expressed confidence in US statements supporting
a strong and nonaligned Yugoslavia, but noted that we must be con-
cerned with the details that make it so. (This is the closest Ljubicic
came to a complaint about US reluctance to release certain weapons
to Yugoslavia. He left the complaining to a member of his entourage;
and even that separate meeting of MG Popovic and LTG Graves lacked
the expected polemics. Popovic renewed the requests for all equipment
which had been denied, reviewed the status of many current actions,
and expanded their shopping list moderately. He added, inter alia,
requests for consultations and information on Stinger, Viper, hydrofoil
vessels, and postgraduate and specialists training in armaments, muni-
tions and quality control fields.) Ljubicic described a “distrust” of the
US in Yugoslavia because Yugoslavs have known pressure from both
sides; the distrust should be eliminated because good relations were
sought sincerely, not for “technical” reasons.
Brown acknowledged that US-Soviet relations were central to many
situations in the world. He commented that “everyone says he is peace-
loving,” but that US actions have shown that we have sought independ-
ence and stability for all nations. US relations with Yugoslavia were
important regardless of the nature of US-Soviet relations, Brown
explained. He said that a secure Yugoslavia was important not only
as a matter of friendship but also for self-interest. Brown pointed out
that steady improvement in the relationship was the goal and that the
“wild swings” of the past should not recur. Brown reflected that a
secure Yugoslavia would have the effect of improving relations
between Yugoslavia and its neighbors.
Ljubicic
then
described unfavorable
aspects
of
Yugoslavia’s
relations with its neighbors. He said relations with Greece were declin-
