Covert and Overt Operations
851
315.
Memorandum for the Record by the Deputy Director of
Central Intelligence (Carlucci)1
Washington, July 11, 1980
SUBJECT
Meeting of the Aaron, Komer, Pustay, Newsom and Carlucci Group,
11 July 1980
1. The meeting was billed as an effort to examine and make sugges-
tions on our intelligence collection and covert action program in Iran.2
I was asked to describe both.
2. I first ran over the collection priorities. A consensus emerged
on the following:
a. We should add a priority on Soviet activities in Iran as a separate
item. This should follow priority c, government/internal stability.
b. The military and economic developments priorities should be
reversed.
3. In the more general discussion on priorities that ensued the
consumer agencies had the following suggestions:
a. More intelligence on religious groups would be very welcome.
b. A high priority was the decision-making process (some argued
that one did not exist). If we could describe the process consumers
would welcome reports on the atmosphere that surrounds those in
authority.
c. Newsom laid considerable stress on more information from
the Bazaaris.
d. In connection with our efforts to penetrate the hostage holders,
Newsom renewed an earlier suggestion. If we had the names and
backgrounds of some of those involved and could identify the educa-
tional institutions in Iran that they attended, State could seek Aid
people who may have taught at those institutions. They might have
known those involved. The group asked that we update our informa-
tion on the hostage holders and make it available to them. I would
appreciate it if NFAC could do a paragraph or so on the nature of the
group and enclose biographic information on those individuals we
have identified.
e. Komer asked if we had some [less than 1 line not declassified]. He
suggested we explore trading information with them on the Soviet
external threat for their assessment of Soviet activities inside of Iran.
I said we would explore this possibility.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 14. Secret; Sensitive; [handling restriction not
declassified].
2 See Document 311. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room
at 11 a.m. Newsom, Komer, Pustay, Carlucci, Spiers, Sick, and Odom attended. (Note,
Black Chamber Meeting, July 11; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Office File, Box 87, For President or Brzezinski Only File, Iran Sensitive 5/80–10/80)
