March 27–December 31, 1979 829 most who surround him are very reluctant to give Sadat bad news. He has few close associates. This would be less damaging if subordinate officials were willing to make independent decisions. Unfortunately, the nature of Egyptian society pushes almost all issues to the top for resolution. Until Sadat reaches a decision, all too often nothing happens. (Frequently, little happens even after Sadat issues directives; there is little follow-up, and bureaucratic inertia is massive—see 78 Cairo 19822.)4 9. Sadat’s popularity nevertheless continues to be wide and apparently genuine. The opposition which does exist is fragmented and lacks dynamic leadership. Thus far, to the best of our knowledge Egyptian security forces (military and civilian) are loyal to Sadat, cohesive and professional, and seem to genuinely welcome the peace treaty with Israel. The Egyptian military—specifically its lower officers and rank and file—reflects its society and is not an elite organization. On the one hand, the military is not cut off from the people. On the other, it is affected by the same economic and social problems which afflict society in general. Additionally, the armed forces are acutely aware of the fact that their military capability has declined in recent years, particularly when compared to Israel. 10. The mass media is government-controlled and uncritical. While there is no prior censorship, editors are government-appointed and are expected to know what should not appear in print. By and large they observe closely these unwritten rules. Labor groups, too, are amenable to government direction. There have been no significant strikes since January 1977, and recent wage increases have permitted workers to keep up with inflation, if only just barely. Labor leaders report no mass discontent, but say there is a pervasive sense of drift. 11. Student and fundamentalist Muslim religious organizations could cause the administration difficulty, as Sadat undoubtedly is now aware. The conservative campus-based Islamic societies (with links to the Muslim Brotherhood) are the best organized force in the country outside the military and the communists, and are deeply committed to their cause. They control student governments on many campuses, and 4 In telegram 19822 from Cairo, August 25, 1978, the Embassy provided a discussion of Egyptian economic policy-making responsibilities as background for Carter’s preparations for the Camp David Summit. The analysis concluded: “In sum, decisionmaking at higher levels in the government-dominated Egyptian economy tends to be diffused, poorly coordinated, lacking in clear guidance from superior authority and unresponsive to out-of-the-ordinary requirements. Buck passing is a well-developed bureaucratic art; individual responsibility for decisions normally is accepted only if impossible to avoid. The extensive use of government committees is a device designed at least as much to arrive at collective responsibility for decisions as it is to reach a consensus on feasible, preferred courses of action.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780348–0998)
