1148 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Photo Exchange at the Signing Ceremony 19. As the delegations were filing in for the signing ceremony, Brooks sought out Nazarkin and raised the question of the exchange of photographs specified for exchange before signature (emplacement equipment, B–1 support equipment, launch associated support vehicles, driver training vehicles.). Nazarkin said he had located the photographs. The two then exchanged the necessary photographs. Conforming and Classification Problems After the Fact 20. Brown was contacted by the MFA, through U.S. Embassy officials, on August 1 to discuss several matters that had emerged since the signing of the treaty on the previous day. Brown telephoned Boyarshchinnov at the MFA, who stated that there were still problems with the English “alternat” of the geographic coordinates agreement, and that the Soviet side was insisting on making that agreement “confidential”, and having both originals and both alternats marked “confidential” before any of the copies left Moscow. Further, Brown learned from Herr that, earlier in the day, Sokov had provided replacement pages in Russian, for the “alternat” on U.S. treaty paper, for about ten mistakes in references that occurred in Russian only; Sokov separately identified two probable mistakes in references in the English text. Brown set up an appointment to meet with Boyarshchinnov and Sokov in the early evening. 21. Arriving at “Gastromid” (the branch of the MFA that is situated above a “Gastronome” about a block from the central MFA building, and the home of the MFA legal advisors) around 8:30 p.m., Brown and Herr met with Boyarshchinnov, Sviridov, Molokoyedova, and Sokov for about two hours. Boyarshchinnov again complained about the faulty English “alternat” of the geographic coordinates agreement; Brown responded that he would either spend an extra day in Moscow to finish it or would finish it in Geneva and provide it to NST Executive Director Zharkov, who was leaving from Geneva for Moscow on August 3. The latter approach was eventually agreed upon. (Comment: The corrected “alternat” was handed to Zharkov on August 2 in Geneva. End comment) 22. The sides then engaged in a long discussion of the requirement of the U.S. side to classify the original English and Russian “alternat” prior to the departure of the U.S. treaty binder containing that agreement from Moscow. Sviridov, Molokoyedova and Boyarshchinnov stated that the only way that the sides could be certain that the agreement would be kept “confidential” was to classify it. In the Russian text (both Soviet original and U.S. “alternat”), they asserted, the word “confidential”, in Russian, should be typed in the upper right hand corner of the first page; they pressed for a similar marking in the U.S. original
