Chapter 2, January–June 1989 87 Number of SSBNs (S) The report for Part II of NSR–12 concludes that the presently programed twenty-­plus Trident SSBNs appear to meet U.S. security requirements. START places no direct restriction on SSBNs, but the size of the force would be indirectly limited by the number of accountable SLBM warheads under the 4900 sublimit. The U.S. approach allows for exempting from START accountability the warheads from as many as three Trident SSBNs in repair yards at any time. It also could allow (depending on the decision on downloading) for increasing the number of SSBNs by decreasing the number of accountable SLBM warheads deployed on them, and it could be revised to allow explicitly for altering the number of deployed launchers on an existing SSBN. It also allows deployment of future SSBNs with fewer than 24 launchers (the number on the Trident SSBN), and of future SLBMs with fewer than eight RVs (the number attributed to the Trident II SLBM). Within this array of options, the U.S. should be able to meet its security requirements with respect to SSBNs in a post-START environment. It should be noted that these provisions also have implications for the number of SSBNs that the Soviets could deploy. Air Breathing Systems (S) The U.S. approach in START has been to channel strategic forces away from ballistic missiles and toward air breathing systems. The U.S. determined that this was in its security interest despite the asymmetry in air defenses. However, it is worth reviewing why this approach was adopted in the first place. (S) Ballistic missiles (and particularly certain types of ICBMs) have been seen as the greater threat to stability. Ballistic missiles in general are characterized by short flight times, high assurance of penetration to target, and the fact that they cannot be recalled once launched. Today, heavily MIRVed ICBMs possess features which make them especially well suited for use in a pre-­emptive attack: high alert rates, good prompt-­attack accuracy, and the requisite communications capability. (S) Air-­breathing systems (heavy bombers and cruise missiles), on the other hand, do not pose as great a threat to crisis stability. Generating the bomber force (which has much lower alert rates than ICBMs) could provide considerable strategic warning, and bomber flight times are measured in hours, not minutes. Moreover, bombers can be recalled. And while stealth technology increases the ability of a bomber to penetrate air defenses, a bomber incorporating stealth technology still would likely have detectable force generation and time-­of-­flight characteristics similar to its non-­stealth counterparts. It has been considerations of this sort which led the U.S. to emphasize tighter constraints and deeper reductions on ballistic missiles than on air-­breathing systems. Partly for
