1064  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
— The Soviets have argued recently that an increase in throw-
weight should be added as a criterion for defining a new type of missile.
—  We don’t like using throw-weight this way. [3 lines not declassified]
—  But the Soviets are insistent that increases in throw-weight be 
an additional criterion for identifying new types.
— Given the relationship between downloading and new types I 
described, this may be an area in which we can show some flexibility, 
especially if we continue to insist on the U.S. position on downloading.
— The problem is finding the right throw-weight threshold.
— If we set the throw-weight threshold for new types of missiles 
too low, the Soviets might deploy variants of existing missiles masquer-
ading as new types that would be counted with a fewer number of RVs. 
That, in turn, could provide the potential for breakout.
— Picking the right number is a matter of judgment, balancing 
how much risk we are prepared to run that the Soviets might exploit 
this approach to preserve some future breakout capability, against mak-
ing a move that could lead to Soviet agreement on other issues, such as 
downloading, of particular importance to us.
— Given this background, it is not surprising that our staffs have 
not been able to come to agreement on what throw-weight increase we 
should propose as a new types criterion. Some believe we must insist 
on not less than a 30-40 percent increase. Others believe we could live 
with a 20 percent increase if we have to. (In both cases, these throw-
weight increases would be in combination with a 5 percent change in 
the length of the first missile stage, a modification that by itself goes 
part of the way toward giving us confidence that we are dealing with a 
“new type” of missile.)
— I don’t propose that we try to resolve the issue here, Mr. President.
DATA DENIAL
— The final issue concerns the ban on denying performance data 
about ballistic missiles.
— Arnie Kanter’s “Ungroup” is wrapping up its review of a new 
proposal to be forwarded to Geneva this week.
— A fundamental principle of this proposal would be agreement 
that each side would use telemetry practices which would allow the 
other side to acquire data on ballistic missile performance.
— In addition, the sides would agree to ensure that the other side 
could interpret and understand the data acquired.
— However, extensive expert-level talks will probably be required 
to resolve the details of this issue even if the Soviets react favorably. The 
letter proposes these experts meetings.
