476 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX for Hamilton and others. Hamilton has told us that announcement of a date will allow him to head off this vote. —Only Congresswoman Oakar (and Congressman Horton to a lesser degree) is still actively opposing your decision. Oakar is alleging that the Administration is even reconsidering its decision to return the Crown. Many influential Senators and Congressmen have publicly supported your decision and expect us to act promptly and assertively on this. (These include Humphrey, McGovern, Griffin, Pell, Biden, Charley Wilson, Vanik, Bingham, Whalen, Frenzel and Fenwick.) —Cardinal Lekai of Hungary has given us his strong support and will issue a public statement. He told Ambassador Kaiser the following: “I support the return of the Crown, the Catholic Church supports the return of the Crown, and the Hungarian people support the return of the Crown.”4 However, the Vatican and the US Catholic Conference are not willing to issue supportive statements, and there is no advantage in waiting any longer for them.5 —Setting a date now would not only defuse the opposition but would allow us to get started on choosing a delegation (Tip O’Neill has written me already about Congressional involvement) and on the technical steps both here and in Budapest. Therefore, I recommend that we return the Crown on January 7, the day after your visit to Brussels. One or more members of your party could go to Budapest for the ceremony, meeting the rest of the US delegation there. If you approve, we will inform the Hungarian Government that we are prepared to return the Crown on January 7, subject to agreement on a joint statement6 (draft attached).7 4 See footnote 5, Document 156. 5 See footnote 6, Document 157. 6 In a memorandum dated December 2, Brzezinski forwarded Vance’s proposals for Presidential approval. Carter approved the January 7, 1978, date for the return and approved Brzezinski’s recommendation that Vance seek more specific assurances, “perhaps through an exchange of letters” on the handling of the return and display of the Crown. Carter wrote in the margin “a) We should consider Jan 6th also (same day I’m in Brussels); b) Will they agree that Cadinal Lekai will participate in accepting Crown? (in statement); c) Date of proposed announcement?” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 27, Hungary: 1–12/77). Brzezinski forwarded Carter’s second and third comments to Vance in a December 2 memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary: Crown of St Stephen: 12/77) 7 Attached but not printed. For the final text, see Department of State Bulletin, January 1978, pp. 32–33
