236  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
development funds as competing with other programs the Navy lead-
ership values more, such as building new ships or buying new aircraft.
If a serious development effort were started now, the D–5 could 
be initially deployed in 1987 or 88—­if high priority were given to the 
project, deployment could probably start a year or two sooner. Such a 
program would be consistent with SALT II. And an announcement that 
we are pursuing this—­even only as an option—­would go a long way to 
defuse the “counterforce debate” that Sam Nunn believes would be so 
damaging as SALT II ratification.
Even if we ultimately decide to forego an increase in missile hard-­
target kill capabilities, development of the Trident II missile would still 
have advantages. The throw weight of this missile is approximately 
the same as that of the M–X, and deployment of it would help reduce 
the growing throw weight asymmetry. Further, the Trident II missile 
(which is significantly larger than the Trident I) would make maximum 
use of each submarine. Thus allowing us the option of deploying fewer 
submarines overall—­with lower costs, at least in the long run.
In view of these considerations, we should be cautious about the 
idea of putting M–X missiles in Minuteman silos—­and look seriously 
at the possibility that development of the Trident II missile or an alter-
native option.3
2. Facts
A Look Into the Arms Trade Future
The Council on Foreign Relations recently published a book enti-
tled Controlling Future Arms Trade.4 The book is part of the Council’s 
1980’s Project which is designed to identify and analyze issues likely to 
be of international concern during the next 10 to 20 years. A number of 
interesting predictions were made in the book, including:
—The pattern of transfers in the 1980’s will conform less and less 
to the division of influence between East and West; the Soviet Union 
and the U.S. will increasingly sell arms to each other’s clients; clients 
will feel free to bargain between East and West. The existence of other 
3 Carter wrote beneath this paragraph: “This is something about which Harold 
should brief me—(by memo first) J.” In a March 13 memorandum, Brzezinski wrote 
Brown: “In connection with your discussion with the President of the idea of putting the 
M–X Missile in Minuteman silos, the President has asked for a memorandum from you 
about possible alternatives to M–X. Specifically, he would be interested in your views 
about the possibility of developing the Trident II (D–5) missile as a survivable hard target 
weapon. The memorandum should also surface other possible options, if any. We would 
also plan discussing this issue at a PRC.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, 
­Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National 
Security Report: 2–4/78).
4 Anne Hessing Cahn, et al., eds. Controlling Future Arms Trade (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1977).
