1957  1383
officials of my government but also with private individuals brought 
home to me depth of concern of American people over Americans 
still imprisoned in his country. They also concerned over failure give 
us that information about Americans still missing from hostilities 
in Korea which his authorities must have. Question of imprisoned 
Americans ought to have been and still could be short-­run problem 
which need not require long discussions. All it required was that his 
authorities take those measures for their release that were envisaged 
in the Agreed Announcement. It was evident that none with whom 
I  talked was able to understand the failure to carry out the prom­
ise contained in the Announcement. Neither could I. Chinese in U.S. 
desiring to return their country, continued be entirely free do so. In 
fact, to best of my knowledge at least 345 had done so since beginning 
our talks here.
11. I continued, in accordance with request made at our last meet­
ing which Wang had repeated here this morning, I had looked into the 
matter of Dr. Lin Lan-­ying who returned to Wang’s country early this 
year. Contrary to the statements Wang said she now makes, she at no 
time prior to her departure made any allegation that she was in any way 
being obstructed or prevented from departing and very fact she did 
depart is best evidence that there was no such obstruction. At the time 
of her departure a search was made by the Customs Authorities—­not 
by the FBI as Wang asserted—­in accordance with customary procedure 
and with all customary safeguards to determine whether there was any 
attempted violation of law. It was found that Dr. Lin was, in violation 
of a long standing regulation of which she must have been perfectly 
aware, attempting to take with her an amount of U.S. dollar funds far 
in excess of any reasonable needs for the trip. In spite of this attempted 
violation of our laws and regulations no action was taken against her 
and she was permitted to proceed without hindrance. Excess funds she 
was attempting to remove from the country had not been confiscated 
as implied in Wang’s statement but had rather been deposited to her 
credit in a blocked account. Further search was made only to deter­
mine whether she was attempting to remove additional matter or infor­
mation in violation of U.S. law and rather than delay her departure 
she was told that written matter carried by her would subsequently 
be examined for such information. Not only is this a matter entirely 
within the competence and authority of my government but I had 
noted that Americans who had returned from Wang’s country reported 
that Wang’s authorities had very strictly limited the amount of funds 
they had been permitted take with them. Thus, I saw no grounds what­
ever for any complaint with regard Dr. Lin who, in spite of attempted 
violation of U.S. law, was freely permitted proceed to Wang’s country.
