First Responses SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS The SCC met to review the present situation in Iran and next steps. The following issues were addressed: 1. Presidential Statement. There is an internal rivalry inside Iran between the religious authorities under Khomeini and the more moderate, secular elements represented by Prime Minister Bazargan and Foreign Minister Yazdi. The U.S. Chargé this morning counseled extreme caution in any U.S. public statements which could undercut the position of the Bazargan-Yazdi forces or further inflame anti-American sentiments among the religious groups.2 State and NSC will prepare on an urgent basis a statement which could be issued either by Jody Powell or by the President. The statement will stress that this is a time for coolness, not inflammatory rhetoric. (S) 2. Emissary. The SCC agreed that it would be useful to offer sending an emissary to Khomeini. This could provide a face-saving device for the religious authorities if they are looking for a way out of the situation. The two most likely candidates are Bill Miller, who has personal contacts with individuals close to Khomeini, and Ramsey Clark. On balance, the SCC preferred Miller, but both possibilities will be explored. All agreed that our offer of an emissary should be tied to Iranian willingness to release the hostages. A decision memorandum for the President will be prepared by State.3 In the meantime, State will proceed with efforts to find a secure channel to relay our thinking to Chargé Laingen. Professor Richard Cottam will also be approached to see if he would be willing to undertake a trip to Tehran on a private citizen basis to use his own contacts with religious authorities on behalf of the hostages. (S) 3. Security for the Shah. The Rockefeller group, which is managing the Shah’s affairs, has increased the security around the Shah. We will suggest that they seek help from the New York police if they have not yet done so. We have suggested that they issue a new medical bulletin on the Shah’s condition and the necessity of further surgery as some- 2 Laingen’s message was not found. 3 According to handwritten notes of the meeting, Brzezinski passed on the message that Carter was “rather negative” at first on using Ramsey Clark as an emissary. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 97, Meetings
