Chapter 2, January–June 1989  33
9.	
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Bush1
Washington, March 31, 1989
SUBJECT
Arms Control Review
Purpose
To provide guidance for reviewing our arms control policies and 
positions.
Discussion
In directing the review of defense strategy mandated by NSR–12,2 
you stated that you would direct the Arms Control Policy Coordinating 
Committee to review current U.S. arms control positions and policies both 
to reflect the results of the defense strategy review and to resolve out-
standing issues requiring resolution before resumption of negotiations. 
A draft National Security Review3 providing such direction is attached.
The arms control review will include:
— A review of the details of our START and Defense and Space 
negotiating positions, timed to allow resumption of negotiations as 
early as mid-June.4
— A review of various issues associated with the Conventional 
Forces in Europe (CFE) negotiations, including the military and polit-
ical implications of reductions in NATO and Warsaw Pact forces in 
Europe which exceed those in the initial NATO proposal.5
— A review of the verification issues associated with a global 
chemical weapons ban.6
— A review of those areas—­anti-­satellite arms control, naval arms 
control, and nuclear weapons free zones—­in which the United States 
has not favored negotiations in the past.
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, H-Files, NSR Files, OA/ID 90006–025, NSR–14—April 03, 1989—Review of U.S. 
Arms Control Policies [1]. Secret. Sent for action. Prepared by Brooks. Copied to Quayle 
and Sununu. A stamped notation indicates Bush saw the memorandum. Bush wrote in 
the upper right-­hand corner: “signed GB 4–2.”
2 NSR–12, dated March 3, “Review of National Defense Strategy,” is scheduled for 
publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. XXVIII, National Security Policy, 1989–1992.
3 Printed as Document 10.
4 Bush underlined “of our START and Defense” and wrote a checkmark in the left-­
hand margin beside this paragraph.
5 Bush underlined “Conventional Forces” and wrote a checkmark in the left-­hand 
margin beside this paragraph.
6 Bush underlined “chemical” and wrote a checkmark in the left-­hand margin, 
between this and the subsequent paragraph.
