742
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
and Defense are each preparing papers indicating what information
must be protected and should not be revealed to Congress and what
can be revealed. (S)
5. The meeting on Thursday will be a three-tier arrangement: the
broader group to address the problem of Iranian assets legislation;
secondly, the smaller group to consider our next political steps; and,
thirdly, the smallest group to address the [less than 1 line not declassified]
Congressional issues. (TS)
273.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State1
Washington, undated
DIPLOMATIC STRATEGY FOR IRAN—THE PERIOD AHEAD
This paper lays out for discussion, revision, and decision certain
possible propositions from which our strategy for the period until the
new Iranian Parliament is formed might be built. It goes on to describe
the elements from which our strategy will be fashioned and suggests
for consideration a specific course of action over the next few weeks.
After six months of frustrating dealings with the Iranians, it is clear
that we are dealing with an outlook that differs fundamentally from
our own, and a chaotic internal situation. Our character, our society
are based on optimism—a long history of strength and success, the
possibility of equality, the protection of institutions enshrined in a
constitution, the belief in our ability to control our own destiny. Iran,
on the other hand, has a long and painful history of foreign invasions,
occupation and domination. Their outlook is a function of this history
and the solace most Iranians have found in Shi’a Islam. They place a
premium on survival. They are manipulative, fatalistic, suspicious and
xenophobic.
With such fundamental cultural and historical differences, it is
easier to understand why most Iranians have remained unmoved by
1 Source: Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Diplomatic Strategy for
Iran. Secret; Sensitive. Submitted to Brzezinski, Turner, Brown, and Jones under an April
30 covering memorandum from Tarnoff, on which an unknown hand wrote: “Revised
Version 5/1/80.” Attendees at the May 2 SCC meeting discussed the paper. See Docu-
ment 275.
