574  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
would have to be met by Soviet air defenses. To an extent consistent 
with this first priority, other key US war-­making capabilities would 
probably also be attacked.
107. The outbreak of general war would probably find the USSR 
at a state of military readiness beyond that of ordinary peacetime, but 
short of what Soviet planners might believe best for the most rapid 
exertion of their total military effort. During any local war or crisis 
which they viewed as likely to become increasingly serious, Soviet 
planners would almost certainly prepare against the possibility of a 
general conflict. However, they would not want to push preparations 
so far as to convince the US that general war was imminent, lest this 
lead the US to strike the first all-­out nuclear blow. The probability of 
increased Western readiness during a crisis, together with the normally 
widespread deployment of Western nuclear striking forces in the US 
and overseas, would make it doubtful that the Soviets could count on 
achieving surprise against all of these forces, but they would almost 
certainly attempt to do so.
108. Soviet recognition of the importance of surprise in modem 
military operations has been reflected in articles and statements over 
the last few years, but it is evident that Soviet military theoreticians 
do not regard surprise as the decisive factor in the outcome of a major 
war between great powers. In fact, they hold that in such a war the 
strategic attack capabilities of both sides might expend themselves and 
leave eventual victory to the side with the greatest residual strength, 
capacity for recovery, and ability to occupy territory. They visualize an 
important role for their ground, tactical air, and naval forces in a gen­
eral war, which in their view would probably become a protracted war 
of attrition.10
109. In the event of general war, Soviet ground, tactical air, and 
naval forces would probably be launched in major campaigns against 
Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East, in order to defeat those 
Western forces within reach and to seize military objectives in those 
areas as well as their industrial and economic resources. The USSR 
would probably plan to commit its ready forces to an offensive against 
NATO, especially through Western Germany, as soon as possible con­
sistent with its attempt to achieve surprise for its initial assaults against 
the US, overseas US and allied nuclear bases, and naval striking forces. 
Campaigns in other areas would be of lesser priority, but we believe 
10 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that as written this para­
graph does not correctly reflect the Soviet judgment of the role of surprise in a general 
war. He believes it is evident that Soviet military theoreticians consider surprise probably 
would be the decisive factor in the outcome of a war between great powers. [Footnote is 
in the original.]
