Paraguay 993 enterprise operation only. In my opinion, the government of Paraguay would give this their blessing. (2) A grant which would complete the Chaco Road connecting Bolivia and Paraguay to be done as a U.S. gesture to the economic benefit of the two nations – Bolivia and Paraguay. This should be tied into the use of whatever funds are to be extended to Bolivia so that the road (a portion of the Pan-American highway) properly ties into the capital of Bolivia and the capital of Paraguay. Bolivia imports a substantial part of her food. Paraguay has fertile soil and could well feed many times its population. The economy of the two countries are in many ways complementary. They are also the only two land-­locked nations in South America and should pose no problem to those in the Department who might be understandably concerned over the problem of precedence insofar as grant aid to Paraguay is concerned. This is an international, two-­nation plan. I want to make clear that there is no present request on the part of Paraguay for grant aid or charity in any form. If we make such a grant, it should be done in adequate amount, in a manner to emphasize the international aspect, and with every precaution to avoid the appearance of being a reluctant giver. I am not talking about an exorbitant amount of money. I believe that with the start that has been made on the Chaco Road, with the help of the ranchers in the area and of the Mennonites, and with the use of the military, which is important, on the construction, that the amount would not be excessive. I would want to get these figures for you; perhaps $5 million could accomplish what we want insofar as the Paraguayan end is concerned. This gesture might well be timed with the Nixon visit,2 ­probably just prior to his arrival so that he may take the bows when he gets here. This is particularly beneficial to Bolivia because it means cheaper food and a higher standard of living as a result. As it is now, I understand that most of Bolivia’s food is imported from the Argentine, none competitively. While this would not be detrimental to the economy of Argentina, which has a worldwide market, it would be a new life line for Bolivia and Paraguay. Storm and the other solid people within the government of Paraguay are extraordinarly strong advocates of access to the Bolivian market and the use of Bolivian minerals. (3) The quick approval of the public works program which we have presented to the DLF, (Additional supporting technical information is being prepared.) (a) The Brazilian road, (b) the Ayala-Oviedo road, (c) telecommunications. All three of these projects are of equal economic growth benefit and constitute the unlocking of Paraguay to other sections of the world – not Bolivia.
