226  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
more detail below, but you also will be asked to decide several other 
issues in START that pose similar tradeoffs.
For example, our current START position would require numer-
ical limits on certain “non-­deployed missiles,” i.e., spare missiles that 
potentially could be launched from makeshift sites or used as refires 
from existing launchers. For these numerical limits to impose mean-
ingful constraints on the Soviets, however, might require them to be set 
far lower than the number of spare missiles we ourselves stockpile to 
support our systems over their lifetimes of 20–30 years. Very low limits 
on “non-­deployed missiles” in START could either greatly add to the 
expense of maintaining our strategic forces or degrade their reliability.
Our current START positions on “airbreathing systems” such as 
bombers and cruise missiles reflects a decision to protect important 
U.S. military capabilities by proposing some limits in START that are 
essentially non-­verifiable and by refusing to accept any limits on other 
systems, notably sea-­launched cruise missiles (SLCMs). Thus, we pro-
pose to exclude “conventional” cruise missiles from any START limits 
even though we cannot reliably tell whether a missile that the Soviets 
say is “conventional” really is nuclear-­armed. (We were confronted with 
the same problem in the INF Treaty but made the opposite decision and 
banned both nuclear and conventional ground-­launched cruise missiles 
in order to deal with this verification problem.)
Likewise, we propose to exclude from START limits any cruise 
missile that cannot fly more than 1500 km, even though we cannot 
verify within very wide limits what the actual range of any Soviet 
cruise missile might be. These positions reflect a judgment that it is 
more important make sure that the U.S. has enough of these nuclear 
and conventional capabilities than to be able to tell whether the Soviets 
either are cheating or are preparing to suddenly deploy large numbers 
of nuclear cruise missiles in excess of START limits.
As noted above, you face two broad alternatives in your approach to veri-
fication. You will need to decide which approach to emphasize.
One is a “political” approach that tries to maximize verification 
and deter cheating to the greatest extent possible, notwithstanding 
the budget costs, intrusiveness, and constraints on U.S. forces. The 
more stringent options (and, to a lesser extent, our current approach) 
on non-­deployed missiles, perimeter-­portal monitoring, and suspect 
site inspections would take you in this direction. You would, how-
ever, have to radically alter our current proposals for limits on bomb-
ers and cruise missiles to bring them into line with this approach. 
Such a “political” approach probably would improve ratification 
prospects, recognizing that no verification measures and no amount 
of money will satisfy hard-­liners who insist on a virtual guarantee 
against Soviet cheating.
