Czechoslovakia 333 respects, the regime is more repressive today than it had been in late 1976. There has been no “constructive dialogue” or role for the Charter as “mediator in conflict situations.” At no time has the movement posed a threat to regime stability (although this was not, of course, its stated intention). The movement has also been troubled by internal divisions and lack of popular acceptance. Most important of all, however, has been the regime’s repression of the dissidents. Although there may be disagreement among Czechoslovak leaders over how to deal with dissidence, there was never doubt that the regime would deny the Chartists any role in the political process. After publication of the Charter 77 manifesto, the regime immediately resorted to harassment and intimidation; it conducted a massive propaganda campaign denouncing the Charter and its signatories—without allowing the contents of that manifesto to be published or revealed at the “spontaneous” meetings of intellectuals, officials, and workers convened to sign anti-Charter petitions. After a time, the intensive harassment and propaganda campaign abated somewhat—perhaps because the regime realized that its tactics served more to call attention to the Charter and to human rights than to discredit the movement. Nevertheless, Charter spokesmen and activists continued to be subjected to heavy surveillance and harassment. Their drivers licenses have been confiscated; telephones tapped or removed; and their homes have been searched and materials confiscated. They have been repeatedly detained and interrogated, denied employment, and exposed to kidnappings and assaults by police thugs. In addition, the regime has tried to weaken the movement by forcing or inducing Charter supporters to emigrate. Informers have been infiltrated into the movement, not only to keep the authorities informed about Charter activities, but also to sow dissension within the movement. Among the most repressive measures taken by the regime are: —trials and imprisonment of four dissidents in October 1977 for terms of 14 months to 3½ years on charges of subversion (during the Belgrade CSCE review conference, while the subject of human rights was being debated at length). —the round-up and preventive detention of some 40 activists on the eve of Brezhnev’s May 1978 visit to Czechoslovakia. Similarly, that summer—as the 10th anniversary of the invasion neared—the regime warned various Chartists to leave Prague or face detention. —the late May 1979 arrests of ten activists of the movement on charges of subversion. The reasons for these arrests are not known, but perhaps reflect renewed determination by the police to wipe out political dissidence before the 1980 CSCE review meeting in Madrid. Two of the arrested are Charter spokesmen. All ten are activists in the Committee for the Defense of the Unjustly Prosecuted (VONS), a subgroup of the Charter, founded in May 1978. VONS has issued more than 100 statements, giving details about the arrests, trials, and sentences
