548  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
steal a march on his competitors in the succession struggle. We think 
that the substance, as distinguished from the style, of Soviet policy is 
likely to be little affected by Khrushchev’s idiosyncrasies.
Role of the Party
33. The victory of Khrushchev has been paralleled by an increas­
ing use of the Party apparatus in all aspects of control and administra­
tion. At the top, in the Party Presidium, the majority now consists of 
Khrushchev’s followers who were elevated from the Secretariat and of 
important regional Party secretaries; the former overwhelming repre­
sentation of men in leading government positions has been drastically 
reduced.4 Party personalities either preside over or play important roles 
in the regional economic councils which now administer the economy in 
place of the former central ministries. Local Party secretaries have also 
been brought into the district military councils, giving the Party a closer 
hold on military administration. In rural areas measures have been taken 
to give the local Party more effective control over agriculture.
34. This increased role of the Party at all levels of administration was 
probably intended in part to insure Khrushchev’s firm control over the 
country, since the Party apparatus was his principal instrument of power. 
But the reforms in industry and agriculture which he has sponsored in 
recent years—­all involving decentralization and a fuller reliance on local 
initiative—­have also made closer Party supervision more necessary in 
order to combat local violations of the Party’s economic directives. Under 
Khrushchev much more will depend on morale and discipline within the 
Party at local levels than has been the case in the past.
35. The increase in authority of the Party apparatus has taken place 
at the expense of the various interest groupings which compete for 
place and influence behind the façade of totalitarian Party unity. The 
professional military opposes the system of political commissars and, 
despite Zhukov’s removal for attempting to reduce Party control over 
the armed forces, this attitude will persist. Government administra­
tors and economic managers will continue to resent what they regard 
as the bumbling interference of Party hacks in their technical spheres. 
Intellectuals—­writers, artists, scientists, students—­will continue 
to press for a greater area of freedom and a loosening of the Party’s 
ideological strait-­jacket. While each of these groups has a stake in the 
success and prosperity of the Soviet state, each has also professional 
interests to further. One purpose of Khrushchev in elevating the Party 
4 At present, 11 of the 14 full members of the Party’s Presidium hold key posts in 
the Party apparatus (including 9 of the 10 secretaries), and only 3 other than Khrushchev 
himself hold leading governmental positions. By contrast, at the time of Malenkov’s 
removal in 1955, of the 9 full members of the Presidium 8 were in leading governmental 
positions, and only Khrushchev was a full time official in the Party apparatus. [Footnote 
is in the original.]
