392 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX that a process of German reunification may be in its infancy. [classification not declassified] The Regime’s Measures East Germany now requires that its citizens convert hard currency into bank certificates before these funds can be used to purchase quality goods in special shops (Intershops). The change acknowledges that the two-currency economy that has developed in East Germany, with the West German mark being the preferred currency, had to be curtailed. The dual-currency system makes special benefits available to those who can acquire foreign funds—many times through transactions outside the official economy. The persons thus rewarded by the system are, by and large, not those the regime wishes to be rewarded—workers and party and government officials. The change in the system was not as restrictive as many East Germans feared, but it will bring home to those who profit from the dual system that the privileges they enjoy are strictly at the sufferance of the regime. [classification not declassified] The new measures are designed to reduce the growing number of informal contacts between East and West Germans. The West German media, which reaches a substantial number of East Germans through radio and television broadcasts, has long been a nuisance to the authorities because of their accurate descriptions, collected from local residents, of economic, social and political conditions in East Germany. To reduce these contacts, the regime has enacted controls requiring Western journalists to provide the authorities 24 hours notice and a detailed itinerary of travel plans outside East Berlin. Other restrictions include a ban on interviews with East German citizens without prior government approvalandarequirementthat,“incarryingouttheirjournalisticwork, journalists must abstain from slandering or defaming the GDR, its state organs, and its leading figures, as well as states allied with the GDR.” These restrictions are more severe than those of any other East European state, including the Soviet Union. [classification not declassified] The restrictions on foreign travel by dissidents have prevented several regime critics, including East Germany’s most prominent author, Stefan Heym, from traveling to West Germany to attend lectures and conferences. The government also has devised a new legal scheme, apparently to be applied on a selective basis, for punishing authors who publish their work in the West. According to this newly devised legal principle, a citizen who publishes in the West and receives compensation is guilty of violating foreign currency regulations, the penalty for which is a 10 year prison term. This law probably is the basis of the recently instituted criminal proceedings against Robert Havemann, a prominent critic. The measures against dissidents will not halt their activities or the feed-back of information into the country about them, but they will have an inhibiting effect. [classification not declassified]
