1978  431
Though precisely what we would give up in terms of military value 
depends on the particular alternative, there are two types of losses: the 
first is the loss of specific characteristics (which determine what kinds 
of things we will or will not be able to do); the second is a loss in simple 
diversity (which determines our confidence in being able to do it, come 
what may, in the face of new and unexpected Soviet developments, or 
of unforeseen occurrences in a combat environment).
A less drastic alternative would be to retain Minuteman in silos 
until its reliability is unacceptably degraded by age, perhaps then 
replacing it with a new missile, and to plan to launch it before Soviet 
R/Vs destroy it. This presumes reliable attack assessment, and a deci-
sion sequence that works. The Soviets might not be sure that sequence 
would not work; I, for one, would be far from sure that it would. My 
major concern can be put this way: such a course would be a major step 
on the road to giving computers the power of decision on going to war.
LOSS OF CHARACTERISTICS
As for specific characteristics, some we value are:
• Independence from tactical warning. This means being able to ride 
out a Soviet strike. It’s desirable because we avoid the need for a “hair 
trigger” response to possibly ambiguous warning with all the com-
plexities that could entail, avoid as well the risk of the hair trigger not 
working because the postulated decision process doesn’t function, and 
also because a Soviet attack on our warning systems cannot jeopardize 
forces that do not depend on warning in the first place.
MAP deployments of ICBMs—­if their size is in the proper ratio 
to the size of the Soviet attack—­would have this valuable characteris-
tic. SLBMs have it already. Bombers do not—­they can be wiped out if 
caught on the ground, or near their bases. (For simplicity, I’ll save the 
discussion of novel basing systems for later in this memo.)
• Endurance. This means being able to maintain some capability 
after an initial exchange—­perhaps for days, or weeks, or even a few 
months. It is desirable not only to prevent further coercion, but as a 
counter to Soviet sheltering of political leadership (they’ve got to come 
up sooner or later), and against third countries who might suddenly 
find themselves in positions of great relative strength.
Again, ICBMs in a MAP deployment would have this characteris-
tic. The SLBMs per se do too, but their problem in this respect lies in the 
dubious endurance of the systems to communicate with them. Bomb-
ers, because their bases are vulnerable, have little endurance, unless 
they have so many potential recycling bases as to prevent the Soviets 
from targeting all the bases.
• Quick Response Hard Target Capability. “Quick” refers not only 
to short flight times [1 line not declassified], but also to your ability to
