(Footnotes: Membership of American delegation and its technical advisers and secretarial staff.) Apr. 16 (2) To the American Delegation Instructions as to attitude to be taken in the event of Soviet participation in the conference. Reservation (text printed) to be made in proposed convention as safeguard against any possible misconstruction of attitude of United States toward a signatory or adhering power represented by a regime not recognized by the United States. 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 32] May 13 (28) From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Desire of French delegation for provision in draft convention that signatories will undertake not to authorize the exportation of war material to countries where domestic legislation prohibits its importation. Circulation of draft provision to that effect by the Uruguayan representative. Request for instructions. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33] May 14 (20) To the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Department’s belief that insertion of provision such as suggested by the French delegation would be superfluous to the purposes of the convention. 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35] May 15 (31) From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Egyptian delegate’s suggestion of a statement to be included in convention to provide for possible infractions of the convention by foreigners in countries where extraterritorial rights are enjoyed. Views of American delegation and suggestion of substitute provision. 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35] May 15 (32) From the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Opinion, after further consideration, that the principle involved in the Uruguayan proposal (made on French initiative), if properly phrased, might serve as a useful precedent for securing cooperation of foreign powers in making effective the provisions of the U. S. prohibition law. 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36] May 16 (21) To the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Information that Department would not object to provision suggested in regard to extraterritorial countries. 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. 38] May 16 (24) To the Chairman of the American Delegation (tel.) Instructions to oppose proposal of Uruguayan delegate, since 53 [Pg. 53 includes
