602 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I bargo against Turkey was an important step to help bolster NATO’s southern flank.3 In Europe and elsewhere, we are committed to maintain strong conventional forces. And no one should doubt that we will use those forces if our vital interests or those of our allies are threatened. In these ways, we will maintain, and strengthen, our security in an age of essential equivalence by meeting the new problems it presents and by seizing the new arms control opportunities it affords. Growing Risks of Regional Conflicts A second change is the reality that the risks posed by regional conflicts have grown. Many of these conflicts are long standing. They have roots deep in history, in geography, in religious and ethnic differences. But as more nations acquire more sophisticated arms, regional conflicts become more dangerous. They pose a constant threat of wider confrontation. As a result, the United States must be more active in working to help settle these disputes peacefully. The fact is that no nation is more intensively engaged in the continuing effort to dampen the flames of conflict around the world than the United States. No other nation could have played the role that the United States has played in helping Israel and Egypt achieve an historic peace treaty.4 And we will continue to remain actively involved in the effort to achieve a comprehensive peace—a peace in which Israel, the neighboring Arab states, and the Palestinian people can live with security and with dignity. In southern Africa, in the eastern Mediterranean, in Southeast Asia, and elsewhere in the world, we are using the influence we have for peace. Progress does not come easily or quickly. There will be setbacks, for the path to peace is often more difficult than the road to war. But with persistence and steadiness, we can help provide the parties to conflict with an alternative to violence—if they choose to take it. In some cases, these efforts will involve working with other interested nations as a catalyst for bringing the parties together. In other situations, we will support international and regional institutions that provide a framework for easing tensions. When we believe it will con- 3 See footnote 6, Document 93. On September 26, 1978, the President lifted the arms embargo against Turkey by signing into law the International Security Assistance Act (S. 3075; P.L. 95–384). For the text of the President’s statement on signing the bill, see Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, p. 1636. 4 Reference is to the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty, signed at Washington on March 26, 1979. For the text of the treaty, see Department of State Bulletin, May 1979, pp. 3–15.
