Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX political factors than a wish to please the United States. [classification not declassified] Similarly, the Hungarian regime’s decision not to punish 30 wouldbe dissidents who in February 1977 supported the Czechoslovak Chartists may have been taken in the hope that this would deter the creation of a dissident movement that could have an adverse impact on relations with Washington. Budapest clearly hoped that the new US administration would be more inclined than its predecessors to return Hungarian national treasures and grant Hungary most-favored-nation trading status. The Hungarian decision to invite American religious leader Billy Graham to Hungary in late 1976 was unquestionably intended to draw attention to Budapest’s relatively moderate domestic policies at a time of sharply increased dissident activity elsewhere in Eastern Europe. [classification not declassified] The Romanian regime was acutely concerned that US attention to human rights could impede renewal of its most-favored-nation status. More importantly, Bucharest was worried that this might set back its “special relationship” with Washington that has been of major political use in fending off the Soviets. As a consequence, the Romanians— except for a brief crackdown in the spring of 1977, when they apparently feared that there would be a dramatic increase in dissidence—have encouraged dissidents to emigrate. The Ceausescu regime has not shown, however, an inclination to adopt more enlightened domestic policies, and remains perhaps the most repressive in Eastern Europe. The regime has privately played down agitation for increased cultural and linguistic rights by the Hungarian minority, calling it a Moscowinspired, Budapest-engineered tactic to tar Romania’s image. [classification not declassified] The Czechoslovak Government, despite its interest in settling several longstanding bilateral issues with the United States, has not moderated in any way its “hard-line” inclinations and has almost completely ignored US sensitivities when dealing with its dissidents. [classification not declassified] Western publicity and support for dissidents has been largely responsible for whatever successes and impact the dissenters have made. Media coverage of their activities, when relayed back into Eastern Europe, has provided important, if indirect lines of communication between dissidents within a country and across national boundaries. This coverage has bolstered morale and has often been the only way for the dissidents’ cause to be publicized within their own country. As a consequence, most dissidents have made a special effort to funnel news to the West. Most frequently, their “connections” have been friends and colleagues who have emigrated: Poles in London and Paris, Romanians in Paris, East Germans in West Germany, and Czechoslovaks in Rome and Vienna. [classification not declassified]
