894  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Union that this existing pattern of cooperation will not be used by the 
United States to circumvent any START limits. (S)
4. Ban on Third-Country Basing. The United States may accept 
a ban on the basing of strategic offensive arms outside its territory, 
provided such a ban does not entail inspections in third countries, or 
interfere with our right of ability to have U.S. ships make port visits or 
temporarily to locate heavy bombers overseas. (S)
5. Limits on Heavy ICBMs. On the understanding that the United 
States will seek the ultimate elimination of heavy ICBMs in follow-­on 
negotiations, and that the Backfire and non-­circumvention issues are 
satisfactorily resolved, the U.S. may accept a package of constraints on 
heavy ICBMs consisting of the following:
a.	 A maximum of 1540 RVs on 154 heavy ICBMs. (S)
b.	A ban on new types of heavy ICBMs. (S)
c.	 A ban on mobile heavy ICBMs. (S)
d.	A ban on downloading of existing types of heavy ICBMs.
e.	 Additional constraints on existing types of heavy ICBMs—­
including a ban on increases in their launch weight and throw-­weight—­
that would have the effect of constraining further improvements in 
their capabilities. (S)
6. Throw-­weight Limits. The United States and Soviet Union have 
agreed to a requirement to reduce current Soviet ballistic missile throw-­
weight by “approximately 50 percent.” The specific throw-­weight 
reductions the United States will require to achieve this objective will 
depend in part on Soviet willingness to accept U.S. proposals in related 
areas. For example, in the context of the proposed U.S.-Soviet compro-
mise on the limitation of the “potential throw-­weight” of future types 
of ballistic missiles, the United States can accept reductions that are 
the equivalent of at least 47 percent of the throw-­weight of the current 
Soviet ballistic missile force. U.S. agreement to reductions in aggregate 
throw-­weight shall be contingent upon the acceptability to the U.S. of 
Soviet declarations of the throw-­weight of their existing types of ballis-
tic missiles.
7. Related Issues. To achieve Soviet agreement on the necessary 
use of retired and former ballistic missiles to conduct SDI tests, the 
United States may accept (a) a narrowly drawn ban on the use of bal-
listic missiles to deploy SDI components in space, and (b) the citation 
of Article XI of the ABM Treaty in the preamble to the START treaty. (S)
CFE
1. Aircraft Limits. Land-­based naval aircraft (LBNA) must be 
subject to numerical constraints in the context of any CFE agree-
ment to limit aircraft. Although a legally-­binding limit is preferable, 
a politically-­binding commitment outside the CFE agreement that 
embodies these numerical constraints is acceptable. The United States
