February 1951–February 1952
91
Finally, it was suggested that it would be well to explore the possi-
bility of an agreement between the British and Iranian Governments
which would give the oil concession to the Iranian Government as it
was demanding, but would continue to permit the British to control the
actual distribution of the oil to the consumers in the Western world and
prevent the Soviets from securing it.
28.
Special Estimate1
SE–6
Washington, May 22, 1951.
CURRENT DEVELOPMENT IN IRAN
Conclusions
1. The clash of interests between Iran and the UK over Iran’s oil re-
sources has reached a critical stage with the elevation of Mohammad
Mossadeq, the leader of the ultra-nationalist National Front group, to
the premiership. Although a real effort will undoubtedly be made to
reach a compromise settlement, a solution will be achieved only with
great difficulty. In any event, there is little indication that Mossadeq
and the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (AIOC) will modify their respec-
tive stands in sufficient time to permit an early settlement of the issue.
2. Although there are important elements opposed to Mossadeq, it
is unlikely that he can be removed from power so long as the oil ques-
tion remains a burning issue, except by violence or by the establish-
ment of a semi-dictatorial regime under the aegis of the Shah. In the
present highly inflammatory state of Iranian public opinion, an attempt
to set up a non-parliamentary regime would involve grave risks which
the Shah has thus far shown no willingness to take.
3. As a result of the present impasse, the following critical develop-
ments may occur before a settlement is reached:
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, NIC Files, Job 79S01011A, Box 3, Folder 6,
SE–6 Current Developments in Iran. Top Secret. According to the note on the covering
sheet, the estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence on May 18. The
Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff participated in the
preparation of this estimate. All members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee con-
curred in this estimate, except as noted by the Director of Intelligence, USAF, with regard
to paragraph 4.
