1956  719
listen any suggestion they had as to how the purpose might be accom­
plished in any other way, and which would at same time meet prob­
lem that would be produced concerning position my government if 
phrase were withdrawn.
82. Wang said I had just stated I not requiring their side accept or 
recognize what their side would not accept or recognize, and that I not 
asking them prejudice their position. But if US should insist in right 
self-­defense in Taiwan area, that nothing else but requiring their side 
recognize US occupation Taiwan. And this exactly prejudicing position 
Chinese people in exercising sovereign rights over Taiwan.
83. Wang said I had said if US should withdraw defense clause 
in draft it would be interpreted by world as renunciation by US of 
its right. Speaking of rights, there are rights in conformity with UN 
­Charter and therefore proper rights, but there are also so-­called rights 
which against spirit UN Charter and which interfere internal affairs 
other states. If it position US in Taiwan area to claim this co-­called 
right as natural right, it not only would be opposed by Chinese people 
but also be opposed by people whole world.
84. Wang said he not see how position US would be prejudiced 
by withdrawing this clause from amendment. Just to contrary, absence 
that clause in statement will demonstrate that two countries China and 
US genuinely desirous seeking peaceful solution disputes and renounc­
ing war between them. If, however, I should insist on this unreasonable 
clause, he did not see how this could lead further progress in talks.
85. I said what he just said seemed me simply confirm what I just 
saying, that their purpose in this declaration was obtain renunciation 
by US of its position. That seemed me be real difficulty.
86. Wang said it quite obvious that such declaration provided for 
peaceful settlement disputes and also at same time provided for parties 
to declaration to undertake not interfere in internal affairs of others. 
Chinese people strongly and firmly will oppose to end right of US to 
self-­defense in Taiwan area, which no more than intervention Chinese 
affairs.
87. Wang said they already made great efforts in discussion dec­
laration and remained for US to make corresponding efforts and take 
further steps to relieve us from present position. If I had any further 
constructive suggestion make, they also looking forward to them.
88. I said my constructive suggestion was they withdraw from 
position which requiring US in this declaration to withdraw from its 
position.
89. Wang said they could not on their part renounce their position 
that US should renounce its position. Position of US is one which insists 
in occupying territory of China. This position indefensible. They had
