Options Identified 309 Political-Diplomatic Issues: 1. AWACS. The aircraft will take off from Egypt at 5:00 p.m. EST today. There will be no announcement of the flight. The Egyptians now indicate a strong interest in joint training exercises with the AWACS on about January 4–5. Although the JCS had originally planned to send the AWACS to Germany shortly after the flight this week, they now propose letting the AWACS remain in Egypt for joint training in early January, followed by a movement to Germany. After the visit to Germany, the AWACS can either return to the U.S. or extend the visit, depending on the situation at the time.6 (S) 2. Intelligence Actions. Admiral Turner said that the Agency is increasing its contacts with various Iranian figures. It was still too early to identify a group of opposition figures who might coalesce into an effective opposition to Khomeini. Rumors about Madani’s opposition to Khomeini are so widespread that the DCI wonders how long he will be able to maintain his present position as governor of Khuzestan and head of the Iranian Navy. As contacts increase, the Agency Iran Task Force will meet with the David Aaron group to examine political implications and possibilities of next steps. Admiral Turner emphasized that this process of feeling out possible opposition figures takes time, and we should not expect results in a few days. Mr. Carlucci added a note of caution that our push for sanctions on Chapter VII is convincing many of the Western governments to reduce their representation in Tehran. [2½ lines not declassified] 3. Shah. The latest blood test indicates that the Shah’s health is deteriorating. A team of doctors will fly to Panama today to examine him and determine what the next steps should be. A transfusion is the minimum expected, and further surgery may be required. Secretary Vance felt that the Shah’s condition was becoming dangerous. The Panamanians want any medical treatment to be performed in Panamanian hospitals, rather than U.S. facilities. The team of doctors is aware of this and will make a recommendation. (S) 6 Carter approved this item with a checkmark.
