844 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement a new mobilization policy it would be desirable to be specific about National Guard functions. However, the practical problem was a polit­ ical one; neither the National Guard nor the Army would agree to the proposition that the Guard should become a militia to enforce martial law under conditions of nuclear attack on the US. Mr. Gates, on the contrary, was sure the National Guard would become just such a mili­ tia. Enforcement of martial law had been openly adopted as a mission for the National Guard in Canada. Our dilemma is that we know what the role of the National Guard will be in nuclear war, but we can’t put it down on paper. Secretary Herter wondered whether the issue should not be met head on. Mr. Gates said that in any future war our mobiliza­ tion base will be what we have in readiness on the day of the attack. Nevertheless, Congress continues to legislate for the National Guard on a different basis. It would be more realistic to assume that in the event of nuclear war, the National Guard will be federalized and will enforce martial law. Secretary Herter felt it was foolish for the Federal Government to provide the National Guard with expensive equip­ ment which it might never use. Mr. Gray pointed out that the draft mobilization paragraph, under the heading “general war,” referred to active forces, selected reserve forces having an initial general war mission, and additional forces. Mr. Gates said the issues raised by the language of the paragraph were not identical with National Guard issues. Mr. Gray suggested that the draft paragraph might perhaps make it clear that planning is under way and direct the responsible agencies to submit proposals which would be specific as to recovery stockpiles. Not much progress would be made by leaving fuzzy language in the paragraph. The Attorney General thought that since the Government could not continue after a nuclear attack unless the country recovered from the attack, there was little difference between the alternative versions of the draft paragraph. Secretary Mueller said Mr. Gray’s suggestion would allow for greater flexibility. Mr. Gates agreed that the paragraph could be completely “open-­ended.” Mr. Scribner thought that if the language of present policy were changed, the change would indicate to those Government officials who desire an expansion of the mobilization base that expansion is possible. The Attorney General felt that if the purpose of the draft paragraph was to give a signal to the staffs of the various agencies, the signal should be given in more precise terms. Mr. Gray suggested the Council might regard the draft paragraph as a paragraph for planning purposes and ask Defense and OCDM to submit the programs contemplated. Mr. Patterson said the draft paragraph, if adopted, would be authority to develop proposals for consideration through the budgetary
