National Security Policy 949 pay the cabin rate by ship. The President asked whether cargo moved mostly by air or by ship. Mr. Douglas said most of the cargo moved by ship. Since MATS had been put on an industrial funding basis, a great many items formerly carried by air were no longer so carried. However, the industrial funding basis made the whole MATS operation look like a commercial airline operation. MATS should, by contrast, be building up a war capability. The President agreed that war capability should be the criterion of MATS operation, but noted that wartime require­ ments were sometimes subject to differing interpretations. He believed, in view of the things which had already been said, that this problem should be solved by locking three or four experts in a room until they arrived at a solution. General Twining pointed out that General Quesada would soon have to testify before Congressional Committees on his program. General Quesada said the basic question was: What is the role of MATS? In his view the present practices of MATS were in conflict with Bureau of the Budget Bulletin No. 60–2. Interrupting, Mr. Douglas said he could not agree with this observation. General Quesada then read extracts from the Bureau of the Budget Bulletin, and concluded that military personnel were moving over routes which were competitive with commercial air carriers. The President said he saw no objection to this practice if that was the most efficient way to run the Department of Defense. General Quesada said the cost factor as between MATS and the commercial airlines were on different bases. Moreover, when MATS was used to transport personnel and goods that could be carried by commercial lines, it was not engaged in training for war. General Quesada said there were seventy-­one certificated carriers, 25 of which were now engaged in litigation. He noted that certification has vari­ ous meanings. An airline can be certificated for an area, for passengers only, or for cargo only. An airline requires a CAB exemption in order to operate outside the field of its certification. He believed Mr. Douglas’ fear that the term “certificated carriers” as used in the paper would cover only a small number of carriers was not justified. The President wondered why the word “certification” had to be used. He thought “certified” would do as well. Mr. Douglas said the Department of Defense was willing to use certificated carriers to carry Defense traffic, but pointed out that some satisfactory carriers would be eliminated by this phrase as defined in NSC 5919, because some satisfactory carriers were not certificated. The President recalled that at one time, in some operations at least, the Government had a list of qualified bidders. Secretary Gates said there was a list of qualified bidders for most operations except for air­ line operations. Mr. Stans pointed out that the Department of Defense
