1956  1109
686.	 Telegram 75 from Geneva1
Geneva, July 26, 1956, 11 p.m.
75. From Johnson.
1. After Wang refused my invitation to open I opened the meeting 
with prepared statement:
A. At our last meeting and several previous meetings you have 
been making reference to what you term attempt of US in discussing 
question arriving at agreement on renunciation force to take prejudiced 
viewpoint and obtain one-­sided advantage. Frankly, when I proposed 
last October that two us issue declaration announcing use force, I did so 
because of conviction my government it would be advantageous to us 
if we could create atmosphere in which our two countries could resolve 
their differences without resorting force. I say this quite frankly and 
openly, because I feel there is nothing wrong or shameful in my hav­
ing made this proposition. It is my responsibility as representative my 
country, seek promote advantage of US. That does not mean I seek pro­
mote disadvantage other countries. I assume you feel same way about 
seeking advance interests your country.
B. In making my proposal last October it was not my intent, or 
intent my government, seek unfair or one-­sided advantage. It was 
not—and is not—my feeling that meaningful renunciation force in set­
tlement our disputes would be adverse to real interests your country. 
In fact it my conviction this would be genuinely also to advantage your 
country as well. It my belief that resort of force over any our disputes 
would in long run injure real interests your country as well as mine. 
I am well aware of position your country with respect our dispute in 
Taiwan area. I am also well aware of reluctance on part your country’s 
authorities abandon what they consider “right” use force if they choose 
do so. It is not my purpose to enter into philosophical argument over 
abstract question whether such “right” can exist nor to argue concept 
rights consistency with what has become a generally accepted princi­
ple modern international conduct. It been my hope your government 
would come to realization that just as practical matter of its own self-­
interest, interest of its people, and interest of rest of world, it ought to 
accept principle of renunciation force.
C. I continue hope your government will eventually accept this 
principle. Matter boils down to this: does your government still 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/7–2656. Confidential; Limit 
Distribution.
