Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1147
have a need for nuclear weapons. What are the possible political solu-
tions in South Asia? We (the U.S.) would welcome help in finding
solutions.
Smith then called attention to the serious problems concerning
Iran and terrorism and the possibility that plutonium in the future
could get into the hands of terrorists when more countries are in a posi-
tion to obtain plutonium.
Amb. Smith asked how Argentina, when it became a responsible
world nuclear supplier, would condition its exports. Castro Madero re-
marked that the South Asian situation was certainly not equivalent to
the South American position. He added that so far no country had de-
veloped nuclear weapons through a nuclear power program. This, he
said, would not be the way to reach a weapons program. He added that
Brazil and Argentina were in the process of reaching a nuclear agree-
ment for cooperation which should alleviate fears of an arms race in
South America. This, he said, naturally, is not a complete answer to the
problem but global approaches are difficult to implement. He said the
best guarantee for non-proliferation is through strong country alliances
and cooperation. According to Castro Madero, denial of technologies to
developing countries has been counter productive and has not been
successful in preventing nuclear proliferation. Smith said that a denial
policy alone could not hope to succeed. It must be accompanied by po-
litical initiatives.
Amb. Smith turned again to the Pakistan situation and indicated
that Pakistan had centrifuges for enrichment of uranium and asked if in
order to be a more reliable supplier (in the Argentine sense) the U.S.
should sell Pakistan better centrifuges, thus enabling it to enrich more
uranium for a nuclear bomb. These are the difficult issues driving U.S.
export policies and non-proliferation. He questioned if Argentina were
a major supplier in the world, would it sell reprocessing technology, for
example, to any country that asked for it? What type of safeguards
would they require.
Smith expressed a hope that U.S. export licensing procedures
could be made more flexible. He said that regional and worldwide po-
litical solutions must be found for proliferation problems. The U.S. was
certainly not pointing out Argentina as a special case.
Amb. Smith then moved to post-INFCE discussions and indicated
he hopes the U.S. would take action to become a more reliable nuclear
supplier, and to modernize present nuclear licensing procedures. He
allowed that the INFCE studies will have to be analyzed, and it will
have to be decided what should be done with the findings. Smith asked
Castro Madero how the GOA felt in this regard. Castro Madero indi-
cated that Argentina was in favor of the formation of a committee com-
posed of interested countries to review the INFCE studies and establish
