A. The expenses of the plebiscite shall be borne by the two countries in equal parts. B. The members of the Plebiscitary Commission shall be repaid their actual expenses and each member shall receive as compensation a sum equivalent to $1,000 per month during the period of service. C. The Commission shall at the earliest practicable moment make and submit to the Arbitrator an estimate of the total cost of carrying out the plebiscite, and a schedule showing the amounts which from time to time should be made available for the use of the Commission. Upon the approval of this estimate and schedule by the Arbitrator the two Governments shall deposit these sums in equal parts in an institution designated by the Commission and in the amounts and at that [the?] times specified in the estimate. If necessary, a supplementary estimate or estimates, schedule or schedules shall be made and submitted in like manner. Any amount not expended in the necessary and proper expenses of the plebiscite shall be repaid by the Commission at the conclusion of its labors to the two Governments in equal parts. D. Within four months after the date of the rendition of this Award, the two Governments shall each deposit in a financial institution to be designated by the Secretary of State of the United States the sum of $15,000 to be made available for the initial expenses and compensation of the members of the Plebiscitary Commission. E. The Arbitrator may extend the period fixed for the first deposit and may likewise modify any schedule presented by the Commission either before or after its approval in order to conform to any modification of the date of the plebiscite. F. In case either Party does not deposit its moiety of any amount required for the expenses of the plebiscite within the time or times specified as hereinbefore provided, or as provided in any schedule prepared by the Commission and approved by the Arbitrator, the other Party may advance the requisite amount in order that the work of the Plebiscitary Commission may not be interrupted, and any amount so advanced shall be added or subtracted as the case may be in paying the treaty sum of ten millions as hereinafter provided and the reimbursement of such advance or advances shall be secured in the same manner as the payment of the ten millions is secured. G. The Plebiscitary Commission shall appoint a bonded disbursing officer who shall on the authority of the Commission disburse from the sums
