Afghanistan 761 officers corps is coming under increasing pressure by the INI. Officers are now being targeted for assassination throughout the country, including attempted attacks on senior officers in Kabul. Reports indicate that the morale of the Afghan military is crumbling. The Parchamist clique and the Khalqi clique of the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) are attacking each other and are in turn attacked by the INI. Party workers live in constant fear for their lives in Kandahar, Jalalabad, and Herat; this pattern is beginning in Kabul. Mazar-i- Sharif is not as chaotic, but the situation in that city is also tense. 2. Afghan Army units are operating in the field, but with decreasing competence. Increasingly, the Soviet forces have been called on to rout the INI from strongholds they occupy. Soviet attacks on the INI have been militarily successful. The Soviets are taking losses, probably at a much higher level than they originally anticipated. But when the INI elects to confront the Soviets in static battles, the Soviets prevail. When the INI has resorted to more classical guerrilla tactics, they have inflicted significant losses on the Soviets. Ambushes, minings and assassinations by the INI are taking a steady toll of Soviet forces. Once the Soviets leave an area from which they have cleared the INI, the insurgents successfully reinfiltrate and cause the returning Afghan Army units considerable grief. The lesson the Soviets must be learning is that if they plan to control an area, they must keep Soviet forces there because the Afghan military cannot handle the job. This leads to the conclusion that the Soviets will have to increase their overall strength levels inside Afghanistan and be prepared to become even more overtly an army of occupation. Regime’s forces. 3. The INI, while demonstrating sophistication in guerrilla tactics, remain disunited and unable to coordinate their sometimes effective actions against the regime and the Soviets. There appears to be little coordination among the groups in Peshawar and those doing the actual fighting; and there appears to be little coordination within Afghanistan among the groups doing the fighting. 4. The INI continue to make good use of the weapons available to them. The average INI soldier is deadly when using an Enfield 303. The INI have been making good use of mines and anti-tank weapons against both the Soviets and the Afghan regime forces. During the last several weeks, there have been confirmed reports that the INI have successfully shot down Soviet MI–8 and MI–24 helicopters with conventional arms.2 The MI–24 gunship helicopter has been particularly harmful to the insurgents, however, and it has proved to be a difficult 2 An unknown hand underlined “conventional arms.”
