Venezuela  1205
sound policies, he said, and as long as there is the will on both sides 
to understand the other’s problems and to work together toward their 
solution, there is no reason for pessimism.
Having expressed the opinion that nothing basically was wrong 
with relations between Venezuela and the United States, Ambassador 
Santaella turned to several outstanding problems that had arisen. He 
repeated his statement that Venezuela was in a difficult period of transi-
tion, and would need the firm moral and political support of the United 
States. He mentioned the problem that had resulted from the admission 
into the United States of Perez Jimenez and Estrada. Stating that he did 
not want to get involved in a discussion of the legal aspects of the case, 
which he understood, he reiterated the depth of feeling in Venezuela 
against the two men. He said that not even Beria nor the Gestapo had 
committed greater atrocities than those perpetrated on the people of 
Venezuela by Perez Jimenez and Estrada. Although the Ambassador 
had been arrested three times during the Perez Jimenez regime, he did 
not consider himself a particular victim of it. He recalled that his law 
partner had been arrested and forced to witness the slow torture and 
finally the murder of another prisoner by “Bachiller” Castro and other 
notorious SN inquisitors. In view of these and other equally serious 
crimes and atrocities, Dr. Santaella said, the Venezuelan people find 
it hard to understand why the United States, with its democratic tra-
ditions, permits Perez Jimenez to live in luxury in Miami and openly 
flaunt his wealth. He said it would not have been so bad if the two 
men had gone quietly to live on ranches in North Dakota, but being 
in Florida, so close to Central and South America, not only made their 
residence in the United States more conspicuous but had caused many 
rumors to circulate about their plotting to regain power, with the acqui-
escence or even the assistance of the United States. He said stories 
continued to circulate of their connections in high places in the United 
States Government, and it was known in Venezuela that Perez Jimenez 
and Estrada had met with their supporters in New York during the Vice 
President’s visit to Venezuela, ostensibly to engineer a revolt against 
the Provisional Government.
Mr. Rubottom briefly outlined the reasons why visas were issued 
to the two men, reiterating that they had both been required to execute 
statements that while in the United States they would not engage in 
activities directed against the Venezuelan Government. He emphasized 
they had no entrée here at all; he said he had no personal sympathy 
whatsoever for either man; as a matter of fact, he had not even met 
them. He told the Ambassador that he and others who understood the 
situation could perform a real service by explaining the facts of the case 
to those who did not understand. Just as we are attempting to play 
down in the United States the incidents that occurred during the Vice
