Human Rights —We could try to get other donor countries to join us in applying human rights criteria to their votes. That would increase the risk of politicizing the IFI’s; further complicate our relations with LDC’s who would suffer not only the onus of our opposition, but also a denial of cash; and might alarm other donors. But failure to do so might lead some Congressmen to believe that we are not serious about using the IFI’s to promote human rights, and produce further legislative restrictions on our role in them. —We could encourage the UN and OAS Human Rights Commissions to make independent reports to the IFI’s. This would be consistent with our desire to multilateralize our human rights policy and to make clear that we are applying internationally recognized standards. But the UN Human Rights Commission in particular is likely to render judgments which we—and Congress—could not accept as objective. —We could try to channel IFI lending programs away from human rights violators. This would meet the letter of the law. But since IFI programs are a long time in the pipeline, it could impede our ability to respond to changing human rights conditions. —We could try to design IFI programs to meet basic human needs criteria. This might lessen the risk that our votes would politicize the IFI’s and would be consistent with the World Bank’s own stated intention. It might do more to promote human rights (especially economic rights) than denial of funds, or US opposition to loans that are approved anyway. But it would also reduce our opportunities for demonstrating our disapproval of countries’ human rights failings. That might so displease some in Congress that we would face new efforts to reduce our contributions to the IFI’s, or to require that we oppose all loans to certain countries. It also would remove a remaining source of support for capital intensive “growth” projects and run counter both to our urging the IFI’s to make loans for energy development to non-oil LDC’s, and to our argument that a commodities’ Common Fund needs no capacity to finance measures such as market development and infrastructure because the development banks meet that need. The Perception of Arrogance We should intensify efforts to multilateralize our human rights efforts. This would help reduce suspicions of a holier-than-thou attitude or an ideological crusade against selected states. More important, it would help the cause of human rights, by further enlisting the weight of world opinion. We either have done or are doing most of the immediately important things to bring our human rights policy in line with international standards (e.g., signing the UN Covenants and the American Convention on Human Rights) and are working to improve the capacity of
