Arms Control and Disarmament 1251 “These concerns caused me to propose the program of Atoms-­ for-­Peace which has resulted in the establishment of the International Atomic Energy Agency. The endorsement of that proposal by the gov­ ernments of 80 nations testifies to the universal desire for peace and to find a means to reduce, hopefully to eliminate, the terrible threat of atomic warfare. “The Government of the United States has maintained that agree­ ments to ban the use of atomic weapons are illusory because such agree­ ments are unenforceable if war should occur. It is also obvious that a suspension of testing of atomic weapons would not mean that stock­ piles of weapons of existing types would not continue to increase by continued manufacture. I have pointed out again and again that, with our basic international political issues and difficulties unresolved, it is the existence of atomic arsenals and their enlargement in the posses­ sion of three nations, and their inevitable acquisition by other nations, which forces the world to live on a knife-­edge of uncertainty as to the maintenance of peace or an atomic holocaust. “I now propose to the governments having atomic weapons and the means of increasing their numbers, a new approach to peace. “Let us agree for a trial period of, say, two years to cease all pro­ duction of the weapons materials. U–235 and plutonium, without which atomic weapons cannot be made. Let us cease to produce these materials for any purpose, military or peaceful. This suspension can be easily inspected since these plants are large, not numerous, and can be kept under U.N. surveillance simply by seeing to it that they are not operated. “Let us during this period supply the growing demand for fission­ able materials to meet the energy needs of a power-­hungry world by using our nuclear materials that are in existence,—beginning to use the materials in our weapons stockpiles. “During the two-­year breathing period, let our negotiators seek safe means of resuming production under controlled methods which will foreclose the possibility that any of it will be converted to weapons use. “Coincident with this more significant agreement a collateral agreement can easily be reached on such subordinate questions as a concurrent suspension of testing, or testing with limited fall-­out or test­ ing for peaceful uses only under U.N. supervision or some combination of these.”
