3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1979 571 This will be the most important meeting from the standpoint of conveying firmness and determination to defend our interests. It will inevitably be more downbeat, with the atmosphere more filled with conflict and tension. The last day will see a private meeting and the SALT and other document signing and this should provide a positive conclusion to the summit. In effect we have something of a drama—at first things are good, then they turn tense, then finally there is a positive resolution. The toasts and your remarks at the signing ceremony will be the key indicators of what is transpiring and they must be carefully crafted with that in mind. At the outset of the talks we must be careful to moderate expectations. The theme of SALT plus serious consultations,14 as we agreed previously, is the best note to strike before the summit begins. U.S. Strategy and Objectives This wary and uncertain setting makes it important that we concentrate on those objectives that have the greatest potential for longer term impact on the U.S.-Soviet relationship. I would define the central strategic objectives of the Vienna Summit in the following terms: 1. To consummate SALT II and to initiate SALT III; 2. To give additional impetus to further U.S.-Soviet arms control measures (such as ASAT, MBFR, CTB, CAT, etc.); 3. To make not only Brezhnev but also the Soviet leaders who stayed at home more aware that the U.S. sees the Soviet Union as insensitive to our vital interests or concerns in such regions as the Middle East, Southern Africa, Cuba, and Vietnam.15 In effect, your objective is to demonstrate that the United States can successfully manage the contradictory positive and negative tendencies in our relationship. To do that, you must articulate a conception of a reciprocal and realistic detente, based not only on the common interest in avoiding nuclear war, but also on genuine respect for each side’s security concerns.16 This requires that you be candid with the Soviet leaders about our deep dissatisfaction with Soviet performance on a whole range of security-related issues. They must be made to understand that to move in a constructive direction now, U.S.-Soviet relations must involve positive Soviet behavior on key security issues of paramount U.S. concern. 14 Carter underlined “SALT plus serious consultations” in this clause. 15 Carter underlined “our vital interests” in this sentence. He underlined “Middle East” and “Southern Africa” and wrote “OK” underneath each of them. He underlined “Cuba” and Vietnam” and wrote a question mark under each. In the margin Carter wrote, “W. Europe, S. Asia, N. Africa, Mediterranean.” 16 Carter underlined the following phrases in this sentence: “common interest in avoiding nuclear war” and “respect for each side’s security.”
