1.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 679

Tehran, February 23, 1951.

THE POSITION OF THE SOVIETS IN IRAN

[Omitted here is a table of contents.]

Introduction:

Nothing could be more interesting, were it possible to do so, than

to eavesdrop upon a meeting of the Politburo during a discussion of the

Iranian problem as it must appear to the Soviet planners. Here is a land

area which they and their grandfathers and even earlier forbears have

worked for years to control. They have pulled one trick after another

out of the hat with which to cajole, seduce or threaten the Iranians into

submission, but the problem still has not been solved.

We can of course only speculate upon what is in the heads of the

Soviet planners. It is possible, though, to study the various techniques

which have been used here by the Soviets in recent years and to analyze

the motives behind those actions. This study has been prepared with

that object in mind. While the conclusions drawn therefore will still

have to remain within the realm of speculation yet perhaps from the

pattern of past events we may be able to discover some indication as to

what the future may bring.

Historical Background:

The past is supposed to be the prologue to the future. If history

shows anything it is the continuing pressure of the Russians upon the

Persians for more than two hundred years. The Russian drive for ex-

pansion was first felt under Peter the Great who, in a war with the Per-

sians in 1722, took practically all of the western and southern shores of

the Caspian. In 1800 Russia annexed Georgia. Persia was then induced

to join Napoleon in his right against the Russians, hoping thereby to re-

cover Georgia. But, when the Russo-Persian War ended in 1813 Persia

was only forced to surrender all claim to Georgia but also to cede all

Persian territory north of the Araxes River, except two small areas

which were lost in a subsequent encounter. Then the Russians concen-

trated upon obtaining control of Turkestan.

A good part of northern Persia had then become Russian and the

border had been moved about a thousand miles nearer to Teheran.

Then, economic penetration of the northern area of what was left of

Persia was undertaken, helped to a great extent by the Agreement of

1907 under which the Russians and the British outlined their separate

spheres of influence. Finally, Russo-Iranian relations went through an

entirely new phase in 1921 when the Soviets signed a Treaty of Friend-

ship with the Persians. That Treaty, except for certain provisions

bearing upon the Soviet right to introduce troops into Iran, was defi-

nitely in the Iranian interest. The Soviets at the same time denounced

the Agreement of 1907.

Reza Shah simultaneously appeared on the scene and the Iranian

situation become much more stabilized. The period with which this

study is concerned began in 1941, when the Soviets and British (and

later ourselves) marched into the country, Reza Shah was deposed and

for all practical purposes Iran was placed under a three power occupa-

tion for the duration of the war. It is interesting to note, as a side-

thought, that the Tudeh Party came into existence at just about the

same time.

The history of the occupation is replete in examples of the many

ways in which the Soviets, contrary to the Tri-Partite Treaty, interfered

in the internal affairs of Iran. That interference primarily took place in

areas dominated by the Soviet Army. The action of many Soviet com-

manders in using their military powers to advance the growth of the

new Tudeh Party and to convert it to Communist ends is particularly

noteworthy. Soviet-led Tudeh demonstrations were held in Tabriz and

other cities and the Iranian security forces were physically prevented

from putting down the subversive demonstrations. At the same time

Soviet agents worked diligently on the Kurds, holding out the promise

of an autonomous Kurdistan. Many other evidences of Soviet interfer-

ence in Iranian affairs are on record. However, from the vantage point

of hindsight what appears to be of importance is that even before the

Teheran Declaration was signed the Soviets had already started to lay

February 1951–February 1952

the organization which they undoubtedly hoped would eventually

lead to their absorption of the northern areas.

Soviet Objectives:

The pattern of recent Soviet activity with regard to Iran seems to

show that the assimilation operation is looked upon by them as two-

phased. One gets the impression that Soviet policy would be immedi-

ately served through the acquisition of the land area adjacent to Baku.

The proximity of the Baku oil fields and their vulnerability to air attack

certainly must make it extremely desirable that a protective buffer soon

be carried out to the south. Iranian territory, in fact points like a dagger

at Baku.

The foregoing theory was borne out several years ago by the state-

ment of a former Soviet Military Attache´. When discussing the

“menace” to the Soviet Union inherent in the presence of American

Military Missions in Iran, that official remarked that while the Soviets

had placed many factories, airplane hangers, et cetera, underground

they obviously could not do so with the oil fields or refineries. Conse-

quently, the presence of potentially hostile military personnel adjacent

to such an essential operation had to be a continual source of worry.

The second phase of the assimilation operation, the absorption of

what remained after the acquisition of the northern area, would be both

easy and difficult. The severance of the northern area would leave Te-

heran stranded more or less in the middle of the desert. Part of its food

supply could be cut off or turned on and off at will. A good part of the

country’s population, and much of its fertile and productive land

would be gone. And the balance of the country could easily be flooded

from the Soviet controlled zone with well-tutored Iranians. The diffi-

culty would come in the southwest, when the British began to feel the

pinch of events.

There are undoubtedly many other factors in the Iranian problem

which must be significant to the Kremlin. Certainly global strategy will

receive its due attention, and Soviet control of the northwestern area

would have an important effect upon the Turkish position. That, how-

ever, is primarily within the realm of the military. Also, Iraq and the

countries lying between it and the eastern shores of the Mediterranean

would be affected by the penetration of Iran. However, while recog-

nizing possible external effects this study will concern itself only with

the internal aspects of the problem.

The Iranians and Communism:

The number of real Communists in Iran is comparatively very

small. A good estimate probably would be one person per thousand.

The member of Iranians who out of desperation induced by the unsatis-

factory state of affairs look to or sympathize with the Tudeh Party is, on

the other hand, very considerable.

It is difficult for any one familiar with the ruggedly selfish and in-

dividualistic nature of the Iranians to imagine any situation in which

most of them would subordinate their personal interests for the attain-

ment of an ideal. In fact, the country probably would have been assimi-

lated by the Soviets long before this had they been able to find more

than a handful of persons willing to sacrifice themselves for the ad-

vancement of Communism. And certainly the Iranians understand

only too well that the land on which they live has long been coveted by

the Russians. There are factors which must increase the difficulties of

communizing the population. Notwithstanding, there are strong

factors operating in the Soviet favor.

The Iranian Government as it has existed during recent years has

lacked the first requirement of sovereignty, the ability to rule effec-

tively. Further, the loss of faith in Government on the part of the Iranian

people has almost become complete. To them Government is simply an

oligarchical structure which exists for the purpose of dividing the pro-

ceeds of corruption having the chosen few. It is this lack of cohesion in

the social body which is driving the great mass of Iranians to search for

a “change”, and more and more to feel that if Communism is the only

available agency through which their present frustration can be re-

lieved, then Communism will have to be accepted.

As one explores the Iranian mind of today one increasingly en-

counters the wish that another Reza Shah appear and reduce the

present chaos to order. Iranian feelings along these lines are, of course,

qualified. Some would settle for an “educated” dictator. Some look for

an “honest” one. While the thought is never expressed, what always is

implied is that self-rule has failed. And it is this same quest for order,

for the reduction of the social system to a basis which will mean some-

thing to the individual, which is one of the factors driving people into

the Tudeh camp. As an illustration, two Life photographers who re-

cently visited Azerbaijan reported that they encountered certain per-

sons in that area who still spoke of the accomplishments under the so-

called “Democratic” regime.

The average Iranian who becomes a Tudeh sympathizer does so

mainly because the Tudeh promises to get rid of a regime which he has

learned to despise and which he is certain will do nothing for him. And,

the persistent belief that the Moslem religion will serve as a bulwark

against the spread of Communism mostly represents wishful thinking,

for the Moslem Church in Iran seems to be about as corrupt as the Gov-

February 1951–February 1952

ernment and to be equally ignorant of the problems of the age. The Ira-

nian does not really look to the West because he has now generally

adopted the belief that the West is trying to use him for its own ends.

And, subconsciously, much of the hatred which is openly expressed

toward the British is actually of a much deeper origin. It stems largely

from the fact that the West, mostly through the instrumentality of the

British who have been here for such a long period, has unalterably af-

fected the former Persian way of life.

It is doubtful if Communism holds any real attraction for but a

very limited number of Iranians. On the other hand, the country is in

what might be called an embryonic revolutionary state and is groping

for the means of doing something which it does not really yet compre-

hend. Communism does offer a vehicle under which the regime can be

assailed and wrongs redressed. Its appeal to the youth seems to be par-

ticularly strong. Teheran University, for example, is shot through with

Tudeh cells, and a similar situation is rapidly being imposed upon the

secondary school system. Other groups, too, such as the railroad

workers, are more open in espousing communistic feelings. Most of

these groups seem to have one thing in common, the feeling that they

are being ignored by the existing social system in terms of income or

privilege, and for that reason the cause for the acceptance of commu-

nism is often found in depressed standards of living. The answer, how-

ever, would in this case seem to be deeper than that. Perhaps it can also

be found in the political and social stagnation which characterizes the

entire Near East and the resultant slow crumbling of the social organi-

zations therein.

Finally, it would be a mistake to think that because it has no basic

appeal outside of its ability to offer a change, Communism cannot

sweep over Iran. An Iranian life is really one of expediency and should

the choice ever be forced upon the masses it is likely that they would

accept Communism with the feeling that their lot thereunder would

not be worse than it is at present. From our point of view such a devel-

opment would be a sorry one for while the Iranians undoubtedly

would eventually adopt Communism to their own character yet certain

basically needed social changes undoubtedly would occur and in the

final summing up the Soviets and not the West would get credit for af-

fecting those changes.

Methods Used in Recent Years by the Soviets in Their Attempts To

Assimilate Iranian Territory:

It should be interesting to consider, in as chronological order as

possible, the various methods used by the Soviets during recent years

in their endeavors to assimilate Iranian territory. The end of World War

II furnishes a good starting point, as it was then that the Soviets appar-

ently believed that the stage had been set for the incorporation of

Azerbaijan.

(a) Establishment of Puppet State—

The Soviets showed no inclination to withdraw their troops from

Iran under the terms of the Tri-Partite Treaty. Instead, they remained

behind and protected the formation of the Azerbaijan puppet state. The

old and wily Qavam went to Moscow to discuss the troop withdrawal

question, but apparently returned empty handed. Later, talks were un-

dertaken by him with the Soviet Ambassador in Teheran, and those

talks led to the initialing of an agreement covering the creation of a joint

Iran-Soviet company to exploit the northern oil. The Soviet troops were

then withdrawn and the Iranian forces entered Azerbaijan and put

down the insurrection. Many months later, however, the Soviets found

that they did not even have the northern oil concession when the Majlis

refused to give the necessary ratification.

It is difficult to explain the Soviet failure in these two instances.

With regard to the collapse of the puppet state, some say that the Com-

munist elements left there had been insufficiently trained and inspired

while at the same time the Soviets did not expect that the Iranian Army

would immediately enter the area. With regard to the oil deal one can

still find two stories prevalent in Teheran: (a) that Qavam tricked the

Soviets and (b) that Qavam intended to give them the northern oil con-

cession but was frustrated by the Majlis.

There also were other forces bearing upon the Azerbaijan incident.

There was United Nations pressure accompanied by great interna-

tional sympathy for “little” Iran which was standing up to the Russian

giant. Regardless of the reasons for the defeat of the Soviets one thing

stands out and that is that their plans, had they carried successfully,

would have given them real control of the northwestern area.

(b) Reliance upon Tudeh Activity—

With both their troops and the puppet state gone, the Soviets were

more or less forced to rely upon the use of Iranians in their efforts at

subversion. That primarily meant the Tudeh Party. Besides being the

best means available, the Soviets seem to have placed more immediate

faith in the party than subsequent events showed to be warranted.

The Tudeh Party is a difficult subject to discuss, because of the

clandestine nature of its operations and also because, like so many

other things in Iran what was planted as an oak seems to have come out

resembling a melon vine, growing in all directions. The Tudeh was at

the outset an Iranian organization. But the Soviets were apparently

quick in recognizing the party to be an excellent catalyst which could

be used to draw together the discontented groups and through which

the energies thus liberated could be turned toward Soviet objectives.

February 1951–February 1952

It seems that the Soviets gradually lost some of the hope which

they initially placed in the organized power of the Iranian laboring

classes. They evidently found that many of the Tudeh members or sym-

pathizers were undependable as far as true communist activity was

concerned. Also, there eventually developed some rebellion against

increased interference from Moscow and in 1948 a seccessionist

movement took place. A segment of the Tudeh then broke away and

formed the Iranian Tudeh Socialist Society. That organization did not

live long, and there is some suspicion that the schism might have been

inspired by Moscow. On the other hand, intensified Soviet efforts to

take over completely the Tudeh must also have been, to some degree,

responsible.

In any event history was hastened when, in February 1948, the at-

tempt upon the Shah’s life occurred. It is, parenthetically, still a moot

point whether the Tudeh really was responsible for that incident. Yet

that occurrence did result in the Tudeh being driven underground and

many of its leaders being imprisoned. Since then and until several

months ago the Government pursued a very strong anti-Tudeh policy,

and little was obvious in the way of subversive activity except the occa-

sional distribution of Communist literature. It is generally believed that

the Tudeh lost ground during this period. In fact, it was only a year ago

that Komissarov, who had formerly been an officer in the Soviet Em-

bassy in Teheran, returned here for the reported purpose of cutting

away from the Tudeh the many diverse elements which had attached

themselves to it and were hindering its real movements. That move in

itself seemed to indicate that the Soviets realized that to be effective the

Tudeh needed a pruning and general overhauling.

(c) Direct Threats—

The Iranian-Soviet Treaty of 1921, which provided the legal basis

for the entry of Soviet troops in 1941, was also resorted to by the So-

viets. The pertinent clauses of that Treaty follow:

“Clause V:

Both the High Contracting Parties bind themselves:

1. Not to permit the formation, or existence on their territory of or-

ganizations or groups, under whatever name, or of separate indi-

viduals, who have made it their object to struggle against Persia or

Russia, and also against states allied with the latter, and similarly not to

permit on their territory the recruiting or mobilization of persons for

the armies or armed forces of such organizations.

2. To forbid those states or organizations, under whatever name,

which make it their object to struggle against the other High Con-

tracting Party, to bring into the territory or to take through the territory

of each of the High Contracting Parties anything that may be used

against the other High Contracting Party.

3. By all means at their disposal to prohibit the existence on their

territory of the troops or armed forces of any third state whatsoever, the

presence of which would constitute a threat to the frontiers, interests,

or security of the other High Contracting Party.

“Clause VI:

Both the High Contracting Parties are agreed that in case on part of

third countries there should be attempts by means of armed interven-

tion to realize a rapacious policy on the territory of Persia or to turn the

territory of Persia into a base for military action against the R.S.F.S.R.,

and if thereby danger should threaten the frontiers of the R.S.F.S.R. or

those of Powers allied to it, and if the Persian Government after

warning on the part of the Government of the R.S.F.S.R. should prove

to be itself not strong enough to prevent this danger, the Government

of the R.S.F.S.R. shall have the right to take its troops into Persian terri-

tory in order to take necessary military measures in the interests of self

defense. When the danger has been removed the Government of the

R.S.F.S.R. promises immediately to withdraw its troops beyond the

frontiers of Persia.

The technique used was one of intimidation, of holding over the

heads of the Iranians the threat to invoke the Treaty and occupy the

northern area. The cause for the threatened action was found in the

presence of the two American Military Missions, which allegedly were

engaged in turning Iran into a base for operations against the Soviet

Union and so constituted a danger to the security of that country. Very

strong notes were sent to the Foreign Office in Teheran, but those notes

were vigorously answered by Teheran. A state of tension was created

but the Iranians stood up well under the pressure. Perhaps the Iranian

rebuttal should have put on record the true fact that Clauses Five (V)

and Six (VI) of the Treaty had been drafted with an entirely different set

of conditions in mind and, as those conditions would no longer exist,

the articles mentioned obviously were inapplicable. In other words,

perhaps the Soviets did accomplish something through this maneuver

to the extent that they created the belief that they had the right to in-

vade the country should a situation which might menace their security

develop. Plainly, however, the technique did not accomplish the de-

sired purpose, for the Iranians retained both Military Missions while no

Soviet occupation occurred.

[Omitted here is information about Iranian-Soviet commercial and

consular activities.]

(f) Reversion to Technique of Friendship and Commerce—

The latest Soviet move was made but several months ago. They

then apparently became worried by the implication inherent in our

plans to assist the country economically and seem to have decided to

meet that challenge through a reversion to peaceful techniques, antici-

February 1951–February 1952

pating our move by entering the field of economics themselves. Also,

their timing was very good, for they took advantage of the fear psy-

chology generated in Teheran by the Korean episode, than in its early

stages. They offered the Iranians the hope for the release of tension

which would come from the restoration of friendlier relations, and did

so at a time when foreign publications were asking “Is Iran next”? They

released several Iranian soldiers who had been held as hostages and

gained considerable good will from that inexpensive gesture. The trade

discussions were attended by considerable publicity, and the feeling

was generated among the populace that now was the time for work for

friendlier relations with the Soviets and thus try to avoid what had hap-

pened in other countries.

At the same time, there was the gradual adoption of what might be

termed a “soft” policy toward the Soviet Union on the part of the Ira-

nians. That new policy seems to have resulted from several things:

(a) the Iranian desire to demonstrate friendship, while keeping their

fingers crossed at the same time, (b) the decision of the Razmara Gov-

ernment to restore a “balance” between the great powers interested in

Iran (which carried with it the apparent desire of Razmara to be the first

Premier within recent years able to deal with the Soviets), (c) possibly,

according to political rumors, the existence of a secret understanding

between Razmara and the Soviet Ambassador providing for greater

freedom to Soviet “democratic” propaganda, the suppression of

anti-Soviet propaganda and the release of some of the Tudeh leaders.

This latest technique has, so far, paid dividends greater than any of

those previously used. That is not to say that the method alone was

responsible for the result, for undoubtedly other pressures upon the

Prime Minister caused him to seek a strengthening of his own position

through some wooing of the Soviets. However, the course of internal

and international events has led to the present position in which Soviet

influence in Iran has considerably increased as Iranian policy has

turned from one of orientation toward the West to that of “neutrality”.

This brings us up-to-date. As the Soviet fortunes have waxed, so

have ours waned. The wheel of events turns quickly in Iran, however,

and what is true today might be false tomorrow. On the other hand,

having taken the initiative the Soviets can be expected to follow up that

initiative. It might therefore be useful to speculate upon the courses of

action which might be used by them in the future.

Methods Which Might in Future Be Used by the Soviets in the Attempt To

Assimilate Iranian Territory:

The following appear to be the principal channels available to the

Soviets for use in an attempt to assimilate Iranian territory:

(a) To Use Commercial Relations as a Means of Political Infiltration—

It would be naive to think that the restoration of trade relations by

the Soviets was undertaken with only commercial ends in view. The

ends must also be political. Now that trade relations have been re-

stored, even though on a restricted basis, there undoubtedly will be

many occasions for the Soviets to pervert those dealings to political

ends. There are, in fact, rumors in Teheran that the Soviets have already

started to subsidize important merchants in return for the latter’s exer-

tion of internal political activity in the Soviet interest. Further, un-

doubtedly the Soviets hope that the resumption of trade will primarily

benefit the northern areas, where surpluses have been accumulating

during the past years for lack of a market, and that the result will be to

make those areas more amenable to Soviet overtures.

In this move, as in others, one can again fine reasons for believing

that the basic objective of the Soviets must be aimed at the political in-

fluencing of the important northern areas. Perhaps their endeavors will

be expedited by the Iranian inability to form Government-controlled

trading companies in Azerbaijan, with the result that trade will eventu-

ally be reduced to a buyer-seller basis. And it probably would not take

very much in the way of tangible achievement to convince many of the

Azerbaijanis that they stood to gain more under a Communist-led

autonomous government than under the state of affairs which now

exists.

(b) To Establish a Situation Under Which Occupation of the Northern

Areas Could be Accomplished Under the Treaty of 1921—

The Soviets are still in the position of being able to stimulate unrest

among the Azerbaijanis and Kurds (and possibly introducing extra-

neous groups as well), and of them sending their troops into the area

under the allegation that the security of the Soviet Union is thereby

being threatened. That development, should it occur, would certainly

be quickly brought to the attention of the United Nations. However, the

determination of the legal points at issue probably would take consid-

erable time, during which the Soviets would be enabled to lay the

groundwork for whatever eventuality might be anticipated. Also, it

might be wise for us to ascertain definitely just what position the British

would take in the United Nations under such circumstances, especially

as there were indications several years ago that the British interpreta-

tion of the pertinent articles of the Treaty did not then entirely agree

with our own.

It seems likely from the information available that the population

of Azerbaijan would not actively resist a Soviet occupation. Some un-

doubtedly would even welcome the move.

(c) To Endeavor to Reach an Agreement with the British Under Which

Separate Spheres of Influence Would be Established in Iran—

February 1951–February 1952

The Shah is reported to fear that out of the present international

situation there might emerge an alignment of nations along the fol-

lowing plans: (1) a Soviet-led bloc, (2) an appeasement bloc, led by the

British, and (3) a resistance bloc, led by the United States. He reportedly

further fears that such a development might bring with it an under-

standing between the British and the Soviets whereunder, among other

things, Soviet control of Azerbaijan might be exchanged for British con-

trol of the Khazistan-Abadan area. The Shah is supported in this belief

by others, some of whom point to the fact that in 1946 the British were

prepared to throw the Qashqais into revolt and thereby curve out their

own puppet state around the oil fields and refineries when it appeared

as though Azerbaijan might be lost.

Certainly there is reason to share the Shah’s reported fears that the

continued growth in British circles of the desire to avoid entanglements

which might lead to war might carry with it the hope of reaching some

working agreement (even if temporary) with the Soviets. Such a divi-

sion of interest would, again, seem to serve the primary interests of the

Soviets and might easily be looked upon as a worthy expedient by the

British inasmuch as they could then bring in troops to defend Abadan.

(d) To Continue to Use the Psychological Factors Inherent in the Present

State of World Affairs as a Weakening Agent Against the Iranian Government

and People—

The will of the Iranian Government and people to resist the Soviets

has lessened considerably during the past year. The Iranians have been

frightened by the Communist show of strength in Korea and, con-

trasting that strength with what they think is the global military

weakness of the West, have concluded that their hope for survival lies

in becoming “neutral” and in dropping their previous Western colora-

tion. With this policy of neutrality and good neighborliness there has

also developed the lessening of Government control over Communist

activity. In fact, the authorities have become reluctant even to take any

drastic measures against the Tudeh Party.

The Iranian is much more at home in the field of intrigue than he is

on the field of battle. Consequently, he is very responsive to any evi-

dence of real outside strength which might be directed against him. The

Soviets might very well keep the Iranians in the present state of hopeful

suspense, while at the same time preparing the ground for the installa-

tion of a new order and being helped in that connection by the uneas-

iness and consequently softness of the Iranians.

(e) Endeavor to Initiate Civil War in Azerbaijan—

Our Consulate in Tabriz has reported the presence in Azerbaijan of

a number of officials of the former “Democratic” regime. Also, several

newspapermen who recently toured through the area have reported

that they found the population in general to be dissatisfied, to feel ne-

glected by the Central Government, and to be lacking in any real anti-

Communist feelings. The Soviets undoubtedly could, if they wished,

send into the area the Barzanis (greatly strengthened with Soviet na-

tionals), together with groups which could be labeled refugees from the

“Democratic” government. If at the same time the Kurds and the Azer-

baijanis could be incited to rebel, a situation which might lead to a civil

war can easily be imagined.

The foregoing possibility should not be confused with that set

forth under paragraph (b). The situation envisaged here is one in which

a prolonged civil war, with the insurgents receiving supplies across the

border, might be developed. Such a move, if successful, could easily

drain all of the country’s military energy and lead to a situation in

which resistance to Soviet pressure would eventually be effectively de-

stroyed unless, of course, outside strength should be added to that

available to the Central Government.

(f) At the Propitious Moment, to Renew Their Demand for the Northern

Oil Concession—

The Soviets certainly have not forgotten how they were tricked out

of the northern oil concession. It is possible that they might eventually

decide to renew their demands for that concession, perhaps selecting a

moment for action in which Iranian fears have become really excited. A

flood of Russian “technicians” into the area would make it fairly easy

for the Soviets to obtain political control of the region, and possibly

even to elect Majlis deputies who could carry the Communist line into

the Majlis.

(g) At the Propitious Moment, to Renew Their Demands for the Dis-

missal of the Two American Military Missions—

The presence of the American Military Missions with the Iranian

Army and Iranian Gendarme´rie serves, from our point of view, much

more of a political than military purpose. Their presence also is none

[more?] proof, to the Iranians who see them every day, of American in-

terest in the maintenance of the integrity of Iran.

It is possible that the Soviets might again be led to demand their

dismissal, thinking that through such a move the Iranians might be

made to feel a greater abandonment by the West. It is not unlikely,

should such a maneuver be successful and given the continued weak-

ening of the Iranian will to resist, that the Soviets might then endeavor

to impose their own military missions upon the country.

(h) Increased Tudeh Activity—

There has been, within the past several months, a considerable in-

crease in Tudeh activities. That increase is not as apparent in terms of

visible demonstration as in terms of indications. Yet, there are outward

signs, as in the case of inspired disturbances in the secondary school

February 1951–February 1952

system. CAS Teheran has also received information to the effect that

the cellular organization of the Tudeh Youth is to be broadened. Of

greatest importance is the evidence, already mentioned, that the Gov-

ernment has abandoned the strong measures formerly used to keep the

Tudeh in check.

It seems logical to suppose that the Soviets will endeavor to use the

Tudeh to the limits of its capabilities. Those capabilities, however, are

not too obvious, for a regrowth of the Party which was whittled down

by Komissarov last year will undoubtedly bring with it the absorption

of many undependable elements. The most informed opinion still

holds that the Tudeh, acting solely by itself, is not strong enough to

change materially the course of events. The Soviets certainly are also

aware of this fact and in their planning must undoubtedly seek to coor-

dinate Tudeh activities with some movement of greater strength.

(i) To Endeavor to Reach an Agreement with an Iranian Prime Minister

Under Which the Country Would be Delivered into the Soviet Bloc—

The foregoing possibility exists, especially as it embodies a tech-

nique used by the Soviets in other areas. The development envisaged

is, for evident reasons, most difficult to anticipate.

In this connection, some thought might be given to the relations

between Prime Minister Razmara and the Soviets. While no evidence

has yet been produced that Razmara is really pro-Soviet, yet the fact re-

mains that he is the first Premier within recent years to lead the Iranians

down the path of closer and consequently more dangerous relations

with the Soviets. Also, CAS Teheran received a report on a recent

Tudeh Youth meeting during which those present were informed that

Razmara is actually working in the interests of the Soviets. While that

report is difficult to evaluate, yet it also seems noteworthy that the So-

viets have been very sparing in their criticism of Razmara. Even in the

case of the recent Iranian action in voting to name the Chinese Com-

munists as aggressors in Korea, the inspired leftist press in Teheran

has placed the blame therefor mainly upon Entezum and not upon

Razmara.

The Possible Shape of Things to Come:

If one assumes that the Soviets are ready for a world war, then

there is little sense in trying to estimate on the basis of past develop-

ments what the future may bring. Under that circumstance the country

could be quickly over-run, with probably little resistance from the Ira-

nian Army, and incorporated into the Soviet Union.

Our thinking must therefor be based upon the supposition that the

present ideological struggle (probably with armed conflicts arising

from time to time on the borders dividing the Soviet and Free blocs)

will continue for some period to come. Accepting that hypothesis, the

study of the pattern of Soviet activity in Iran during recent years indi-

cates that that activity has been primarily directed to the acquisition of

the northern, particularly northwestern, areas of the country. It would

seem logical to conclude therefrom that immediate Russian policy could

be satisfied through the acquisition of political and military control

over the Iranian land area south of Baku. The ultimate objective would,

of course, remain the assimilation of the entire country, although

perhaps that operation might not be attempted until the Soviets are

ready to run the risks which would attend their entry into the Persian

Gulf oil basin.

It is difficult to anticipate what the next Soviet move will be. Some

of the techniques available for their use have been described. Yet, the

Soviets are probably as dedicated to the rule of expediency as are the

Iranians and will suit method and timing to the conditions which con-

front them.

The Soviet position in Iran can best be understood if the following

thoughts are given the consideration which they deserve:

(1) The primary Soviet objective must be land and not, as is com-

monly believed, oil. While the “Heartland” doctrine of MacKinder has

been found to be somewhat inapplicable today yet it is interesting to

note that the Soviets now control all of the so-called Heartlands except

the territories of Iran and Afghanistan, (Tibet being the last acquisition

in that respect). Iranian oil must, of course, enter into Soviet planning

but their objective certainly would remain unchanged even if to-

morrow the oil under Iranian soil should suddenly disappear.

(2) Iran, the country being acted upon by the Soviets, is for all prac-

tical purposes but a geographical expression which has so far been

maintained intact solely by the will of the West. Further, the course of

events in Iran promises to be such as to lead eventually to a situation

which will play directly into Soviet hands. The Iranian social system

represents an anachronism which ultimately will be either changed or

destroyed, and there is little reason to hope that the necessary changes

will be brought about in proper time by those in power.

Finally, the situation which probably will ultimately develop in

Iran was more or less predicted by Sumner Welles in 1946 in his book

“Where are We Heading”. That situation is envisaged as a direct con-

flict between basic British and Russian interests in the country. While

we would be primarily concerned with the international aspects of the

collision of interests, the British might very easily be tempted to resort

to a “realistic” settlement of the conflict. This would seem to be the time

for us to decide the role which we would assume should such a state of

affairs eventuate.

Joseph J. Wagner

Second Secretary of Embassy

2.

Editorial Note

reported on the “confused” situation in Tehran following the assassina-

tion that day of Prime Minister Razmara. Discounting the possibility

that the Soviets had been involved in the assassination, Grady wrote

that many others may have had an interest in Razmara’s death, in-

cluding the Shah, who feared Razmara’s power; the British, who felt

Razmara had not done enough to settle the oil dispute; and the Na-

tional Front. He added that the Shah had suggested the imposition of

martial law to the Majlis, but was dissuaded from doing so. (National

In telegram 2008 from Tehran, March 8, Ambassador Grady pre-

dicted that, in the wake of Razmara’s assassination, the likelihood of

the Majlis demanding nationalization of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Com-

pany (AIOC) was high. Grady therefore suggested that “considering

US may lose through any open intervention, that we stand to lose less

by insistence that Britains now make every possible effort reach agree-

ment along Aramco lines while we limit our action to public and pri-

vate statements that we believe such an agreement would completely

safeguard Iran interests and should be accepted by them.” He added

that “this approach could be discussed at Washington–London level

and if Britains knew that we would support them to degree mentioned

it is possible that they might be encouraged to concentrate all of their

power here upon problem. Because question is now almost entirely po-

litical and emotional, British solution would have to be along those

Grady then reported on his conversation with the British Ambas-

sador in Tehran in telegram 2020 from Tehran, March 9. They both

agreed “that Shah likely to decide upon weak government as tempo-

rary measure until some of emotion now prevalent wears itself out, and

then it is to be hoped, install strong Prime Minister.” He added that he

had suggested to the Shah a legal way be found to impose martial law.

He also gave expression to his fear that the “Soviets might attempt cap-

related report on the situation in Iran from Deputy Assistant Secretary

for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs, Burton Berry, to

Secretary Acheson, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, volume X, Iran,

3.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,

Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, March 9, 1951.

MEMORANDUM OF INFORMATION NO. 32

FOR

National Estimates Board

SUBJECT

The Situation in Iran

1. Information is still incomplete regarding the influences at work

behind the assassination of Premier Razmara of Iran. It appears, how-

ever, that the murder was an outgrowth of Iran’s internal stress and

strains and that Soviet influences were not directly involved. Little is

known about Fedi-i-a-Islam, the organization which planned to [the]

murder, but it is probably a band of religious fanatics similar to the

so-called Committee of Twelve responsible for the murder of Minister

of Court Ilajir in November 1949. Like the Committee of Twelve,

Fedi-i-a-Islam appears to be an extremist off-shoot of the small but vo-

ciferous troup of religious reactionaries and xenophobes in the Majlis.

This group has opposed Razmara especially for his “sellout” to the UK

on the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (AIOC) concession issues. Mem-

bers of group, however, have also accused Razmara of appeasing the

USSR and of coddling the pro-Communist element in Iran; although

there have been various unproved assertions that Mulla Kashani, the

leader of the ultra-reactionary clerical element, has covert ties with

the USSR, it is unlikely that the USSR could have had any direct influ-

ence on the murder. The pro-Soviet Tudeh Party was officially charged

with planning another act of terrorism, the attempted assassina-

tion of the Shah in February 1949, but the evidence to that effect was

unconvincing.

2. The assassination will have no immediate effect on Iran’s will-

ingness and ability to resist Soviet pressures. Nevertheless, it will pro-

mote a further weakening of Iran’s internal stability, both by adding to

the general sense of aimlessness, insecurity, and frustration and by

highlighting Iran’s lack of capable leadership. The Shah may well re-

spond temporarily to the challenge by attempting personally to pro-

vide the vigorous leadership that Iran needs, but it is doubtful that he

Staff Memoranda—1951. Secret. There is no drafting information on the memorandum.

4.

Memorandum From the Plans Branch, Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans to the Deputy Director of

Central Intelligence (Jackson)

Washington, March 12, 1951.

U.S.-Iranian relations have been deteriorating for some time with

the result that there has been a closer orientation of Iran with the Soviet

[Union], and a number of reports bear witness to this fact. Ambassador

Grady in January was sufficiently exercised to propose a quiet decrease

in number of U.S. women and children in Tehran and to state that the

Iran 1951–1953. Secret. Drafted by [name not declassified].

5.

Paper Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

SUMMARY APPRAISAL OF THE CURRENT SITUATION IN IRAN

The assassination of Prime Minister Razmara seriously worsens an

already grave situation in Iran. Political and economic insecurity com-

bine with chauvinist and fanatical religious emotions to produce an at-

mosphere extremely favorable to Soviet subversion. Nationalization of

the oil industry possibly combined with further assassinations of top

Iran officials, including even the Shah, could easily lead to a complete

breakdown of the Iran government and social order, from which a

pro-Soviet regime might well emerge leaving Iran as a satellite state.

Assuming that we can for the moment discount the likelihood of

direct Soviet military intervention, the

following developments

threaten, unless remedial measures can be promptly taken.

1. Continuation of the present uncertain situation under which

Iran faces the threats of chaos and disintegration, with the ever-present

danger of anti-US elements gaining control of the government.

2. A serious worsening of the internal situation and further assassi-

nations, including that of the Shah and Prime Minister Ala. Such devel-

opments could well result in a complete breakdown of the central gov-

ernment and general disintegration.

3. The actual assumption of control over the central government by

pro-Soviet elements and the absorption of Iran into the Soviet orbit as a

satellite state. In our opinion, the most effective courses of action in

these various contingencies are as follows:

Iran 1951–1953. Top Secret. The paper is undated but is attached to a working draft dated

March 13. This is apparently the paper presented to Department of State officials on

March 14. See Document 8.

1. Continuation of the Present Situation.

At this moment it is essential to develop an intensified propaganda

campaign (by both overt and covert means) in support of the Shah and

Prime Minister Ala. The campaign, which should be country-wide,

would obviously include the following: increased support to the pa-

pers which would publish stories in support of Ala and the Shah, advo-

cating calmness and restraint in national crisis; appealing to Iranian pa-

triotism and Moslem pride against foreign and anti-religious ideol-

ogies; support to political parties and individuals who would work for

those same ends, including possibly an attempt, closely coordinated

with the State Department, to establish a strong coalition movement en-

listing the backing of individual political and religious leaders and

parties, elements of the army and if possible of the tribes as well; and

assistance in the form of money, personnel and technical aid to the po-

lice and security forces in Iran. It should be pointed out that this whole

program would have a vastly better chance of success if it could be

done in support of a vigorous overt US program to strengthen Iran, in-

cluding loans, increased military aid, medical and public health pro-

grams, and Point Four assistance generally.

The chief danger to the continuity of any pro-Western government—

aside from the consequences of failure to make progress with critical fi-

nancial and economic problems and the disruptive influence of the

USSR—lies in the unholy alliance of the Mossadeq2 group with Aya-

tollah Kashani. Their combined efforts work to impede the orderly

functioning of the legislative body and to promote a chauvinistic pro-

gram which is difficult for any cabinet to oppose without being charged

with neglecting national interests.

It may be that the new government will have a period of two or

three months of grace before it, in turn, is subjected to the destructive

criticism of the above alliance. In this period a serious effort should be

made to discredit, weaken, and split these groups. How can this be

done?

In the case of the Ayatollah Kashani group, by persuading the

leading pro-government clerics to take an open stand against the ter-

rorism and inflamatory appeals of the Kashani group as being contrary

to the principles of Islam. It is probable that leading clerics do believe

this and, in addition, they are likely to be jealous of the popularity and

conspicuousness of Kashani.

The individuals to be approached include the following:

February 1951–February 1952

a. [5 lines not declassified]

b. [1½ lines not declassified]

c. [1½ lines not declassified]

d. [2 lines not declassified]

Efforts should also be made to buy off Kashani. It would appear

that at heart Kashani is primarily interested in himself rather than

being inspired by a crusading zeal, and there have been indications that

his attitude toward the US can be influenced by money.

Approach to Kashani should be made through either:

a. [1 line not declassified]

b. [1½ lines not declassified]

An alternative course would be to discredit Kashani by means of

printed material. Pamphlets could be clandestinely printed and distrib-

uted vehemently attacking Kashani. Two approaches, at least, are pos-

sible. One is to praise Kashani in such a way as fully to expose the

dangers of his methods. Another is to trade his career, emphasizing the

unsavory character of a good deal of it, and then tie him in with the So-

viet efforts to undermine the Iranian Government.

Approaches to Dr. Mossadeq and the National Front group are

more difficult.

Mossadeq, in spite of his emotional fainting spells, in the Majlis,

his long-winded speeches, and his lack of a constructive program, is

too widely admired to be the subject of successful attack. The approach

should be against his conspicuous followers, to emphasize the idea that

they are deceiving and misleading the grand old patriot. Two methods

appear possible:

a. Use of clandestine publications to expose the Soviet ties of Ho-

sein Makki, Sayyid Sbol Hazan Haerizadeh, and possibly Ibol Qader

Azad.

b. Attempt to split off such of his more stable and reasonable fol-

lowers as Dr. Mozafar Boghai and Illahyer Saleh by demonstrating the

general disorder and anarchy which this group is fostering.

In addition to attacking the direct instigators of the present situa-

tion, “black propaganda” weapons should be used. Instructions could

be “discovered” directing Tudeh Party members, following the recent

success of the “Tudeh plot,” to carry out open revolt. (This might bring

a measure of unity to the country and provoke the security forces to

take harsh measures against the Tudeh Party.) Leaflets, newspaper ar-

ticles, forged copies of Mardam (the Tudeh paper) should assign full

credit to the Communists for the success of the plot against Razmara.

“Instructions” could also be discovered listing the persons slated for

liquidation after Tudeh assumption of power. These lists would in-

clude important religious and political leaders as well as important

tribal chiefs.

Another approach would be to attempt to split the Tudeh Party,

particularly to exploit the deviationist tendencies of which there have

already been indications.

2. Serious Deterioration of the Present Situation.

In this contingency immediate approach should be made to both

conservation and progressive political parties, groups, and individuals

who might be in a position either to regain control of the government or

to establish security in limited sections of Iran. These elements include

the following:

a. Political Factions.

There are many political groups, few of which can be called

parties. All of these should be worked on in an effort to establish a prac-

tical coalition. They include, among others, the Majlis factions called

Iran and Javan, which appear to be moderately progressive in character.

There are also many prominent, intelligent, and influential younger

government officials now affiliated with the Iran group. They have the

ability to work together and are less inclined to the excessive nation-

alism of these leaders who tend to go along with the Mossadeq group.

A new progressive party, under the leadership of Movvagar, was es-

tablished about 1 March and appears desirous of US aid.

b. Ranking Army Leaders.

Many of the heads of departments of the Ministry of War and com-

manders of divisions are definitely pro-US and would welcome any

catalyst which would unite their efforts to prevent disintegration of in-

ternal security. The names of these officers are known to us.

c. Important Religious Leaders.

These include the individuals mentioned in Section 1 above and

also the all-important Shi’a leaders resident at the shrines at Kerbela,

Nejaf, and Semarra in Iraq.

d. Tribal Leaders.

These include the following:

(1) [1½ lines not declassified]

(2) [2 lines not declassified]

(3) [1 line not declassified]

(4) [1 line not declassified]

3. Imposition of a Satellite Government.

In this contingency we cannot assume that any political group will

be willing to oppose the government openly, nor can any early or effec-

tive results be obtained from the encouragement of clandestine political

opposition.

The most effective tactic might be to encourage collaboration be-

tween Iranian Army divisional commanders and local tribal leaders in

February 1951–February 1952

setting up military areas of resistance to the authority of the gov-

ernment. Approach would be made to the divisional commanders and

to the same tribal leaders already mentioned. In addition, approaches

would be made to leaders of the Boer Ahmadi, Lur, Southern Kurds,

Khamseh, Kuh Giluyeh, Makran, and tribes of the coastal strip of the

Persian Gulf.

Such of these groups as proved amenable could be covertly sup-

plied with money, arms, mate´riel, food, and possibly personnel.

6.

Draft Statement of Policy Proposed by the National Security

Council

NSC 107

Washington, March 14, 1951.

IRAN

1. It continues to be in the security interest of the United States that

Iran not fall under communist domination, either as a result of invasion

or internal subversion.

a. Iran is located in a key strategic position, the occupation of

which would enable an enemy to threaten the nearby oil producing

areas, Turkey, the countries on the Eastern Mediterranean, Pakistan,

and India. Iranian oil resources are of great importance to the econ-

omies of the United Kingdom and Western European countries. Loss of

these resources would affect adversely those economies in peacetime.

b. Communist domination of Iran would damage United States

prestige and seriously weaken, if not destroy, the will to resist in

nearby countries, except Turkey.

c. Communist domination of Iran could only be viewed as one in a

series of military, political and economic developments the conse-

quences of which would threaten the security interests of the United

States.

For these reasons, the United States should continue its basic

policy to take all feasible steps to assure that Iran does not fall victim to

communist control.

2. Because of United States commitments in other areas, the cur-

rent understanding with the United Kingdom that it is responsible for

the initiative in military support of Iran should be continued. The vul-

nerability of Iran, particularly the northern part, and the paucity of the

military resources available make it desirable that the United States

and the United Kingdom jointly give early consideration to measures

designed to strengthen the general area in order to give Iran support in

depth.

3. Present conditions in Iran as well as Soviet threats to that

country require that the United States further strengthen its programs

in Iran in support of its basic policy. Accordingly, the United States

should:

a. Continue to extend political support and military aid and accel-

erate economic aid as much as possible in order to (1) increase internal

security in Iran, (2) strengthen the Iranian Government and people in

their resistance to communist pressures, (3) bring them into closer asso-

ciation with the free world, and (4) demonstrate the intention of the

United States to assist the Iranians to remain independent.

b. Press the United Kingdom to effect an early and equitable settle-

ment of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company dispute.

4. In the event an Iranian Government, despite the foregoing

United States measures, should take steps leading toward communist

control in Iran and capitulation to the USSR, the United States should

be prepared to undertake special political operations to reverse the

trend and to effect Iranian alignment with the free world.

5. The United States should now make plans and preparations in

conjunction with the United Kingdom to counter possible communist

subversion in Iran and to increase support of the pro-Western Iranian

Government in the event of either a communist seizure of power in one

or more of the provinces or a communist seizure of the central gov-

ernment. Such plans and preparations should envisage political and

economic support, including:

a. Correlated political action by the United States and the United

Kingdom.

b. Conduct of special political operations by the United States and

the United Kingdom.

c. Efforts to induce nearby countries such as Turkey and Pakistan

to assist the legal Iranian Government.

d. As desirable, consultation with selected countries to attain sup-

port for the United States position.

February 1951–February 1952

e. Exposure of USSR responsibility and consideration of reference

of the situation to the United Nations.

6. In the event of overt attack by organized USSR military forces

against Iran, the United States in common prudence would have to pro-

ceed on the assumption that global war is probably imminent. Accord-

ingly, the United States should then immediately:2

a. Seek, by political measures, to localize the action to stop the ag-

gression, to restore the status quo, and to ensure the unity of the free

world if war nevertheless follows. These measures should include di-

rect diplomatic action and resort to the United Nations with the objec-

tives of:

(1) Making clear to the world United States preference for a

peaceful settlement and the conditions upon which the United States

would, in concert with other members of the United Nations, accept

such a settlement.

(2) Obtaining agreement of the United Nations authorizing

member nations to take appropriate action in the name of the United

Nations to assist Iran.

b. Consider the possibility of a direct approach to the highest So-

viet leaders.

c. Place itself in the best possible position to meet the increased

threat of global war.

d. Consult with selected allies to perfect coordination of plans.

e. While minimizing United States military commitments in areas

of little strategic significance, take action with reference to the aggres-

sion in this critical area to the extent and in the manner best contrib-

uting to the implementation of United States national war plans.

lowing views of the Joint Secretaries regarding NSC 107, as read by the Secretary of De-

fense: ‘The Joint Secretaries recommend that NSC 107 be rejected in its entirety. The heart

what to do in case of a Soviet attack, respectively. Neither paragraph faces up to the ques-

tion. They are safe innocuous statements of generalities which do not indicate anything

except watchful waiting. A policy document for Iran must bluntly face the facts. If we

cannot do anything we should say so. If we can take concrete steps in either contingency

we should specifically so state. Until a complete study as to specific manner and means

by which we can protect the interests of the West in Iran has been completed we should

not attempt to establish a national policy with respect to that country, particularly in

view of current developments.’” (National Archives, RG 273, Records of the National Se-

Attachment

Study Prepared by the Staff of the National Security Council

THE POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES

WITH RESPECT TO IRAN

The Problem

1. To assess the position of the United States with respect to Iran,

with particular reference to possible future developments in Iran af-

fecting United States security interests.

Analysis

Basic United States Position

2. Because of its resources, strategic location, vulnerability to

armed attack and exposure to political subversion, Iran must be re-

garded as a continuing objective in the Soviet program of expansion. If

Iran should come under Soviet domination, the independence of all

other countries of the Middle East would be threatened. Specifically the

USSR could (1) control or limit the availability of a Middle Eastern oil

reservoir upon which the economy of Western Europe depends; (2) ac-

quire advance bases for subversive activities or actual attack against a

vast contiguous area including Turkey, Iraq, the Arabian Peninsula

(hence the Suez Canal), Afghanistan, and Pakistan; (3) obtain a base

hundreds of miles nearer to potential US–UK lines of defense in the

Middle East than any held at present; (4) control continental air routes

crossing Iran, threaten those traversing adjacent areas, and menace

shipping in the Persian Gulf; and (5) undermine the will of most

Middle Eastern countries to resist Soviet aggression. In addition to

these developments affecting the Middle East, the loss of another free

country to communist domination at this time would damage the

global position of the United States and other members of the Western

community by weakening the determination of threatened nations ev-

erywhere to resist communism.

3. Loss of Iranian oil production and of the refinery at Abadan

would seriously affect Western economic and military interests, partic-

ularly as regards the level of industrial activity in Western Europe. The

effect of this loss on the volume of petroleum products available for

Western Europe could be overcome in a reasonable length of time by

developing reserves and building refineries elsewhere, but the finan-

cial effects, in the loss of the British investment and in the increased

dollar requirements of Western Europe, could be overcome only

slowly, if at all. The loss of Abadan would also deprive the West of the

principal source of aviation gasoline and fuel oil in the Eastern Hemi-

sphere, with consequent effect upon air and naval activity in the region.

February 1951–February 1952

4. The primary objective of our policy toward Iran is to prevent the

domination of that country by the USSR and to strengthen Iran’s associ-

ation with the free world. Corollary aims are (1) to encourage relations

between Iran and other countries calculated to elicit United Nations

support for its continued independence; (2) to assist the Iranian Gov-

ernment in maintaining conditions of internal security, thereby in-

creasing respect for Iranian sovereignty, strengthening the stability of

the government, avoiding a pretext for overt Soviet intervention, and

making indirect Soviet aggression through internal subversion more

difficult; and (3) to foster social reform and an expanding economy

with the purpose of alleviating discontent and strengthening allegiance

to the central government.

Evaluation of Current Policy

5. Our objective of preventing domination of Iran by the USSR has

so far been achieved by means of political action. Iran, after first fol-

lowing a policy of procrastination, evasion and compromise when con-

fronted by an aggressive Soviet attitude, has for the past three years,

with strong United States and United Kingdom encouragement and

support, been able to maintain its independence in the face of persistent

Soviet pressure. The United States has informed Iranian authorities

that it is prepared, so long as the Iranian Government demonstrates a

willingness to stand up for its independence against external pressure,

to support Iran not only by words but also by appropriate acts. We

have told the Iranians that we are not in a position to make any commit-

ment as to our action if the Soviet Union should take aggressive meas-

ures against Iran, but have pointed out our obligations under the

United Nations Charter. In response to Iranian inquiries, we have au-

thorized the Embassy in Tehran to say that in the event of war with the

Soviet Union involving both Iran and the United States, Iran may count

on all assistance compatible with United States resources and commit-

ments in a global conflict. The Secretary of State informed the Shah on

November 18, 1949 that our interest was not limited to the area of our

formal treaty obligations. The Shah was assured that our interest in

Iran would be great indeed if trouble should come.

6. Past United States efforts to assist Iran internally have included

two military missions now advising the Iranian Army and the Gen-

darme´rie, support of Iran’s efforts to secure financial aid through ap-

propriate agencies (such as the World Bank) for well-justified economic

development projects, encouragement and advice in connection with

the Iranian Government’s consideration of political and economic re-

forms designed to strengthen popular loyalty to the central gov-

ernment, and the provision of surplus light military equipment on

credit for internal security and legitimate defense purposes. Iran has

also been included in the Mutual Defense Assistance Program and is

now receiving military aid on a grant basis. The purpose of this aid is to

assist in the maintenance of internal security, to increase the confidence

of the Iranian Government and people in their ability to defend them-

selves, to give concrete evidence of American interest in the security of

Iran, and to enable the Iranian forces, in the event of war, to carry out

certain limited defensive operations in furtherance of over-all strategic

plans of the free world.

7. With the approval of the President and in conjunction with the

Export-Import Bank, the Department of State is initiating a new pro-

gram designed to overcome some of the existing weaknesses of the Ira-

nian governmental and economic structure and provide impetus for

the economic and social development of the country. This program in-

cludes the following elements:

a. An Export-Import Bank loan of $25,000,000 for road building

and agricultural improvement. Failure of Iran to accept this credit

would increase our reliance on IBRD credits and United States Govern-

ment grants as levers to induce the Iranian Government to put its eco-

nomic house in order.

b. The strengthening of the staffs of the existing American diplo-

matic and consular posts in Iran and the opening of a new consulate at

Isfahan.

c. A substantially enlarged program of information and cultural re-

lations in Iran.

d. A military aid program within the capabilities of the Iranian

armed forces to absorb.

e. A technical assistance program using Point Four funds concen-

trating on public health, rural extension, education, etc., at the village

level.

f. Seeking the cooperation of the United Kingdom to enable Iran to

utilize its sterling receipts from petroleum for essential development of

the country, including conversion of such sterling into dollars, as may

be required, for essential imports and servicing of dollar obligations for

development purposes.

8. A major source of economic stagnation and political discontent

in Iran has been the failure of the Iranian Government and the Anglo-

Iranian Oil Company to reach an agreement on a supplementary con-

cession agreement. The belief is widespread in Iran that the company is

unfairly exploiting the country by refusing to offer reasonable and eq-

uitable royalties and its entire operation is resented as a closed corpora-

tion exploiting Iranian wealth but beyond the reach of Iranian custom

or law.

9. This has resulted in strong antagonism against the British and,

among the less educated, against all foreigners, and has led many Ira-

February 1951–February 1952

nians to believe that the Western powers are not seriously interested in

the welfare and independence of the country but are concerned only

with exploiting its primary resources for their own purposes. The

present Iranian leaders do not associate the United States with the

policies of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company. They, however, want the

United States to side with them in the dispute and force the Company

to meet their terms. Nationalization, which is currently under discus-

sion in the Iranian Parliament, is not impossible and if it did occur

would subsequently make it easier for the USSR to influence the distri-

bution of the oil. The United States should use its utmost influence to

persuade the British to offer, and the Iranian Government to accept, an

equitable concession agreement. Failure to reach such agreement

carries with it such undesirable consequences that no opportunity

should be lost to impart to both governments our sense of urgency in

this matter.

10. Iran has expressed serious dissatisfaction with the limited na-

ture of the military assistance we are prepared to furnish and even

greater dissatisfaction at our past failure to provide substantial direct

economic assistance. The Iranian Government has repeatedly stressed

the desirability of a closer defense relationship with the United States,

preferably through the mechanism of a regional defense arrangement

for the Near East similar to the North Atlantic Treaty. Our refusal to

commit ourselves in this respect has been a further source of Iranian

uneasiness and discontent. These factors have occasionally in the past

given rise to a belief in Iran that the United States is not seriously inter-

ested in the welfare and independence of the country and would

abandon it to Russian aggression if matters came to a showdown. There

is a danger that such an attitude will recur unless the United States con-

tinues to take a course designed to convince the Iranians of its genuine

interest in Iranian independence. There is a belief in influential Iranian

quarters that the Iranian Government in its westward orientation

policy has gone too far and has placed Iran in an extremely vulnerable

position vis-a`-vis the Soviet Union without obtaining anything in re-

turn to help Iran protect itself. This attitude combined with recent os-

tensibly friendly gestures by the USSR have started a trend towards

Iran’s reversion to its historical policy of playing one power off against

the other and maintaining a precarious neutrality. The new program of

American assistance and guidance outlined above is designed to coun-

teract this trend in Iranian thinking. Likewise, the firm policy adopted

by the United States in Korea has helped to convince the Iranians of

United States determination to oppose aggression even though the

United States has no formal security arrangements with the country at-

tacked. Reverses in Korea, on the other hand, tend to make many Ira-

nians doubtful of United States ability to render effective assistance, a

feeling not lessened by Iran’s proximity to the Soviet Union.

Possible Future Developments

11. Although the USSR will continue to apply strong political and

psychological pressures against Iran in an effort to force the gov-

ernment of that country into submission, it is considered unlikely that

the Soviet Union would be willing to resort to direct armed interven-

tion by organized USSR military forces at this time. Nevertheless the

possibility of such armed intervention cannot be entirely ruled out. In

the absence of such armed intervention Iran is probably capable of

maintaining successful resistance to Soviet pressure and could be ex-

pected to maintain its alignment with the free world provided it has

confidence in United States and United Kingdom support and can pro-

duce competent political leadership able to overcome the existing

feeling of frustration and hopelessness among the mass of the people

and to implement the planned economic and social reforms, delay in

the execution of which is now seriously threatening the internal sta-

bility of the country. Since these conditions necessary for the mainte-

nance of Iran’s westward orientation and resistance to Soviet pressure

may not continue to exist, it is possible that the United States may be

faced in the future with one or more of the following contingencies:

First Contingency: The Iranian Government adopts a policy of “neutrality”

in the “cold war” and seeks a modus vivendi with the Soviet Union.

12. Continuing deterioration of the situation in Iran has created a

feeling of hopelessness and a public psychology inherently dangerous

from the point of view of Iran’s determination to resist Soviet pres-

sures. Present Soviet tactics in Iran are designed to convince the Ira-

nians that they have nothing to fear from the USSR and it seems certain

that in their search for security many Iranians are impressed by the

present “friendly” policy of the Soviets. Unless the United States can

convince them of the real issue at stake, they will insist on a gov-

ernment in power not unsympathetic to Soviet approaches. Such a gov-

ernment, fearing overt Soviet action and feeling that it has been left

alone to its fate, might seek some sort of understanding with the Soviet

Union, possibly along the lines of the agreement of 1946. Such an un-

derstanding would permit Soviet economic exploitation, amnesty to

political prisoners, legalization of the Tudeh Party and its eventual par-

ticipation in the government, and would open the door to a gradual

taking over of the country by local communist and Soviet agents.

13. Current United States measures in Iran are designed to prevent

this first contingency. If nevertheless the contingency did occur, the

United States could, in conjunction with the United Kingdom and with

little risk in proportion to the possible gain, take positive steps, in-

cluding covert measures, to support pro-Western elements and effect

Iran’s alignment with the free world. The alternative course of action,

February 1951–February 1952

that of accepting without counter-action Iran’s reversion to an attitude

of neutrality, would probably result in eventual loss of Iran with the

consequences noted in paragraph 2 above.

Second Contingency: The overthrow of the present Iranian Government and

the establishment of a pro-Soviet puppet government by subversive or

other means not involving the use of Soviet military force.

14. The weakness of the Iranian Government and the growing ac-

tivity of dissident elements, including the Tudeh Party (despite the fact

that this party is outlawed and has to function underground) make this

event a possibility. Several leading Iranians have expressed the view

that communist overthrow of the government is not only possible but

even probable unless steps are taken to improve the economic and so-

cial condition of the people and increase the efficiency of the gov-

ernment. The appointment of General Razmara, formerly Chief of Staff

of the Iranian Army, as Prime Minister gave promise of improved lead-

ership and direction; but up to the time of his assassination on March 7,

1951, his accomplishments had been singularly few.

15. The assassination of Prime Minister Razmara underlines the

basic political instability of Iran and emphasizes once again the need

for strong and vigorous leadership. It had been hoped at the time of his

appointment in June 1950 that Razmara possessed the qualities and in-

fluence needed to give Iran forceful government. However, he proved

unable to make headway against the selfish interests of the politicians

who control the Iranian Parliament and at the time of his death, he had

been obliged to resort to one compromise after another in order to stay

in power.

16. His murder will greatly increase the existing political insta-

bility in Iran at least for a temporary period. The opportunities avail-

able to the communists will thus be enhanced and it therefore becomes

more than ever necessary that there be firm direction of the gov-

ernment at almost any cost. The only source of the required type of

leadership at the moment appears to be the Shah. He can only succeed

with strong support from the United States and the United Kingdom.

During the next few months the political situation will be extremely

fluid and give rise to many difficulties.

17. If the second contingency occurred the United States would

have three alternative courses of action:

a. To accept the loss of Iran to the Soviet orbit. This would require a re-

versal of basic United States policy regarding the Mediterranean and

Middle East and would mean acceptance of the consequences summa-

rized in paragraph 2 above.

b. To support, in conjunction with the United Kingdom, the legitimate

government by all means short of commitment of United States military

forces. This course of action would involve little risk and if successful

would produce considerable gain at little cost. It would leave United

States forces uncommitted in Iran and hence available for other and

possibly more urgent missions. It is understood that the United

Kingdom stands ready to send a small force into Iraq or southern Iran

in such an emergency and this might be sufficient to accomplish our

purposes without the use of United States forces. Use of United

Kingdom forces probably would not have the same degree of provoca-

tion as the use of United States forces; but would give the USSR a pre-

text to invoke the 1921 Irano-Soviet Treaty of Friendship. On the other

hand, should this course prove ineffective in restoring the legitimate

government, the United States would have to accept loss of all or part

of Iran or pass to the course of action noted in the following sub-

paragraph.

c. To support the legitimate government of Iran by measures which in-

clude, inter alia, the deployment of United States armed forces (1) as a show of

force or (2) in sufficient strength to restore the legitimate government. A

show of force could be limited to air and naval action, and might be

successful in restoring the legitimate government and preserving Iran’s

alignment with the West. However, United States armed forces in suffi-

cient strength to restore the legitimate government might lead to pro-

gressively heavier commitments that the United States could not af-

ford. In any event, United States armed forces in strength to restore the

government will not be available in the foreseeable future. Commit-

ment of United States forces even in a show of force might provoke mil-

itary action by the USSR which could well lead to hostilities between

the United States and the USSR.

Third Contingency: The establishment of pro-Soviet provincial governments

in Iran by subversive or other means not involving the use of Soviet

military force.

18. The provincial administration of Iran is still subject to a high

degree of centralized control from Tehran, and the local communist

leadership in northern Iran was largely broken up when Soviet forces

retired in 1946. Therefore, even though renewed communist activity

has been reported in some parts of the area, it is doubtful that commu-

nist leadership could be re-installed in the provincial administrations,

in the absence of renewed entry of Soviet forces, unless the central gov-

ernment virtually ceased to function or was overthrown and replaced

by a pro-Soviet puppet regime. Nevertheless, establishment of pro-

Soviet provincial governments is by no means impossible if confusion

and maladministration in the Iranian Government continue for an in-

definite period and if political leadership is not greatly improved.

19. If this contingency did occur we would be faced with intensi-

fied Soviet subversive activities in the remaining free areas of Iran and

February 1951–February 1952

in Near Eastern areas contiguous thereto and with an increased tend-

ency on the part of Near Eastern countries to seek strengthened secu-

rity arrangements with the Western powers. Should security arrange-

ments considered satisfactory by them not be forthcoming, the Near

Eastern countries might in time seek a compromise with the USSR.

20. In this contingency the courses of action available to the United

States are virtually the same as those discussed under the second con-

tingency above, the principal difference being that support of the Ira-

nian Government at its request would be for the purpose of enabling it

to regain control of revolting provinces rather than of the central ma-

chinery of government. However, the risk of military involvement with

the USSR would be increased for the United States if United States or

United Kingdom forces, either as token forces or in strength, were de-

ployed near the northern provinces, although it is entirely possible

such deployment might serve as a deterrent.

Fourth Contingency: An overt invasion of Iran by the armed forces of the

Soviet Union.

21. Information presently available does not indicate that overt So-

viet attack with organized USSR military forces against Iran is probable

at this time, especially since opportunities still remain for the USSR to

gain its objectives in Iran short of overt attack. However, the possibility

of such attack cannot be excluded, since the USSR has the military capa-

bility of launching an attack without warning and quickly overrunning

Iran. While such an attack would in fact give rise to the risk of global

war, it is possible, even though not probable, that the USSR, miscalcu-

lating the degree of risk involved, would launch an attack against Iran

designed to attain Soviet objectives in that area without bringing on

global war. It is also possible, but improbable, that the USSR would de-

liberately assume a risk of global war by attacking Iran.

22. It seems likely, in view of the repeated references to the 1921

Irano-Soviet Treaty of Friendship in the Soviet protests to Iran in 1948

and 1950 over the presence in Iran of American military missions and

oil drillers, that the Soviets will, if they invade Iran, invoke Article 6 of

this treaty as a justification for their action. According to the Legal Ad-

viser of the Department of State, the following conditions must co-exist

before the Soviet Union would be justified in sending troops into Iran:

“a. If any third countries attempt by military interference to carry

out a policy of usurpation in the territory of Persia or to make the terri-

tory of Persia a base for military operations against Russia.

“b. If at the same time there is a threat of danger to the frontiers of

the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic or those of the Powers

allied therewith.

“c. If the Persian Government, after being warned by the Russian

Soviet Government, finds itself unable to avert such danger.

“d. If preparations have been made for a considerable armed attack

upon Russia or the Soviet Republics allied to her by the partisans of the

regime which has been overthrown (the Czarist regime), or by its sup-

porters among those foreign powers which are in a position to assist the

enemies of the Workers and Peasants Republics, and at the same time

to possess themselves by force or by underhand methods of part of

the Persian territory thereby establishing a base of operations for any

attacks—made either directly or through the counter-revolutionary

forces—which they might contemplate against Russia or the Soviet Re-

publics allied to her.”

It is also the view of the Department’s legal advisers that if the USSR

made out a case for co-existence of the above four conditions, and at the

same time the Government of Iran denied their co-existence and/or re-

sisted the introduction of Soviet troops into Iran, the USSR would not

be entitled under the United Nations Charter to introduce armed forces

unilaterally into Iran on the basis of the treaty. It would be a violation of

Charter obligations for the Soviet Union to take such action against the

will and over the resistance of the Government of Iran. In such circum-

stances, the Soviet Government would be bound by the Charter to seek

a peaceful adjustment of differences arising out of the 1921 treaty and,

if necessary, to refer the matter to the United Nations for consideration.

23. In view of the above, the invocation of the treaty need leave no

doubts in the free world as to the rights and wrongs of the matter and

the misuse of its provisions by the Soviets to justify aggression could be

made clear to world opinion. The Soviets can use the treaty as a pretext

to becloud the issue and the United States should accordingly be on the

alert to counter such moves.

24. In the event of overt Soviet attack on Iran, available United

States courses of action would include:

a. Opposing the aggression by political means short of the commitment of

United States armed forces in Iran. This course would be the less costly

and would leave our forces available for other urgent tasks, including

the contingency of global war. This course, however, would be unlikely

to succeed.

b. Opposing the aggression by all means short of global war, including de-

ployment of United States and United Kingdom forces for localized opposition

to the Soviet attack. This course would lead to hostilities between United

States and USSR forces involving the risk of global war, while the com-

mitment of United States forces in Iran would reduce United States ca-

pabilities for global war if it developed. However, this course, in so far

as it prevented complete Soviet occupation of Iran, would provide an

February 1951–February 1952

opportunity for the operation of political measures designed to stop the

aggression short of global war.

c. Taking action on the assumption that global war had automatically

begun. However, it would be contrary to United States interests and tra-

ditions to regard a localized attack as the automatic “push-button” ini-

tiation of global war.

Conclusions

25. The present situation in Iran requires the continuation of basic

United States policy with respect to the Mediterranean and the Middle

East, including Iran, and the strengthening of measures in support of

that policy, particularly measures designed to prevent Iran from as-

suming an attitude of neutrality in the “cold war”.

26. In the event Iran assumes an attitude of neutrality in the “cold

war”, political steps by the United States and United Kingdom to re-

store Iranian alignment with the free world would be required.

27. In the event the present Iranian Government is replaced by a

pro-Soviet puppet government through subversive measures not in-

volving the use of Soviet military forces, United States and United

Kingdom support of the legitimate government would be required.

28. In the event pro-Soviet provincial governments are established

in certain areas of Iran by subversive means not involving the use of So-

viet military force, United States and United Kingdom support of the

legitimate government, short of deployment of United States forces is

required.

29. Direct Soviet attack on Iran would not automatically initiate

global war, but would in fact so greatly increase the risk of global war

that the United States while taking measures to stop and localize the

aggression would also have to proceed on the assumption that global

war was probably imminent.

7.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans (Roosevelt) to the Deputy

Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Dulles)

Washington, March 15, 1951.

SUBJECT

Comments on NIE Paper (The Current Crisis in Iran) dated 15 March 19512

1. In accordance with the request you made to me this afternoon

over the phone I am submitting to you our comments on the present

NIE paper on the current crisis in Iran (15 March 1951). There is no need

for me to point out that we are not in the estimating business and can

comment only in the light of our operating experiences and require-

ments. As an operator I am bound to look at this paper with the ques-

tion, “Will this paper help or hinder our program?” An estimator does

not take quite that point of view! The following is offered therefore

solely for your information.

2. On paragraph 1 of the reference paper: We feel that the eco-

nomic situation is at least as serious as the political and contributes at

least as much to Iran’s instability. Moreover, we feel that this instability

has been seriously increased by the assassination of Razmara. The de-

mand for nationalization of oil resources is only one of the vigorous de-

mands expressed in this outburst of extreme nationalism.

3. On paragraph 2: “Imminent” is the key word in the first sentence

and if the reader capitalizes it and sees it in neon lights we would agree

with this sentence. We feel, however, that the tone of the paper as a

whole does not encourage him to read “imminent” in that sense.

8.

Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State

for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Berry) to

the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Matthews)

Washington, March 15, 1951.

SUBJECT

CIA Proposals for the Iranian Crisis

Problem

To consider possible courses of covert action by CIA represent-

atives in relation to the Iranian crisis.

Discussion

At the request of CIA, and accompanied by other representatives

of NEA, I visited Messrs. Allen Dulles, Frank Wisner and Kermit Roo-

sevelt on March 14 to discuss the current Iranian crisis. CIA, concerned

over the turn of events in that country, had prepared the attached

paper on the situation, setting forth possible courses of action which

might be carried out covertly. It was emphasized that the paper is no

more than a draft hurriedly prepared and that the program would be

refined on the basis of subsequent discussions with the Department.

I undertook to discuss in general terms the CIA proposals with the

appropriate Departmental officers before pursuing the matter further

with CIA. The real importance of the paper is, I think, that CIA is pre-

pared to move ahead rapidly with an action program requiring sup-

plies, money, and personnel if, in the opinion of the Department, it will

be useful in the attainment of our objectives in Iran.

I feel that we certainly must not under-estimate the dangers in-

volved in the Iranian situation, although Razmara’s assassination ap-

pears in fact to have been accomplished by a representative of a small

fanatical nationalist sect. The lack of drastic subsequent developments

cret. Drafted by Rountree. Attached is a handwritten note apparently written by Berry. In

this note Berry poses a number of questions, such as, “Is there the material from which to

build ‘a strong coalition government in Iran?’ (as suggested by CIA)”; “Is this the mo-

ment to bring out ‘a rigorous overt U.S. program to strengthen Iran’ or is it the moment to

let the dust settle while we act correctly?”; and “It is generally assumed that Ala and his

government are a temporary expedient. If so what do we expect to follow, what groups

and what leaders? Are we now working, educationally and otherwise, on such?”

February 1951–February 1952

lends credence to the assumption that the assassination was not

brought about by Communist elements, although Communism in Iran

clearly has benefited greatly by the confusion and turmoil which has

been created. At the moment there is reason to hope that by exercising a

reasonably firm hand the Shah and Prime Minister Ala, strongly pro-

Western, will be able to maintain order until tempers have cooled.

There is always the danger that every opportunity will be seized by

subversive elements and thus we should constantly be on guard; how-

ever, we must be most careful in the conduct of our affairs in Iran to

avoid any policies or programs which might lower American prestige

or encourage the development of an anti-American attitude which un-

questionably would result from the disclosure of any “improper” inter-

vention during this critical period of emotional nationalism.

With this in mind, I believe that certain of the proposals set forth

by CIA might involve great dangers, while others, if carefully imple-

mented, could be of considerable use. It is difficult at this distance to

evaluate fully in each instance the propriety of our proceeding with

given lines of action. Considerable authority and responsibility for de-

termining what courses of action should be pursued must, in my

opinion, be vested in the Ambassador in Tehran, operating under

broad lines set forth jointly by the Department and CIA.

With regard to CIA’s specific proposals for action under the

present situation, I have the following comments:

(1) The suggestion concerning the development of an intensified

propaganda campaign by both overt and covert means in support of

the Shah and Prime Minister Ala is of course generally desirable. How-

ever, any wide-scale United States propaganda supporting the Shah

and the Prime Minister at the present moment would unquestionably

embarrass them and leave them open to criticism from the nationalist

factions as American creatures. The various propaganda points sug-

gested by CIA are good.

(2) While a “strong coalition movement” along the proper lines

would be desirable, it is difficult to see how such a development could

be brought about by United States agencies at this time.

(3) Assistance in the form of money, personnel and technical aid to

the police and security forces in Iran is, of course, highly desirable. At

the moment I fear that it would be impossible for political reasons for

the Iranians to accept any American personnel in these fields other than

the present Gendarme´rie Mission, but they probably would welcome

American assistance in the forms of arms, equipment, and the training

in the United States of Iranian security officials.

(4) I concur in the comment that this whole program would have a

better chance of success if it could be carried out in support of a vig-

orous overt United States program to strengthen Iran, including loans,

increased military aid, medical and public health programs and Point

IV assistance. Every effort is being made to increase as appropriate and

expedite our Iranian aid programs.

(5) I have serious reservations concerning the advisability of any

approach to Mullah Kashani, the leader of the ultra-nationalist reli-

gious groups in Iran, who has a wide popular following. I doubt that

Kashani could, in any event, be bought for any appreciable length of

time, and he might very well use any approach of this sort as a further

weapon in his current attempts to stir up public hatred of all foreigners,

particularly Americans and British. It would be in character for him to

use such an approach as evidence of the intrigues of foreign powers

against the sovereignty of Iran; in this he could win more adherents

and further inflame those whom he already has. The alternate course

proposed by CIA, to discredit Kashani by means of printed material,

etc., has, I believe, merit but this program would have to be carried out

with the greatest caution.

(6) I concur with the opinion expressed by CIA that any approach

to Dr. Mohamad Mossadeq, the leader of the National Front group,

would be difficult, and believe it would be fruitless. The suggested use

of clandestine publications to expose the Soviet ties of some of his fol-

lowers appears a distinct possibility, but the possible effectiveness of

splitting off from his group his “more stable and reasonable followers”

appears questionable.

(7) The use of “black propaganda” weapons against the Tudeh

Party is attractive and might have useful results. However, the present

atmosphere in Iran is so tense and public opinion so emotionally

aroused that any revelation of a “plot” might further disturb the situa-

tion. CIA might, however, make plans for activity of this sort with the

understanding that it would not be implemented until the situation is

such that the results can be more accurately estimated.

(8) The suggestion that an attempt be made to split the Tudeh

Party, particularly to exploit deviationist tendencies, appears to have

merit if practicable steps can be formulated. Perhaps precise courses of

action can be worked out by the representatives in the field as opportu-

nities present themselves.

In addition to the above courses of action suggested for immediate

implementation, the CIA paper sets forth programs assuming (a) a se-

rious deterioration in the situation, or (b) the imposition of a satellite

government. Under either of these contingencies it is recognized that

our action must be far more drastic than under present circumstances,

and the suggestions set forth by CIA should be given careful consider-

ation. In this connection, the present NSC paper on Iran, which was ap-

proved by the Senior Staff on March 13 and is going to the Council for

February 1951–February 1952

approval on March 21, provides broad latitude for United States meas-

ures along these lines.

Recommendations

(1) That NEA pursue discussions with CIA along the foregoing

lines and urge that agency to proceed with appropriate aspects of its ac-

tion program, pointing out that the success of the program depends in

very large measure upon the caliber of the CIA personnel assigned to

the task.

(2) That instructions agreed to by the Department and CIA be com-

municated to Tehran, authorizing the implementation of such elements

of the program as are fully approved by the Ambassador.

resentatives on this program should be held as soon as possible, preferably on 19 March

. . . CNE strongly recommends that ADPC and, if possible, DD/P should attend this

meeting and should urge again the point that the CIA program can be effective to any sig-

nificant extent only as part of a vigorous national program. It is feared that so far we have

made this point to little avail.” (Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 79–01228A,

9.

Special Estimate

SE–3

Washington, March 16, 1951.

THE CURRENT CRISIS IN IRAN

Conclusions

1. The political situation in Iran has long been unstable. This insta-

bility has been increased by the assassination of Razmara, which has

led to a new outburst of extreme nationalism, expressed in a vigorous

demand for nationalization of oil resources of the Anglo-Iranian Oil

Company.

2. We do not believe, however, that the situation is such that there

is imminent danger of the government’s losing control, barring armed

intervention by the USSR. This estimate is based on the following

considerations:

a. Available information indicates that the Iranian armed forces,

including the gendarme´rie and police, are adequate to maintain order.

There is no evidence to suggest that they are not under effective control

of the government.

b. The extreme nationalists have only a very small representation

in the Majlis. Their popular following, though large and widespread, is

nevertheless unorganized.

c. The illegal pro-Soviet Tudeh Party is not believed to be capable

of taking advantage of the current tension to gain control of the gov-

ernment or even seriously to disrupt the government’s control.

d. Although the main issue in the present crisis is nationalization

of Iran’s oil resources and although this issue has evoked over-

whelming popular support, responsible government officials, led by

the Shah, are aware of the difficulties involved in nationalization.

Given the cooperation of the British, they may be expected to make a

real effort to find a face-saving settlement with the Anglo-Iranian Oil

Company.

3. Nevertheless, the possibility cannot be excluded that the situa-

tion may be aggravated and the crisis prolonged by an unyielding atti-

tude on the part of the British, or by some unpredictable development

SE–3, The Current Crisis in Iran. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet, the esti-

mate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the Intel-

ligence Advisory Committee on March 15. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intel-

ligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, Air Force, and the Joint

Chiefs of Staff participated in its preparation.

February 1951–February 1952

such as assassination of the Shah. In such circumstances the opportu-

nity might be created for an attempt by the Tudeh Party to seize power,

or even for armed intervention by the USSR.

Discussion

The Background of the Crisis

4. The assassination of Premier Razmara by a religious fanatic on 7

March and the ensuing period of uncertainty are direct results of the

agitation for nationalization of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, which

has been building up ever since the rejection by the Majlis in December

1950 of a revised concession agreement offered by the company. This

agitation has been led by a very small group of ultra-nationalists in the

Majlis known as the National Front. One of its leaders, the violently

anti-British religious figure, Mulla Kashani, was reportedly implicated

in the assassination, also by religious fanatics, of another high official in

1949.

5. Tension over the oil issue increased sharply in the period just

preceding the assassination. The National Front stepped up its de-

mands for nationalization, using that issue as a club to attack Razmara,

whose attempts to provide strong government had run counter to its

own attempts to gain a controlling influence. The National Front re-

portedly approached the British with an offer to drop the nationaliza-

tion issue entirely if the British would help get rid of Razmara in favor

of a more acceptable Premier. The British, irritated with Razmara’s

failure to line up support for their position, delivered strong official

warnings against any attempts at nationalization, meanwhile, how-

ever, indicating to Razmara that they were willing to grant a more gen-

erous concession agreement along the lines of that recently concluded

by Saudi Arabia and the Arabian-American Oil Company. Razmara

was persuaded to go before the Majlis Oil Commission with a state-

ment prepared for him by the British emphasizing the practical diffi-

culties of nationalization. In his presentation on 3 March, Razmara (to

the irritation of the British) was careful to label the statement as one

prepared by technical experts rather than his own. The statement, how-

ever, still brought down the wrath of the ultra-nationalists upon him

and may well have furnished the immediate incentive (or pretext) for

his murder.

The Development of the Crisis

6. The assassination produced no immediate repercussions.

Tehran was quiet, with the public evidently unconcerned. The pro-

Soviet Tudeh Party was evidently taken by surprise. The Shah, after

briefly considering the invocation of martial law, decided against such

a move and contented himself with the designation of an innocuous

elder statesman as acting Premier.

7. This situation, however, soon changed. On the evening of 8

March the Majlis Oil Commission, under pressure from the exultant

ultra-nationalists, unanimously passes a resolution endorsing national-

ization but asking a two-month extension for study of the practical

problems involved. On the following morning the pro-Soviet element

went into action with an anti-US and anti-UK demonstration outside

the US Embassy, while in the afternoon Mulla Kashani held a mass

meeting which, though orderly, was marked by inflammatory speeches

denouncing the British and Razmara. The organization responsible for

the murder, the Friends of Islam, threatened violence against other op-

ponents of nationalization and indicated that reprisals would be forth-

coming if the assassin were not released. Although the provinces ap-

parently continued to be quiet, and the government’s control of the

security forces was apparently unshaken, uneasiness in Tehran, partic-

ularly in political circles, mounted sharply. No one appeared capable of

forming a strong government satisfactory to the Shah, and most of

those who would normally have participated in such a government

were deterred by fear of personal reprisal and by the sheer difficulty of

coping with the question of nationalization. Proclamation of martial

law would require approval of a demoralized Majlis, while dissolution

of the Majlis involved a risk of increasing the tension. Under the cir-

cumstances, the Shah apparently decided to avoid a head-on clash with

the ultra-nationalists, making do with a weak interim government until

tension abated.

8. The situation has clarified somewhat during the last few days.

Upon rejection by the Majlis on 11 March of the Shah’s first choice for

interim Premier, the Shah persuaded his widely respected Minister of

Court, former Ambassador to the US Ala, to assume the premiership.

Ala, who has been approved by both the Senate and the Majlis, is de-

scribed as apparently “cheerful and optimistic” about what he regards

as the task of effecting a reconciliation among the various factions, in-

cluding Kashani’s. Meanwhile, the impending adjournment of Parlia-

ment for the Noruz holidays offers a breathing spell, and it has been re-

ported that the police have been quietly rounding up members of the

reportedly small Friends of Islam group and of the Tudeh Party. At the

same time, however, the unanimous Majlis vote in favor of the resolu-

tion on oil nationalization indicates that the National Front is deter-

mined to exploit its present psychological advantage. The Oil Commis-

sion has been granted a two-month extension to study the practical

aspects of the problem. In addition, the warning note on nationaliza-

tion which the UK has sent Iran may actually provoke rather than dis-

courage further ultra-nationalist outbursts.

9. A major indication of the trend will be provided by Ala’s presen-

tation of his proposed Cabinet to the Majlis on 18 March.

February 1951–February 1952

10.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans (Roosevelt) to the Deputy

Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Dulles)

Washington, March 26, 1951.

SUBJECT

NIE–6—Iran’s Position in the East-West Conflict

1. In accordance with your telephone request to Mr. Wisner, I am

submitting the following comments on NIE–6 prepared by ourselves in

collaboration with OSO.

2. We feel that the basic fault of this paper is that it is not addressed

to the present situation in Iran. (Historically, NIE–6 was designed as a

supporting paper for NSC 107.3) In our opinion it fails to come to grips

with the essential question, which is whether the loss of Iran to USSR

domination in the “cold war” would vitally affect the security of the US.

It merely states “there is a danger”. We feel that Iran’s loss under “cold

war” conditions would be disastrous and that unless something is done

to stem the tide it is a strong possibility.

3. It is difficult to quarrel with individual sentences or statements

in NIE–6. However, we feel that there are many sins of omission rather

than commission and that the tone gives the impression that the situa-

tion is neither critical or remediable. We do not feel that conclusions 1 b

tion described in (b) of both paragraphs greatly increases the likelihood

of situation (c) developing.

4. We further feel that while the wording of paragraph 3 is tech-

nically correct it implies that US interests would best be served by not

aiding Iran. Admittedly no firm alignment of Iran with the United

11.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency (Dulles) to Director of Central

Intelligence Smith

Washington, March 28, 1951.

SUBJECT

CIA’s Role in Iran

1. I have reviewed the attached memorandum2 respecting CIA’s

role in Iran and pass it on with concurrence. I wish to stress, however,

that the steps which CIA alone can take in this situation will probably

not substantially change the present downward trend and to be really

effective should be combined with an over-all program in the eco-

nomic, financial, and military fields. This would imply coordinated

planning.

Iran 1951–1953. Top Secret. The undated attachment was apparently drafted in the Direc-

torate of Plans.

February 1951–February 1952

2. With the present trend I feel that Iran may be lost to the West in

the coming 12 months and believe that it is urgent to plan and carry out

the steps which might change the trend and protect this vital position

in the Middle East.

Allen W. Dulles

Attachment

CIA’S ROLE IN IRAN

Summary

1. Currently CIA operations are severely restricted in Iran owing

primarily to the hampering effect of increased distrust of the West, in-

cluding the US. The Iranians, alleging that US aid has been wholly in-

adequate, remain unconvinced of the genuineness of US interest in

Iran.

2. Under existing circumstances, and in the absence of a series of

major overt US efforts in the political, economic, and military fields,

CIA can do little more than intensify its psychological-political warfare

with the object of trying to prevent a bad situation from growing worse.

To this end, CIA is:

a.

Providing

increased

subsidization

for

selected

Iranian

newspapers.

b. Extending guidance and money to Iranian elements opposed to

ultra-nationalism and terrorism.

c. Investigating the feasibility of establishing new, pro-Western po-

litical parties.

d. Taking steps to discredit and if possible disrupt forces hostile to

US security interests.

e. Exploring the possibility of establishing [less than 1 line not declas-

sified] a radio station for clandestine broadcasts which would reach at

least certain parts of Iran.

f. Gearing its collection machinery to provide intelligence needed

for these activities.

3. Obviously in the present situation these efforts alone cannot be

relied upon to prevent the possible collapse of the regime. Accordingly

CIA is endeavoring to organize indigenous resistance groups against

the possibility that a hostile government may be installed in Tehran.

4. If the US should establish a policy of all-out aid to Iran, which

would produce a more friendly and cooperative atmosphere, CIA op-

erations could be expanded to include:

a. A general overhauling of the Iranian intelligence and security

services.

b. Greater influence upon the Iranian press.

c. The possible establishment of a clandestine radio station in Iran.

d. Greatly intensified political warfare.

e. Accelerated organization, with better prospects of success, of re-

sistance groups and escape and evasion nets for operations in the event

of Soviet occupation.

This expanded scale of CIA operations would not be possible of ac-

complishment covertly without the pretext and cover which only a

greatly increased overt program would provide.

CIA’S ROLE IN IRAN

1. In view of the seriousness of the Iranian situation, CIA is striving

to do what it can to help reduce the possibility of the country’s falling

into Soviet hands and to foster the establishment of an enduring pro-

Western alignment. Existing conditions are such, however, as to make

all CIA operations exceptionally difficult and uncertain of outcome. Of

the various circumscribing factors, the most serious is a mounting dis-

trust of the West, including the US, which makes it almost impossible

to send additional covert agents into the country, restricts the move-

ments and effectiveness of those already there, severely limits the

number of Iranians willing to cooperate with the US in clandestine op-

erations, and makes the people in general unreceptive, if not downright

hostile, to US overtures. US policy has not succeeded in demonstrating

to the Iranians that the US is genuinely interested in their country or in

convincing them that their salvation lies in firm alignment with the

West, and not in rapprochement with the USSR nor in an untenable

course of neutrality.

2. It is believed that the conditions noted above will obtain so long

as US assistance to Iran is maintained at the present rate or at a rate

which is not substantially more vigorous than at present. It is question-

able whether the program provided for in NSC 1073 even if fully and

speedily executed would suffice to reverse the unfavorable trend.

Under these circumstances, CIA can do little more than intensify its

psychological-political warfare campaign in an effort to prevent or re-

tard further deterioration of the Iranian situation. Specifically, CIA is

currently augmenting the following existing programs in Iran:

a. Providing for increased subsidization of newspapers, for the

preclusive buying of newsprint or printing facilities, and (if circum-

stances warrant) for the establishment of new newspapers. These meas-

February 1951–February 1952

ures are designed to combat the tendency of influential sections of the

Iranian press to encourage and support the chauvinism and religious

fanaticism which have a paralyzing effect on the Iranian Government.

b. Extending guidance and financial support to individuals,

groups, and parties hostile to the ultra-nationalists, fanatical terrorists,

and pro-Soviet groups.

c. Investigating the feasibility of establishing new political parties,

which might include a progressive religious party, a moderate “so-

cialist” party to draw liberals away from the Tudeh Party, and a party

with vigorous, pro-Western representation in the Parliament.

d. Taking positive steps to discredit and if possible disrupt forces

inimical to US security interests by subversion and by directing black

propaganda against the leading chauvinists, fanatics, and Communists.

e. Exploring the possibility of establishing [less than 1 line not declas-

sified] a radio station for clandestine broadcasts in Azerbaijani. These

broadcasts (countering those of the Soviet “Free Azerbaijan” station)

could be beamed to certain parts of Iran but not so effectively as if the

station were located in Iran, which is hardly possible under present

conditions.

f. Gearing its collection machinery to provide increased intelli-

gence needed in connection with these various activities. “Soft” targets

relatively easy to penetrate for information purposes include [1½ lines

not declassified] (especially the following of Mulla Kashani), [1½ lines not

declassified]. “Hard” targets requiring long-range operations to pene-

trate include the Tudeh Party, [1½ lines not declassified].

g. [1 paragraph (3½ lines) not declassified]

3. For the reasons outlined in Paragraph 2 above, these efforts ob-

viously cannot be relied upon to prevent the possible collapse of the

present regime. CIA has accordingly begun to identify and establish

contact with the tribal, military, and civil leaders who would effectively

support a resistance program in the event that a hostile government is

installed in Iran. Once agreements are reached with these leaders, CIA

will determine the material aid which they would require and will

commence to acquire and stockpile material at appropriate points.

4. If the US should decide to follow a policy of all-out aid to Iran,

both overt and covert, the prospect of preserving Iran during the cold

war period could be immeasurably improved. Greater cover would be

available, and the atmosphere might be cleared for augmenting and ex-

panding CIA operations, which could be more effective in support of a

program directed positively toward promoting stability and active co-

operation with the West instead of toward the negative objective of

trying to prevent a bad situation from growing worse. Emphasis would

be placed on rehabilitating Iran and building up immunity to Soviet

and Soviet-inspired subversion, and plans could be more effectively

laid for operations to be carried out if Soviet troops should invade and

occupy Iran.

5. Under a US program of all-out aid, CIA operations could in-

clude the following:

a. A general overhauling of the Iranian intelligence and security

services. The program would include material aid; training of key of-

ficers in modern techniques; and insistence (at least to some degree)

that CIA guidance in such matters be followed. The objective would be

to create an efficient organization with which CIA could work and

which would be extremely useful in helping to prevent hostile penetra-

tion of key government offices and in running operations against the

Tudeh Party, Soviet installations, and the USSR itself.

b. Greater influence upon the Iranian press. Subsidization would

be increased as needed; hostile publications could be forced out of

business; and the direction of certain influential papers would, in effect,

be completely taken over.

c. If possible, the establishment of a clandestine broadcasting sta-

tion in Iran. The station, purporting to be inside the USSR, would trans-

mit black propaganda designed to discredit the USSR and Soviet Com-

munism and aimed particularly at the Azerbaijani and other waverers.

This station could be a powerful instrument in strengthening Iran

against hostile penetration from without and within.

d. Greatly intensified covert political activity in support of desir-

able and against undesirable individuals and groups. If need be, the

government itself or key officials therein could be subsidized to pro-

mote US security interests. The subsidization of politicians and political

parties has long been a common practice in Iran, and effective steps

would be taken to encourage defection in the Tudeh Party and to create

vigorous new groups which would actively support US interests.

e. Increased efforts, with better prospects of success, to organize re-

sistance groups to function in the event of Soviet invasion and occupa-

tion. This program would include more substantial efforts to prepare

tribal groups and segments of the army to carry out guerrilla activities

against Soviet units and installations. It might even prove feasible to

bolster the Shah’s avowed intention of withdrawing to the mountains

and setting up a government there.

f. [1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

12.

Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State

for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Berry) to

Secretary of State Acheson

Washington, April 3, 1951.

SUBJECT

The Iranian Situation

With reference to my memorandum of March 142 outlining the Ira-

nian situation, there follows a summary of more recent developments:

The high state of tension that developed as a result of Razmara’s

assassination has continued. A few days after this murder, the former

Minister of Education in Razmara’s Government was shot and later

died, and rumors spread regarding further assassinations. Martial law

in Tehran was declared by the Shah on March 20 for a period of two

months and Parliament adjourned for the Iranian New Year holidays.

More recently, plots were reportedly uncovered involving planned

attempts on the lives of the Shah, Prime Minister Ala and other offi-

cials who were suspected of having moderate views regarding

nationalization.

A succession of strikes broke out last week in Abadan and nearby

oilfields, the original cause being a reduction by AIOC of living allow-

ances for its workers. These strikes, which initially involved only a few

employees, quickly expanded as a result of agitation by members of the

illegal Communist Tudeh Party, posing as members of the National

Front group which spearheaded the popular move for nationalization.

(The National Front has not yet publicly disassociated itself from the fa-

natical religious brotherhood, Fedayan Islam, members of which assas-

sinated Razmara and his Minister of Education.) The strike now in-

volves between twelve and fifteen thousand employees, whose

demands upon the company have reportedly increased to substantial

proportions. The Shah has declared martial law in the military district

which includes Abadan and the southern oilfields. We have learned of

no immediate prospects of settlement.

Prime Minister Ala, in view of the seriousness of the situation, con-

vened an emergency session of Parliament on April 2 but, in the ab-

sence of a quorum, the Parliament was compelled to adjourn. Mean-

cret. Drafted by Gray and Rountree.

while, Ala’s position is somewhat tenuous, as he has not yet received

the customary vote of confidence and there is some question as to the

legality of the declaration of martial law in the absence of a properly in-

stalled Government. There has, however, been no suggestion that mar-

tial law will not be continued.

Although the situation is potentially dangerous, disorders have

not yet developed in the AIOC strike areas and the situation elsewhere

is outwardly calm. (In Isfahan there were minor disturbances involved

in a small-scale strike of textile workers.) Iranian security forces are

considered presently able to maintain order. In view of the currently

critical internal financial position of the Government, however, Army

personnel (as well as civil servants) have in some cases gone for many

months without payment and the possible consequences of a continua-

tion of this situation cannot be overlooked.

In this tense atmosphere, and in light of the Iranian clamor for na-

tionalization, it is felt that any precipitous action on the part of the

British would bring about a very dangerous situation. We therefore re-

quested the British to take no important steps without consulting us,

and the Foreign Office agreed. In light, however, of the AIOC decision

to reduce allowances at this critical juncture and the subsequent report

that elements of the British fleet had been sent to Abadan, the matter

was again pursued with the Foreign Office in London. We were told

that the Foreign Office did not know in advance of the reduction in al-

lowances, which was pursuant to an administrative arrangement made

much earlier between the oil company and its workers, and that the

press reports concerning naval movements were grossly exaggerated.

Elements of the fleet are in fact in the Persian Gulf area “on normal

duty” but have not been dispatched to Abadan. Two sloops, regularly

assigned to the Persian Gulf, are understood to be at Bahrein. A cruiser

is at Aden. In this connection, the British have again assured us that

they will inform us before taking any important steps, but they reserve

the right in an emergency to take appropriate measures to protect the

lives and property of British citizens.

Of great concern to us is the position of the British Government.

There have been indications that it is considering a “strong” course in

Iran which, in our view, would be extremely dangerous. Mr. McGhee is

Ambassador Gifford of its willingness to consult with the U.S. “prior substantive action.”

In telegram 5142 from Tehran, March 30, however, Gifford reported that “ultimate ac-

tion, if Brit lives endangered by threatened seizure oil properties wld probably be to

move Brit troops to Basra and take other mil precautions. FonOff recognizes risk in any

display of force and wld probably sanction it only as last resort. It is significant however

that FonOff does not discount possibility force may be necessary.” Both telegrams are in

February 1951–February 1952

now consulting with British officials in London, and it is hoped that

they will divulge their plan to him. Also, it is expected that conversa-

tions with a British delegation headed by Ambassador Franks will

begin in Washington on April 9. It is hoped that these discussions will

provide the basis for agreement between the United States and the

United Kingdom as to an appropriate course in Iran, including plans

for a possible settlement of the AIOC dispute on a basis which would

take into account the Iranian demand for nationalization and would

protect the legitimate interests of both parties.

Regarding special United States measures in the present crisis, we

are endeavoring to implement as rapidly as possible the various seg-

ments of existing aid programs, although it is generally felt that these

cannot to a great extent be successful in quickly providing a significant

impact upon Iranian public opinion. We are, therefore, considering ex-

traordinary measures and have also asked for Ambassador Grady’s ur-

gent views concerning the most effective utilization of special funds

which might be obtained for this purpose.

The Department and CIA are formulating for immediate execution

a special program involving covert action in several fields, and experi-

enced officers from both agencies are shortly departing for Tehran to

help carry out this phase.

13.

National Intelligence Estimate

NIE–6

Washington, April 5, 1951.

IRAN’S POSITION IN THE EAST-WEST CONFLICT

The Problem

To estimate the position of Iran in the East-West conflict.

Conclusions

1. US security interests in Iran have during the past six months

been progressively undermined by political and economic develop-

ments that have: (a) weakened the present regime; (b) induced the gov-

ernment to adopt policies favorable to the USSR (and hence unfavor-

able to the West); and (c) increased the influence of ultranationalist

elements, which have already compelled the government to adopt pol-

icies unfavorable to the West and may force the adoption of additional

measures against Western interests.

2. For the future, US security interests in Iran are threatened by:

a. The ever-present Soviet military capability to launch an attack

on Iran with little or no warning, and Iran’s incapability of defending

itself against such an attack.

b. The possibility that the Iranian Government’s policy of restrict-

ing Western interests in Iran may be further extended, perhaps to the

point of eliminating Western interests.

c. The possibility that disorders in the oil field area, whether or not

Communist-inspired, may restrict or cut off supplies of Iranian oil to

the West.

d. The political and economic instability of Iran (particularly as ag-

gravated by subversion), which might result in the breakdown or pa-

ralysis of government control and might lead to the collapse of the

present regime and the establishment of a completely anti-Western or

even a Soviet-dominated government.

NIE–6: Iran. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet, the intelligence organizations

of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff partici-

pated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the Intelligence Advisory Com-

mittee concurred in this estimate on April 2.

February 1951–February 1952

3. With respect to these threats, we believe that:

a. Unless the Kremlin considers general war to be imminent, the

USSR is unlikely under present conditions to take the risk of interna-

tional complications involved in overt military action in Iran. The

Kremlin must estimate that there would be at least an even chance that

the US would oppose any overt military action by the USSR in Iran.

b. The Iranian Government probably will impose further restric-

tions on Western interests, but is unlikely to eliminate these interests

completely.

c. Although there has recently been unrest among some of the oil

workers, disorders on a scale that would seriously reduce supplies of

oil to the West are improbable so long as the government retains effec-

tive control of the security forces.

d. Although there is insufficient evidence to indicate that recent

events in Iran have seriously shaken the government’s ability to main-

tain its authority, there is nevertheless a continuing danger of a break-

down of government control and possibly of a political collapse, which

in turn would provide an opportunity for Communist seizure of

power, with or without overt Soviet assistance. If the present trend con-

tinues—leading to actual nationalization of the Anglo-Iranian oil con-

cession, exclusion of the West from effective participation in Iran’s eco-

nomic and financial recovery, further political assassinations, increased

weakness in government and in the control of Army and security

forces, and greater exploitation of unrest and intensification through

Soviet subversive activities—then Iran is likely in time to become a

second Czechoslovakia.

4. Increased Western economic and military assistance, if accepted

by the Iranian Government, would in the short term strengthen the

present regime and might in the long run increase Iran’s basic political

and economic stability. Such assistance would have to be regarded as a

long range, continuing investment. It could not be expected to result in

a firm or permanent alignment of Iran with the West, or increase signif-

icantly Iran’s small defensive capability against the USSR.

Discussion

Iran’s Present Position

1. Iran’s strongest existing connections are with the West. Iran is

presently dependent on the Western Powers for markets, money,

equipment, and technical advice, and Western commercial interests

(primarily British) play a major role in the Iranian economy. The Anglo-

Iranian Oil Company alone accounts for an estimated 6 to 8 percent of

Iran’s national income, provides approximately a quarter of the Iranian

Treasury’s total receipts, and contributes materially to Iran’s foreign

exchange through purchase of rials for local use. Most Iranians are

better disposed toward the West than toward the USSR. The Iranian

Government is a recipient of US military assistance and has US military

advisers for its army and gendarme´rie. It has consistently supported

the US in the UN.

2. This relationship with the West, however, is seriously threat-

ened. Iran is extremely vulnerable to Soviet attack. In addition, the

country’s political, economic, and social instability exposes it to subver-

sive and disruptive pressures. The government’s recent tendency to co-

operate with the USSR may facilitate Soviet subversive activity. Finally,

the current eruption of anti-Western feeling in Iran threatens Western

interests with expulsion.

Iran’s Vulnerability to Soviet Attack

3. Iran is incapable of effectively resisting a Soviet invasion. Its

armed forces are not only small but also weak in mate´riel, leadership,

and tactical organization. The USSR could seize key points in Iran with

airborne troops and in any event could quickly occupy the most impor-

tant areas of the country by overland invasion. Rapid Soviet overland

advances could be temporarily delayed if effective use were made of

demolitions on bridges, tunnels, and other transportation facilities

along the invasion routes. Some guerrilla resistance could be carried on

if government leaders were able to escape to selected southern moun-

tain areas, but the effectiveness of such resistance would be limited.

4. There is no present prospect of a marked improvement in Iran’s

military capabilities. Although the US military missions have helped

considerably to increase Iran’s ability to maintain internal security, it

will be a long time before the deficiencies of the Iranian armed forces in

leadership, organization, and training can be overcome and before

these forces can make effective use of modern Western equipment.

5. Although the USSR is capable of invading Iran at any time

without warning, the Kremlin may consider the achievement of control

over Iran not sufficiently urgent to warrant open employment of mili-

tary force. The Kremlin may further consider that Iran’s own defensive

capabilities will remain negligible, and that Iran’s ability to resist sub-

version will decline, and that consequently the advantages of an early

attack on Iran would be incommensurate with the risk of international

complications involved. The Kremlin must estimate that there would

be at least an even chance that the US would oppose any overt military

action by the USSR in Iran. If, however, the British were to send their

armed forces into Iran to protect their nationals in the oil well area, the

Soviets might take action based on their interpretation of Article 6 of

the Treaty of 1921.

Iran’s Vulnerability to Subversion

6. Internally, Iran is subject to a variety of strains and stresses.

February 1951–February 1952

a. The Iranian economy is backward, inefficient, and saddled with

extensive absentee ownership. To raise the traditionally low living

standard of the bulk of the population to a satisfactory level would re-

quire a long-term development program considerably more ambitious

than any thus far initiated. In addition, the weaknesses of the economic

system make it subject to periodic dislocations. For example, crop

failure in 1949 produced widespread unemployment and hardship,

and bad management has resulted at present in another of Iran’s recur-

rent financial crises.

b. The central government has failed to gain the full support of the

tribes, an only partially assimilated and potentially recalcitrant element

which constitutes about 25 percent of the population. Tehran’s neglect

of provincial interests and its use of extortion and force in exercising its

authority have engendered continuing resentment in the hinterland,

notably in the northern border province of Azerbaijan.

c. Iran is politically unstable. Although Iran is formally a constitu-

tional monarchy with popular representation, effective control of the

governmental machinery still rests in the hands of a small ruling group

whose conduct of affairs has been marked by factionalism, intrigue,

and failure to respond to the country’s needs and aspirations. Iran has

few strong leaders. The Shah occupies a special position by virtue of his

command of the army, his constitutional prerogatives, and the prestige

of the Crown. Ultimate power, however, still rests largely with the few

hundred landlords, tribal leaders, merchants, army officers, and clergy

who dominate the social and economic life of the country and supply

the membership of Parliament. Motivated by individual and class in-

terests, the various factions in Parliament have engaged in a continuing

contest with the executive in recent years. Attempts to initiate political

and social reform have been effectively frustrated, despite the fact that

growing popular desire for better living conditions has led every gov-

ernment since 1941 to endorse political decentralization, expanded

health and education facilities, higher wages, and improved produc-

tion methods. The Seven Year Development Program, from which

much was hoped, was first broached in 1946 but is still stalled in the

preliminary stages. Meanwhile, the lack of cohesion within Parliament

has made it a ready vehicle for obstructionism and special pleading.

d. This state of affairs has had an unsettling political and social ef-

fect which makes the position of the old ruling group increasingly inse-

cure. This group has thus far retained its traditional pre-eminence, and

the vast majority of the population, despite its grumbling, remains po-

litically apathetic. Nevertheless, there is a growing feeling of insecurity

and dissatisfaction, notably among students, white collar workers, and

industrial laborers. This feeling can find expression only through ex-

tremist movements. The USSR has worked assiduously to exploit pop-

ular insecurity and dissatisfaction in Iran, not only through its support

of the subversive Tudeh Party but also through special efforts to revive

the separatist spirit in Azerbaijan and to rouse the traditionally restive

Kurdish tribes, who had a short-lived “people’s republic” of their own

in 1946. The only other force attempting to exploit this popular discon-

tent is the reactionary ultra-nationalist element which blames Iran’s

troubles on foreign domination of Iran’s economy and foreign influ-

ences on Iran’s way of life. These ultra-nationalists do not at present

constitute a large organized group; there are only a handful of National

Front deputies in Parliament. Nevertheless, the popular appeal of their

nationalist agitation and the violence of their terrorist fringe has en-

abled them to exercise, both before and after Premier Razmara’s assas-

sination, an influence out of all proportion to their numerical strength.

7. The assassination of Premier Razmara by a religious fanatic on 7

March and the subsequent threat of terrorism have increased Iran’s in-

ternal tensions and provided new opportunities for factional conflict

and subversion. Although Razmara failed to gain any real support

from the Majlis for his attempts to provide strong leadership, he was a

stabilizing influence, particularly with the army, and his death points

up Iran’s shortage of strong leaders. His forcible removal from the

scene, together with the hesitancy displayed by the Shah in the face of

ultra-nationalist efforts to capitalize on the situation, tends to under-

mine the government’s authority and to encourage the Tudeh Party

and other groups to advance their special interests. Ultra-nationalists,

without assuming major executive responsibility, may be able to im-

pose their will on the government on a variety of issues.

8. The government’s ability to maintain its authority depends pri-

marily on its control of the security forces. This control over the security

forces may be critically shaken if the present crisis is prolonged and ex-

acerbated by further violence and mob pressure or if the economic situ-

ation is allowed to deteriorate to such an extent that minimum relief

from hardship is not provided. At present, however, the government

retains control over the army and gendarme´rie, and so long as it con-

tinues to do so the pro-Soviet forces will probably not be able to gain

power without actual armed intervention by the USSR. Martial law is

now in effect in Terhan and the oil area.

a. The Communist-dominated Tudeh Party, though it has appar-

ently succeeded in building up a unified underground organization

and has shown various signs of renewed vitality in recent months, re-

mains a conspiratorial organization whose membership is drawn

mainly from the small intellectual and industrial classes. It has accom-

plished little toward arousing the peasantry, which constitutes the vast

majority of the population, and evidently has not succeeded in effec-

tively penetrating the army and gendarme´rie or in building up the re-

February 1951–February 1952

serves of arms and equipment necessary for a successful coup d’e´tat.

The Tudeh Party may eventually be capable of seriously interfering,

through strikes and sabotage, with the supply of Iranian oil to the West.

At present, however, disorders on a scale which would seriously re-

duce this supply are improbable so long as the government retains ef-

fective control of the security forces.

b. The USSR’s agitation in Azerbaijan and the other northern prov-

inces has apparently heightened fear of a Soviet invasion rather than

generated a desire for revolt; despite their grievances against the cen-

tral government and their landlords, the people of these provinces

would generally oppose the return of the Russians or their Iranian

disciples.

c. Although there have been periodic reports of an imminent

Kurdish revolt, there is no firm evidence that the USSR has succeeded

in transforming traditional Kurdish hatred of the authorities into an ac-

tive revolutionary spirit and in securing the cooperation of the Kurdish

tribes. Even if the Kurds did revolt, they would probably be ineffective

outside their own tribal areas.

d. The present capabilities of other elements in Iran for directly

challenging the government’s authority are also limited. The ultra-

nationalists, though they have successfully exploited popular senti-

ment to get their way on the explosive oil issue and have gained polit-

ical influence in the process, do not now have the organized strength to

establish continuing political control over the government or to defy

the security forces. The non-Kurdish tribes could present a serious

threat only if they were able to submerge their differences and act in

unison. Individual tribal uprisings, however, could be put down so

long as the security forces remained loyal. In any event, it is doubtful

that any of the tribes could operate beyond its own territory unless a

breakdown of the central government had taken place.

9. The USSR might conceivably launch an invasion of Iran with

guerrilla forces under the lead of the exiled Barzani Kurds and Aber-

baijan Democrats. These exiled elements are few in number, however,

and would not be militarily effective unless supported by large

numbers of Soviet “volunteers.”

10. Development of greater internal stability in Iran will at best re-

quire a number of years. Expanded US economic and technical assist-

ance might bolster the position of those Iranian leaders who have been

advocating internal reform. In terms of material improvement, how-

ever, such US assistance would have to be looked upon as a long-range

investment. Progress would undoubtedly continue to be hampered by

Iranian lack of skill, by graft and political maneuvering, by resistance to

change by both the vested interests and the population at large, and by

lack of perseverance. There is a real danger that Western advisers, as in

the past, will either become overwhelmed by the complexities of the sit-

uation or, by their zealousness, incur the opposition of the Iranians.

Nevertheless, Western aid and guidance, if accepted by the Iranians,

would contribute to the development of greater internal stability.

Iran’s Probable Course of Action

11. Iran’s foreign policy is currently unsettled. Between the end of

World War II and mid-1950 the Iranian Government moved closer to

the West, in part because of its desire for economic assistance, but

mainly because of the menacing attitude of the USSR. The USSR at-

tempted unsuccessfully to discourage Iranian association with the

West by frontier incidents, threatening notes, and propaganda utter-

ances accusing Iran of allowing the US to organize bases for aggression

on its soil and reminding the Iranians of the USSR’s “right” to move in

against such bases under the 1921 Soviet-Iranian Treaty of Friendship.

The Iranian Government made repeated pleas for US economic and

military support, and the Shah and the late Premier Razmara (then

Chief of Staff) asserted that Iran was committed to the West. Never-

theless, Iran has retained a basic preference for isolation and neutrality

and a strong attachment to its traditional and previously successful

policy of preserving Iran’s precarious independence by playing the

great powers off against each other and distributing Iran’s favors im-

partially so as to prevent any one power from gaining a dominant in-

fluence. These sentiments have been reinforced by resentment of past

Anglo-Russian interference in Iranian affairs. The Russian Communists

are generally hated and feared like their Czarist predecessors. The UK,

though no longer generally feared, has remained an object of wide-

spread mistrust and—through its interest in the Anglo-Iranian Oil

Company and the once Iranian-controlled island of Bahrein—a favorite

target of Iranian xenophobia. Within recent months strong pressures

for the curtailment of Western privileges and a return to the old policy

have emerged, particularly in view of: (a) annoyance with the fact that

US economic assistance has fallen short of Iranian expectations;

(b) growing doubts about US willingness and ability to protect Iran;

(c) resentment of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company’s refusal to make

more than limited changes in its concession agreement with Iran;

(d) irritation with Western attempts to push internal changes; and

(e) the Soviet Union’s reversion to a more friendly attitude toward

Iran—a move which stimulated an Iranian hope of staying on good

terms with the USSR. During the fall of 1950 Iran increased its dealings

with the USSR, notably through conclusion of a trade agreement. The

trend toward nationalism and neutrality, earlier manifested in the can-

cellation of VOA and BBC rebroadcast facilities, restriction of travel by

foreign nationals in Iran, and obstinate bargaining over the terms of the

pending $25 million Export-Import Bank loan, has now culminated in

February 1951–February 1952

overwhelming approval by both houses of Parliament of a resolution

for nationalization of the oil industry.

12. It is unlikely that the present movement away from the West

would lead Iran to align itself with the USSR. The vehemence of current

feeling against the British is a manifestation of Iran’s basic resentment

of foreign influence rather than an expression of pro-Soviet sentiment;

the number of Iranians who actively support the USSR is very small.

Soviet sympathizers who have infiltrated the ultra-nationalist faction

will probably try to steer Iran closer to the USSR if the ultra-nationalists

should succeed in solidifying their current position of vantage. It is

probable, however, that other pressure groups would unite to prevent

the alignment of Iran with the USSR. The great majority of Iranians,

and particularly the present regime, are unlikely to be won over by a

friendly Soviet policy even if such a policy were long continued. The fa-

vorable impression which the USSR created by its recent actions has al-

ready begun to wear off, in view of the limited usefulness of the trade

pact, the failure of the Soviet-Iranian border commission to produce

concrete results, and the USSR’s continuing role as a hard bargainer on

such matters as Iran’s gold claims.

13. It is also unlikely that Iran will completely eliminate Western

interests. Although the small group of ultra-nationalist deputies in Par-

liament has succeeded in exploiting popular feeling against the British

and has been able to seize the initiative in the period following Premier

Razmara’s assassination, most of the governing group would probably

wish to retain some Western support as a counter-balance to Soviet

pressures. Despite Parliament’s overwhelming endorsement of the

principle of oil nationalization, it is not certain that the Anglo-Iranian

Oil Company will in fact be obliged to cease its operations in Iran in the

near future, not only because of the magnitude of the economic, legal,

and technical problems involved but also because of the self-interested

opposition of many members of the ruling class.

14. There is little doubt, however, that Iran has embarked on a

course involving a loosening of its connections with the West and a

guarded extension of its dealings with the USSR. Although the British

may be able to patch up their relations with Iran on the oil question, ul-

timate expropriation of the oil company has at least been brought

closer, and the curtailment of the few other commercial advantages

which the UK still enjoys in Iran will undoubtedly continue. The Shah

and some other leaders will probably continue to try to obtain Western

economic and military aid, but Parliament’s willingness to accept such

aid is far from certain. In any event, the Iranian Government can be ex-

pected to insist that US help be provided on Iranian terms, to refuse any

overt commitment to the West, and perhaps to waver in its support of

the US in the UN. Although the Iranian Government will probably not

cancel the US military missions, it may well further curtail the freedom

of action of mission officers and other US and UK officials. Meanwhile,

Iran will probably be willing to develop additional commercial and cul-

tural ties with the USSR, though it will attempt to control the extension

of Soviet influence. Iran would probably not go so far as to grant the

USSR an oil concession or to agree to establishment of a joint Irano-

Soviet oil company.

15. In the event of war, Iran’s policy would probably be as follows:

a. If Iran were attacked, the Iranians would offer some resistance,

meanwhile calling for US and UN aid.

b. If an isolated Soviet or Satellite attack took place against some

other country, Iran would remain neutral or, at most, support the UN

without contributing armed forces. Although Iran is unlikely to restrict

the supply of oil to the West, it would not allow the use of Iranian terri-

tory for air bases.

c. If a general war in which Iran was not initially attacked took

place, Iran would probably attempt to remain neutral. There is a remote

possibility that Iran might attempt to avoid provocation of the USSR by

curtailing the supply of oil to the West, though the financial loss in-

volved would militate against such a move.

16. The extent to which Iran’s association with the West can be

strengthened is problematical. A satisfactory British-Iranian settlement

on the oil issue is a prerequisite to improvement of Iran’s relations with

the West. An expanded US economic assistance program would tend to

strengthen the position of those who have looked to the West for help.

A more explicit US pledge of military support, either unilaterally or

through a US-backed regional security organization, might quiet the

present fears of the Shah concerning the remoteness of Western sup-

port. The assassination of Premier Razmara, however, has not only re-

moved a leading advocate of a pro-Western alignment but has greatly

strengthened the position of the ultra-nationalist leaders. The success

of further US gestures would be rendered questionable by Iran’s under-

lying dislike and fear of foreign influence and by its awareness of its ex-

treme vulnerability to Soviet attack. Most Iranian opinion would prob-

ably remain skeptical about the degree, permanency, and unselfishness

of US interest in strengthening the country. Even given a more favor-

able attitude toward the US, most influential Iranians would probably

oppose any attempt to align Iran firmly with the West on the ground

that such an arrangement would be unduly provocative to the USSR

and at variance with the tradition of maintaining an independent posi-

tion with respect to the great powers.

February 1951–February 1952

14.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Political Operations

Staff, Near East and Africa Division ([name not declassified])

to the Chief of the Near East and Africa Division, Directorate

of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)

Washington, April 11, 1951.

SUBJECT

NSC 107, The Position of the United States with Respect to Iran

1. On 24 March the President approved and directed the imple-

mentation of NSC 107 by all agencies concerned under the coordination

of the Secretary of State.

2. NSC 107 calls for plans and preparations in conjunction with the

United Kingdom to counter possible communist subversion in Iran and

to increase support of the pro-western Iranian Government in the event

of communist seizure of power, such plans and preparations to include

conduct of “special political operations” by the United States and the

15.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Plans Staff, Near East

and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans ([name not

declassified]) to the Acting Chief of the Policy, Plans and

Review Section, Office of Policy Coordination, Directorate of

Plans, Central Intelligence Agency ([name not declassified])

Washington, April 12, 1951.

SUBJECT

Comments on your memorandum, “The Limitations of Diplomacy,” dated 13

March 19512

1. Iran is an interesting case in the context of the attached corre-

spondence. It should be noted at the outset, however, that Iran does not

fall into the category of countries we have helped too lavishly. We have

in fact given the Iranians very little; they feel this keenly in view of

what we have done for Greece and Turkey, and are genuinely skeptical

of the sincerity of our interest in Iran. Moreover, Iran is threatened with

an actual Soviet invasion (as distinct from an indirect, Soviet-inspired

invasion). So it would be somewhat unrealistic to expect Iran to throw

itself lock, stock, and barrel into the Western camp—particularly in the

absence of military commitments from us.

2. These factors necessarily limit the objectives of a covert pro-

gram. The best we can hope for is to prevent Iran’s falling into Soviet

hands during the cold war period. To this end we are taking various

steps designed to strengthen the present (or any anti-Soviet) regime; to

divide, weaken, and discredit the pro-Soviet Tudeh Party and other

hostile elements; to do the same respecting the intensely nationalistic

and chauvinistic elements which, wittingly or unwittingly, serve Soviet

ends by creating instability; and, in the long run, to bring to Iran a

measure of stability. There is no need at this time to establish an Oppo-

sition in the commonly accepted meaning of that word. We are, how-

ever, actively investigating the possibility of establishing an energetic

progressive party designed to attract the best elements from various

factions (including leftists) and to push the economic and political re-

forms necessary to make the people less vulnerable to the blandish-

and signed by the Chief of the Plans Staff.

16.

Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Office of

National Estimates (Langer) to Director of Central

Intelligence Smith

Washington, April 20, 1951.

SUBJECT

Situation in Iran

The situation in Iran is becoming increasingly critical. As a result

of strikes and violence, the Abadan refinery has been closed down, and

production and shipping operations have been restricted. Crude oil ex-

ports have been reduced by 20 percent, and the export of refined

products will cease within a few days. Petroleum experts are at vari-

Memos for DCI (1951) (Substantive). Secret. There is no drafting information on the

memorandum.

ance on the time that must elapse between the settlement of the strike

and the resumption of full production of refined products.

Although Iranian Army reinforcements, including tanks and ar-

mored cars, have been rushed to the oil field area, the situation remains

explosive. At least 20,000 workers are now idle, and anti-British feeling

is running high. Tudeh and National Front agents are active in the area

and can be expected to continue to foment demonstrations and

violence.

If further trouble occurs, there is a possibility that the UK might

send troops to southern Iran. UK Foreign Minister Morrison has stated

that he would not hesitate “to take appropriate action” to safeguard

British lives and property. Two British frigates are standing by at Ku-

wait, another is at Bahrein, and a cruiser is on its way to the Persian

Gulf from Aden. Should any British forces be landed in southern Iran,

not only would Anglo-Iranian relations be further embittered but the

USSR would be given a pretext under the Soviet-Iranian Treaty of 1921

to occupy parts of northern Iran.

A further serious danger is that the combination of Tudeh leader-

ship and deep-seated unrest which has produced the crisis in southern

Iran might undermine the authority of the central government in other

parts of the country. Demonstrations and violence have already oc-

curred in Isfahan, strikes are reported in Mazanderan, and a Tudeh-led

demonstration is reportedly scheduled in Tabriz on 1 May. The Iranian

Chief of Staff is gravely concerned that the Tudeh group might be able

to keep the armed forces off balance by such widely separated activity.

Government preoccupation with disturbances at Abadan and else-

where and obstructive tactics in the Majlis are delaying action on the

government’s internal financial problems and impeding any reason-

able solution of the oil nationalization issue. Although Prime Minister

Ala has recently obtained a vote of confidence in the Majlis, there is

considerable doubt that he can obtain Majlis support for a really effec-

tive attack on Iran’s current problems. In view of the critical nature of

these problems and the necessity for their early solution and because of

the constant danger of further National Front and Tudeh-inspired out-

breaks, the Iranian Government will probably have to adopt extreme

measures if the crisis is to be overcome. Such measures would include:

(a) dissolution of the Majlis; (b) reinstitution of martial law; (c) rule by

decree; and (d) suppression of free speech and assembly.

17.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt)

Washington, April 23, 1951.

The Tehran station submits the following estimate of the situation

in Iran as of 18 April 1951 for the purpose of operational planning.

The position of the Ala Cabinet is considered uncertain despite the

vote of confidence given it 17 April 1951. At present Ala is acting with

extreme caution. Although it appears he has made no working arrange-

ment with Mullah Kashani, the opposition of the National Front has

been neutralized, at least temporarily, and several Front repre-

sentatives such as Fazlullah Zahedi, appointed Minister of Interior,

have been included in the Cabinet. Ala, however, is receiving only lim-

ited active support from the Shah and others and is facing opposition

from Seyyid Zia and his British supporters and from Qavam. Never-

theless Ala may be able to retain the premiership and, if so, he plans to

take stronger measures against the extremists. Most observers, how-

ever, believe Ala will be replaced by Seyyid Zia, a move which the sta-

tion feels would probably occur only with Ala’s full approval as being

in the best interests of Iran. If Seyyid Zia becomes Prime Minister, he

would apparently inaugurate a strong man type of government. It is

believed that the Shah would order dissolution of the Majlis after

Seyyid Zia obtained a vote of confidence, call for new elections and

support Seyyid Zia in governing by decree and forcefully suppressing

Iran 1951–1953. Secret.

18.

Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy

Coordination, Directorate of Plans (Wisner) to the Deputy

Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Dulles)

Washington, April 23, 1951.

SUBJECT

Special Iranian Program

1. As part of our emergency program for Iran, consideration has

been given to a direct subsidy to the Prime Minister to enable him to

strengthen the hand of his supporters and confound his enemies. The

State Department had given preliminary approval to this suggestion

pending clarification of the Iranian political situation and approval of

our Ambassador.

2. The OPC “task force” now in Tehran has cabled stating that the

Ambassador agrees that the time is now ripe for action and has author-

ized an independent OPC approach to Ala with an offer of [dollar

amount not declassified] to be used entirely at his discretion. Speedy ac-

tion is urged in view of the severe test which the Prime Minister will

face this week when he presents his Finance Bill.

3. Steps are being taken to obtain final policy approval from

Deputy Under Secretary Matthews and to consider the desirability of

coordinating our approach to Ala with that which Ambassador Grady

should shortly be authorized to take presenting an official US aid

program.

4. We propose that the initial payment should be [dollar amount not

declassified]. Before approaching Ala OPC Tehran would like assurance

that the full sum will be authorized and that the first installment will

reach them as soon as possible.

5. It is therefore requested that you authorize the immediate dis-

bursement of [dollar amount not declassified] and the additional expendi-

ture, if results warrant, of [dollar amount not declassified] during the fiscal

year 1952.

6. This operation obviously requires special security measures,

and will be handled on “Eyes Only” basis among those who need to

know of it. In view of Ala’s elevated position and personal sensitivity,

tive. Drafted by Roosevelt.

19.

Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Current

Intelligence, Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence

Agency

Washington, April 30, 1951.

SUBJECT

The Soviet Attitude toward the Situation in Iran since the Assassination of

Razmara

1. The situation in Iran since the assassination of Premier Razmara

on 7 March has presented the Soviet Union with favorable opportu-

nities to increase its influence and gain ultimate control over the

country. The ostensible show of non-intervention in the situation on the

part of the USSR calls for a comprehensive review of recent Soviet dip-

lomatic moves, current propaganda, activity along the Soviet-Iranian

border, and the tactics of the outlawed pro-Soviet Tudeh Party. The

possibility of future Soviet intervention under the terms of the 1921

treaty should also be considered.

2. Diplomatically, the USSR has continued its policy, inaugurated

in the latter half of 1950, of displaying friendship for the Iranian Gov-

ernment and not interfering in the government’s problems connected

with oil nationalization, internal unrest, and relations with the British.

There is no evidence that the Soviet Ambassador in Iran has put any

pressure on the Iranian Government. In corroboration of this, Premier

Ala told the French Ambassador in late March that there had been no

Soviet pressure on him. The Soviet Union seems aware that for the time

being any ill-timed Soviet diplomatic pressure or demands for oil

rights might cause these advantages to be forfeited.

Top Secret; ACORN.

February 1951–February 1952

3. Soviet propaganda since 7 March, in its daily reporting on Iran,

reveals the Kremlin’s close interest in developments there, particularly

with reference to the oil situation, the recent strikes, and public demon-

strations. Consistent with its diplomatic effort to disassociate the USSR

from events in Iran, Moscow has refrained from commenting editori-

ally on actions taken by the Iranian Government or speculating on fu-

ture developments. Soviet press and propaganda have avoided any

hint of unfriendliness towards the government or comment on its insta-

bility. Since Razmara’s assassination this propaganda has concentrated

on US–UK rivalry for Iranian oil and US–UK exploitation of Iran. The

Communists’ “clandestine” “Free Azerbaijan” radio in Baku, on the

other hand, has adhered to its previous policy of attacking the Shah,

Premier Ala, and the Majlis as pawns of US–UK imperialism and be-

trayers of the Iranian people.

4. While the Soviet Union is believed capable of invading Iran suc-

cessfully without prior warning, there has been no indication that the

USSR is preparing to take such a step at this time. Iranian military intel-

ligence, although fragmentary, constitutes the best source of informa-

tion on Soviet border activities. This source reports Soviet troop move-

ments on the Azerbaijan frontier and some additional military

activities since late February. These are probably connected with the

annual Soviet maneuvers in this area, which began earlier than usual

this year. Reports that dissident elements (exiled Azerbaijani Demo-

crats and Barzani Kurds) are on the frontier ready to invade Iran have

appeared, as is common during periods of tribal migrations and reg-

ular maneuvers. No reports of any Soviet activity on the Khorassan

sector of the border east of the Caspian Sea have been received. Soviet

military maneuvers on this section of the frontier generally begin later

than those on the Azerbaijan border.

5. Communist policy in Iran since Razmara’s assassination has

been aimed at inciting further agitation on the oil issue while keeping

Communist connections with the disturbances on a covert level. Al-

though there is no firm evidence of pro-Soviet Tudeh Party involve-

ment in the current disturbances, press reports and Iranian officials

commonly blame the Tudeh Party. The Tudeh is said to be behind the

“Organization for the Expropriation of the Anglo Iranian Oil Com-

pany” (AIOC), which, with the National Front (the ultra-nationalist fac-

tion in Parliament), has spearheaded the movement to nationalize

Iran’s oil. The Tudeh, according to Iranian intelligence reports, is also

behind the organization of the “Hayat-i-Islam,” which has been agi-

tating on the oil issue in the North. Tudeh agitators have also been re-

ported in the southern oil fields during the recent AIOC strike. Tudeh

agitation, as reported by Iranian military intelligence, showed a notice-

able increase in February in all parts of the country, but declined mark-

edly in March.

6. Moscow has followed a noncommittal policy concerning Soviet

intervention in Iran under the terms of the 1921 Iranian-Soviet treaty,

and neither the press nor the radio has referred to the treaty since Raz-

mara’s assassination. Soviet Ambassador Sadchikov, conferring with

Satellite officials in Tehran on 16 April, reportedly stated that it was

hardly likely that the Soviets would intervene in Iran if British troops

landed to maintain law and order in the south. He added that any So-

viet action would depend on the duration of the UK action and that fur-

thermore the treaty’s terms would require an appeal to the USSR from

the Tehran government. His delineation of Soviet intentions may have

been an effort to encourage a more forceful British policy towards Iran.

While the USSR undoubtedly realizes that British military forces are

unlikely to occupy the oil area, any Communist-inspired agitation in

the oil fields during the strike was presumably aimed at provoking the

UK. Should Communist-Nationalist agitation tactics bring on new dis-

turbances in the oil area, British intervention would intensify unrest

and hatred of the UK to the USSR’s advantage. On 26 April, a Moscow

commentary alleged British concentration of armed forces in the vi-

cinity of southern Iran and for the first time charged the British with the

intention of “interfering actively in internal affairs should occasion

arise.” Repeated emphasis on the possibility of UK intervention could

be viewed as an unspoken threat of Soviet intervention under the terms

of the 1921 treaty.

20.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,

Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, May 1, 1951.

MEMORANDUM OF INFORMATION NO. 67

FOR

National Estimates Board

SUBJECT

Iranian Developments

1. The elevation of Mohammad Mossadeq, the leader of the ultra-

nationalist National Front Party, to the premiership constitutes a rad-

ical departure in Iran’s political development. Political activity in Iran

has generally consisted in the struggle for power among a small group

of men of the wealthy class whose major interest was to protect the

vested interests of the group as a whole. The interplay of personal in-

terests and rivalries and the personal likes and dislikes of the Shah

were the determining factors in the selection of prime ministers.

2. Mossadeq has come to power by other means. Although he is a

member of the traditional ruling minority, his influence among his

peers is negligible, his personal following in the Majlis is small, and he

is disliked and distrusted by the Shah. In spite of these factors, how-

ever, he has great political strength because of the general appeal of his

constant demand that all foreign influence be eliminated from Iran. He

has the support not only of his National Front Party but also of the Fa-

dayan Islam, a small terrorist group of religious fanatics, the Tudeh

Party (as long as Mossadeq’s chauvinism is directed against the

Western Powers), and probably the great majority of Iran’s peasants,

laborers, and tradesmen, who, though politically inert, can signifi-

cantly affect political developments in Tehran through strikes, demon-

strations, and violence.

3. Because of the intensity of Iranian chauvinism, few Iranian

leaders dare to oppose Mossadeq publicly. It is for this reason that Mos-

sadeq has exerted such a decisive influence over Iranian developments

during the past year. He has blocked the negotiation of US loan and the

conclusion of a revised AIOC agreement. He condoned the assassina-

tion of Razmara on the grounds that the latter was being too lenient

with the British. Finally he pushed the oil nationalization oil bill

Staff Memoranda—1951. Secret. There is no drafting information on the memorandum.

through the Majlis, probably against the better judgment of most of the

deputies, who, however, succumbed to patriotic fervor or feared the

consequences (including assassination) of opposing the measure.

4. During the six weeks when Hussein Ala was Prime Minister,

Mossadeq was chairman of the Majlis Oil Commission appointed to

draw up recommendations for taking over the AIOC installations. The

Shah, Ala, and moderate members of the Majlis probably hoped that

some agreement could be patched up with the AIOC before Mossadeq

could complete his work. Mossadeq, however, reported to Majlis more

than a month ahead of schedule. Increased bitterness toward the UK re-

sulting from the intervening strikes and violence in the oil field area

kept emotions high throughout the country and simplified Mossadeq’s

job in obtaining prompt Majlis approval for his recommendations. The

new law sets up a government committee of twelve to take over oil in-

stallations and provides for setting aside 25 percent of oil revenues to

meet future claims of the “former company.” The Majlis action resulted

in the immediate resignation of Ala, and, on the recommendation of

both the Majlis and the Senate, the Shah asked Mossadeq to form a new

government.

5. Although the responsibilities of office may to some extent act as

a sobering influence on Mossadeq, he will probably pursue the fol-

lowing objectives:

a. Full implementation of the nationalization law and effective Ira-

nian Government control of the oil installations in southern Iran. It is

possible that, if the UK accepted nationalization in principle, Mossadeq

might be willing to conclude a management contract with AIOC, under

which the latter would operate the oil installations under the direction

of an Iranian Government agency. If the UK and AIOC refused to ac-

cept these terms, Mossadeq would probably take over the oil installa-

tions by force even at the risk of closing down the whole industry. In

such an eventuality, he would probably try to obtain foreign techni-

cians through individual contracts to restart production.

b. The elimination of other manifestations of foreign influence in

Iran. It is extremely unlikely that Mossadeq would accept international

loans from the Export-Import Bank or IBRD. He might even refuse to

accept further US military aid and request the US Military Missions to

leave the country.

6. In pursuit of these objectives, Mossadeq will probably adopt a

lenient attitude toward manifestations of nationalist fervor, even if in-

dulged in by members of the Tudeh Party. He has consistently opposed

February 1951–February 1952

martial law and restrictions on speech, assembly, and the press. There

is a danger that the Tudeh Party may attempt to take advantage of Mos-

sadeq’s leniency in this respect to foment violence and disturbances

throughout the country. Mossadeq may attempt to win Tudeh support

(at least during the current oil crisis) by legalizing their status. In the

long run, however, the National Front and Tudeh will almost certainly

clash, for their fundamental aims are diametrically opposed.

7. The most significant aspect of Mossadeq’s advent to power is

that the more moderate elements in Iran’s governing class appear to

have lost control of the situation. Many deputies in the Majlis sup-

ported Mossadeq for Prime Minister in the hope that the oil crisis, for

which he is largely responsible, would result in his own downfall. In

view of his strong popular backing, however, he will not be easily dis-

placed. If he obtains increased revenues from Iran’s oil resources, his

position will be stronger than ever. If he fails to solve the oil crisis, he

can place the blame entirely on the British and will lose little if any of

his popular support. There are probably only two major developments,

each of which would lead to critical situations, which could prevent

him from achieving his objective:

a. UK occupation of the oil installations; and

b. the establishment under the aegis of the Shah of a semi-

dictatorial regime willing to negotiate a new agreement with AIOC on

the latter’s terms. The first alternative would probably result from the

refusal of the AIOC, presumably backed by the UK Government, to ne-

gotiate on Mossadeq’s terms. The second alternative would result from

the opposition of Iran’s vested interests, including the Shah, to the

growing power of Mossadeq. The likelihood of either alternative occur-

ring would be increased very greatly by widespread violence and dem-

onstrations. The stability of Mossadeq’s regime will, therefore, depend

to a large extent on his relations with the Tudeh Party.

21.

Progress Report Prepared for the National Security Council

Washington, May 2, 1951.

SUBJECT

First Progress Report on NSC 107, “The Position of the United States with

Respect to Iran”

NSC 1073 was approved as Governmental policy on March 14. It is

requested that this Progress Report, as of April 24 be circulated to the

members of the Council for their information.

I. The General Situation

Since the preparation of NSC 107 the situation in Iran has progres-

sively deteriorated. The assassination of Prime Minister Razmara by a

religious fanatic was followed immediately by the vote of the Parlia-

ment in favor of nationalization of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, the

assassination of one of Razmara’s cabinet ministers, widespread dem-

onstrations and disorders, and by a serious and crippling strike in the

southern oil fields and the Abadan refinery. The Communist (Tudeh)

Party is exploiting the situation, particularly the oil strikes, to the ut-

most. While much of what has appeared in the American press has

been exaggerated, the situation in Iran is very serious.

The Iranian Government, headed by Prime Minister Hossein Ala,

appointed to succeed Razmara, has acted throughout the crisis with

commendable firmness. At the time of his appointment, Prime Minister

Ala was looked upon both in Iran and abroad as an honest and patriotic

man but weak. In the six weeks he has been in office, however, he has

demonstrated considerable strength and is presently giving Iran admi-

rable leadership. He has recently obtained an almost unanimous vote

of confidence from Parliament.

The Shah, while giving his Prime Minister full support, has not ex-

ercised all of the leadership and guidance which would be desirable at

present. This, however, is due at least partially to ill health. He is suf-

fering from chronic appendicitis and is considering leaving the country

for an operation for this and possibly other ailments.

February 1951–February 1952

Action Taken

In line with the policy statement contained in NSC 107, the United

States has:

1. Informed the Shah and Prime Minister Ala that they have the

full support of the United States Government.

2. Urged the British Government to take similar action.

3. Inaugurated special political measures as provided for in NSC

107.

4. Cautioned the British Government against taking any “strong”

measures such as manipulation into office of a dictatorial Prime Min-

ister who would attempt to nullify the popular nationalization resolu-

tion, or the threat to use or actual use of force in the southern oil fields

or refinery.

5. Taken every opportunity to strengthen the American position in

Iran by good will gestures such as sending to Iran the equipment and

technicians to combat a threatened locust plague.

Action Contemplated

The Department of State has under urgent consideration, for rec-

ommendation to the President, plans for supporting the present Iranian

Government, particularly the Shah, on a more substantial, urgent and

dramatic scale than has been possible in the past.

II. The Oil Question

Both houses of the Iranian Parliament six weeks ago voted in favor

of nationalization of Iran’s petroleum industry and requested the Oil

Commission of the lower house to prepare a report within two months

on the best manner of implementing the resolution. The Commission is

now considering the question. The idea of nationalization has become

imbedded in the Iranian people and a great deal of emotionalism and

excitement has been stirred up over the question.

It is the opinion of all American observers in Iran and of the De-

partment of State that any arrangement which may be worked out be-

tween the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company and the Iranian Government

must, at least in principle, recognize nationalization. This position was

taken by the Department’s representatives in a series of meetings with

the British held in Washington to discuss the problem. The British dele-

gation did not share this view, although it realized that the feeling for

nationalization in Iran was very strong. The British first proposed

making the Iranians an offer of an equal share of the Company’s profits

and immediate steps to include Iranians in the direction of the Com-

pany. The Company would, under this proposal, become progressively

“Iranized” until, upon the end of the concession in 1993, it would be to-

22.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, May 3, 1951.

1. For our post operational planning estimate of situation 1 May

1951 follows.

as great surprise even to Seyyid Zia who apparently expected be

chosen but believes Mosadeq has committed political suicide and is

not displeased. Ala resigned because of conviction Majlis and Senate

would pass oil bill in spite of his private opposition and recognition in-

ability to execute. UK protest probably spurred Ala’s action and Majlis

determination pass oil bill. Mosadeq has replaced Ala’s policy employ

limited force maintain order by policy appeal patriotism Iran. Public to

refrain action and avoid disorder. Lack of incident 1 May 1951 first test

validity this approach. Mosadeq program of strengthening political in-

dependence, assuring economic independence, and extending social

justice, well-being and peace of all classes of the population widely

welcomed. Cabinet members not yet selected. Ambiguities of oil bill

make manner implementation uncertain. Execution Mosadeq program

will probably bring showdown between vested interests which have ef-

fectively sabotaged past efforts political and social reform and the ill

defined and semi-articulate group composed of white-collar workers,

intellectuals, students, shopkeepers and skilled laborers. It is from

group that Tudeh has derived its main support but this has been to

some extent diverted by the National Front and could be even further

diverted by Mosadeq’s continued success. Such diversion will be op-

posed by Tudeh sympathizers who may be expected to exert every ef-

fort gain control Mosadeq Government. This will split the National

Front and present a serious danger. If Mosadeq can pass liberal legisla-

tion on the political front and provide enough money on the economic

front to improve living condition of his followers his prospects of de-

feating Tudeh are good. If he can control it the potential force at Mo-

sadeq’s disposal is probably sufficient to overcome much of the opposi-

tion of the vested interests. It is also unlikely if Mosadeq succeeds that

Shah will or can oppose him in his program or reform. Mosadeq’s age

and ill health provide further uncertainty in any forecast.

Part Two.

Iran 1951–1953. Top Secret.

23.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 899

Tehran, May 4, 1951.

Transmitting a Memorandum Entitled “Estimate of the Political

Strength of the Mossadeq Government”.

There is transmitted herewith for the consideration of the Depart-

ment a memorandum entitled “Estimate of the Political Strength of the

Mossadeq Government” which has been prepared by Mr. Stutesman

and Mr. Cuomo of the Embassy staff.

Drafted by Richards. Attachment drafted by Stutesman and Cuomo. Sent by pouch.

February 1951–February 1952

I am confident that the Department will find the enclosed memo-

randum of considerable interest. The enigmatic Dr. Mosadeq is to exert

considerable influence in Iran in the immediate future. The skill with

which he conducts the affairs of the government, and the political

course which he follows will probably determine the future not only of

the vitally important oil resources of this country, but perhaps of the

country itself.

Mosadeq is a dramatic demagogue who appears to be without par-

ticular wisdom or background for government. These very factors

make his presence at the head of the government especially important.

He has qualities which, while not commending him to the world, may

establish his place firmly in the minds of the people as a popular leader.

I am inclined to doubt the statement in the memorandum that Mo-

sadeq “has the confidence of the majority of Iranians”. The majority of

the Iranians are illiterate and uninformed and are concerned only with

their daily living. Inside the principal towns the name of Mosadeq is

probably little better known than was that of Razmara, Mansour, or

Saleh. It is nevertheless true that Dr. Mosadeq does command a large

following of the more articulate in the cities and from this he derives his

strength.

For the time being we should, I believe, show a willingness posi-

tively to cooperate with the Mosadeq Government, as is suggested in

the concluding paragraphs of the memorandum. The Ambassador in-

tends to follow this policy unless the Department instructs to the con-

trary.

For the Ambassador:

Arthur L. Richards

Counselor of Embassy

Attachment

ESTIMATE OF THE POLITICAL STRENGTH OF THE

MOSADEQ GOVERNMENT

It seems appropriate at this time to make an estimate of the situa-

tion in Iran and of the political strength of the Mosadeq Government.

From this estimate it may be possible also to perceive some indications

of further developments, although this paper will not go into that as-

pect of the future.

The resignation of Prime Minister Hosein Ala and the advent of

Mohammed Mosadeq to power have been adequately described else-

where. At the present Dr. Mosadeq and his cabinet are only estab-

lishing themselves and, also for the present, the choice of the Prime

Minister and his cabinet appears to please many sections of the Iranian

public although for different reasons, some of which are described

below.

Any estimate of the political strength of the Mosadeq Government

must take cognizance of the wide speculation current in Tehran re-

garding the length of time which the Prime Minister will be able to re-

tain power. Speculation ranges from a week to many months tenure of

office. But all such conjecture must balance the forces at play about the

new Government.

The sources of strength which are available to Prime Minister Mo-

sadeq of course depend on his physical ability to survive the arduous

task of leading an Iranian Government. Dr. Mosadeq is in his seventies

and also was ill last winter to an extent that he could not come to Majlis

sessions for a period. His fainting spells, which have never been diag-

nosed to Embassy satisfaction as either solely political or entirely med-

ical manifestations, are still with him since he fainted twice on May 3rd,

once while visiting a prison and reminiscing on his own incarceration

and once when some flowers and compliments were pressed upon him

by a crowd of admirers. However, if his health holds out it can be stated

that the following sources of strength may be utilized to keep him in

power.

Primary among these sources of strength is popular support. This

is not an easy factor to describe in this country of illiterate people who

have few political aspirations and are so deeply concerned in barely

sustaining their existence. However, for the first time in many years a

Prime Minister is in power who has the confidence of the majority of

Iranians and himself believes that his primary function is “to close the

gap between the Government and the people which has been the his-

toric cause for discontent in the past”, a phrase he used in speaking to

the Ambassador on May 2nd.

Secondly, he may use the oil issue for his own benefit since he can

conceivably extend to any political issue today his claim that an attack

on Mosadeq is an attack on the best interests of the people. Concur-

rently he can accuse his critics of being pro-British by being anti-

Mosadeq. Also in this connection Dr. Mosadeq may well be the only

politician in Iran today who might make a deal with the British to settle

the oil question on a practical basis which it increasingly appears must

include British personnel continuing to man the oil fields and refinery.

Only Dr. Mosadeq might be able to accomplish this without bringing a

general accusation of treason on his head. His stand against foreign in-

fluence in Iran and particularly his well known leadership in the

struggle to nationalize the AIOC has given him a good vantage point

from which to work in settling this outstanding and delicate matter. Al-

ready there are straws in the wind showing the Prime Minister’s in-

terest in bringing the matter to some conclusion, for on May 3rd he sent

February 1951–February 1952

emissaries to the British Embassy, as Counselor Middleton described it

“to feel us out as to the next move”. This may be considered a move of

the Prime Minister’s to establish a framework for negotiations with the

British.

Further, Prime Minister Mosadeq is an experienced politician and

he has taken a cautious approach to the major issues of the day which

could bring him opposition. His program as announced on presenta-

tion of his Government to the Majlis contained only two points on

which there could conceivably be Majlis debate, and both these

points—execution of nationalization of the oil industry and revision of

the electoral law—were couched in terms which allowed no immediate

opposition. His strategy in choosing a cabinet which has been called al-

ready by one newspaper a “national union cabinet” was apparently

built to prevent controversy with the Majlis. It is deliberately not a Na-

tional Front cabinet. Another move in this cautious line of avoiding

open dissatisfaction in the Majlis was Dr. Mosadeq’s first step to imple-

ment his long sought program of seeking electoral reform by calling for

representatives of the Fractions of the Majlis to meet with the cabinet

ministers concerned, in working out an acceptable electoral reform. He

has avoided the open fighting on the Majlis floor which holds such

dangers for any Government.

Finally, there is presently real support for Prime Minister Mosadeq

in the ranks of the National Front coalition which, if it holds together in

this support, can materially assist him in the Majlis and before the

people. Although National Front Deputies are not entering the cabinet

they have demonstrated their support for their erstwhile Majlis leader.

Even leftist Deputies Azad and Haerizadeh on May Day urged the

workers to heed and support the Mosadeq Government.

However, there are many factors present in the situation today

which may work to bring about the downfall of the Mosadeq

Government.

First of all is the character of the man himself. His emotions under

stress have been demonstrated. He is more used to opposing than gov-

erning, and although he has held some administrative posts in the past

his abilities to administer such complicated problems as face the Prime

Minister today are doubtful. His age and recent ill health also leave him

weak in face of these tremendous burdens, administration and leader-

ship. Finally, and it may be, most dangerously, he has not shown a clear

perception of the problems facing Iran and his solutions as presented in

the Majlis and to the Ambassador on May 2nd are notably vague and

ill-defined in detail. Possibly this has been deliberate political

shrewdness but it might be disastrous if he continues such a vague ap-

proach to future problems.

Internal political forces which may defeat the Mosadeq program

certainly include the reactionaries who can be expected to oppose vig-

orously any social or economic reform program. The Court and the Par-

liament represent landed and wealthy interests who will resist any at-

tacks on their prerogatives or profits. Already several representatives

of the Court and old line political circles have indicated delight that

Mosadeq is Prime Minister because he must now wrestle with the

problems which he previously forced on the Government. Close candi-

date for Premiership, Seyid Zia, on the day that Mosadeq’s appoint-

ment was announced, gleefully told an Embassy officer that he was

very pleased at this development which would remove Mosadeq from

the Majlis and surely cause him to fall on his face while Prime Minister.

The Shah reportedly indicated to a British Embassy source on May 3rd

that Dr. Mosadeq’s stay in power was not expected to continue for a

long time.

If Dr. Mosadeq fails to correct the ancient evils of oppressive Gov-

ernment and economic woes he will lose much popular support and in-

crease popular disappointment and cynicism. Distrust and dislike of

Government is deep-rooted in Iran and even a popular hero like Dr.

Mosadeq will have difficulty in overcoming this, even without the

added problems of possible loss of oil revenues and lack of U.S. eco-

nomic aid. He has emphasized his concern in this regard and his strong

desire to have an economic program for the alleviation of popular

discontent.

The leftist part in the picture is not yet clear. Several National Front

Deputies who were close to Mosadeq represent a radical leftist ap-

proach to politics. Their brand of political action will probably be

pressed on Mosadeq who may be forced to take such action which will

split his National Front supporters, presently a coalition of radical and

moderate elements, into opposing elements.

In summary, while there are many forces which may well work to

bring the downfall of this Mosadeq Government it is not inevitable that

it will fall in the immediate future. Further, it is entirely possible that a

complete failure of the Mosadeq Government to implement the social

program which the nation so evidently expects will be blamed on the

reactionaries and the British and possibly on us. His utter failure might

drive numbers of presently moderate Iranian liberals, discontented

with further abortive attempts to improve conditions within the ex-

isting frame work of Government, to seek alliance with the Commu-

nists in achieving reforms through drastic means.

It may well be advisable for the United States to indicate support

of the Mosadeq Government. By increasing Dr. Mosadeq’s confidence

in U.S. efforts to assist Iran we may well bring his Government to coop-

erate in implementing our programs here. His aims, while presently

24.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, May 6, 1951.

1. Following is joint OSO–OPC interim reply ref tel submitted

without ref Grady or consultation with [less than 1 line not declassified]

who presently absent Tehran.

May 51. Reassessment situation in light events past five days indicate

somewhat more clearly following points:

a. Mosadeq personally receiving more popular support both from

within and outside National Front than has been accorded other recent

govts.

b. His choice of cabinet while somewhat disappointing has not yet

evoked much opposition.

Iran 1951–1953. Secret. No telegram number appears on the source text.

mented by encouraging legitimate indigenous liberal progressive

movements which detract from or supplant Tudeh.

g. Oil nationalization and 9 point Mosadeq proposal4 is a fact

which cannot be reversed without major upheaval or long festering

wounds, reasonable moderation of implementation probably is best

that can be hoped for.

h. US Government probably is only outside power capable

exerting moderating influence on present government.

3. Field plans for concrete long range operation by TEHEG are sub-

following alternative course now appears open to us:

a. Continue watchful-waiting until course present government

better determined.

b. Support Mosadeq directly, or through his key appointees, by di-

rect approach.

c. Attempt replace Mosadeq government.

4. Of above alternatives we seriously doubt feasibility and wisdom

our attempt replace this government. In first place we do not have ma-

chine smoothly to effect change. Secondly, of the opposition leaders

presently in sight (Seyyid Zia, Qavam, Zahedi), each have disadvan-

tage outweighing their advantages, and we doubt if any are capable of

mustering Mosadeq’s strength or receive the broad popular support

which is being accorded him. Moreover, it now appears doubtful

whether any rightist opposition can be expected to weaken Tudeh to

extent Mosadeq and National Front possibly can do. Tentatively, there-

fore, we are inclined to view that wisest course may be to support Mo-

ment 15).

February 1951–February 1952

sadeq, however, risks of this course, including effects possible UK and

other reaction, must yet be fully weighed.

5. Although we are not yet in position estimate this aspect situation

clearly, we believe Mosadeq probably would be receptive to direct

approach.

25.

Minutes of Director of Central Intelligence Smith’s Meeting

Washington, May 9, 1951.

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Iran.]

Mr. Dulles stated that in his opinion only one thing could save the

situation in Iran, namely to have the Shah throw out Mossadeq, close

the Majlis and temporarily rule by decree. At a later date a new premier

could be installed with our help. The Director asked Mr. Dulles to get in

touch with Mr. Matthews and Mr. McGhee at State Department and

discuss this matter. If we are to act along these lines, it may be neces-

sary to have an NSC directive.

26.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, May 10, 1951.

SUBJECT

Conversation between Messrs. George McGhee, Burton Berry, and William

Rountree of the State Department, and Allen Dulles and Kermit Roosevelt of

CIA, Thursday, 10 May 1951

1. Mr. Dulles emphasized to Mr. McGhee the urgent importance

that CIA attaches to the Iranian situation. He stated that he felt the time

might come very shortly when the Shah would have to choose between

making a fight for his kingdom and going into exile. If he chooses to

fight, his course of action would probably have to be that of dissolving

the Majlis, replacing Mossadeq as Prime Minister with a man upon

whom he could rely, and governing the country as his father did, by de-

cree. Mr. Dulles suggested that the Shah might require considerable

moral and practical support before he would undertake such a course

and that we should be prepared to throw all our weight where it would

do the most good to preserve Iran from Soviet domination. He went on

to say that he had discussed with DCI this proposition and that DCI

had indicated his desire to do whatever would be helpful in this regard.

Consideration might be given to sending an individual in whom the

Shah had great personal confidence to Tehran to stiffen the Shah’s will

to resist and to assure him of American support. In response to Mr.

McGhee’s question, Mr. Dulles indicated that there seemed to be gen-

eral agreement that Ambassador George Allen2 would be the best pos-

sible person for the job, but that it was recognized that there were very

grave practical difficulties in the way of his use.

2. In subsequent discussion it was agreed that it would not be fea-

sible to send George Allen to Tehran under the circumstances. Various

other individuals were considered in this connection, but most had to

be discarded for one reason or another. Mr. Dulles suggested that

Nelson Rockefeller might quite plausibly visit Iran as well as other

parts of the Near East, and State Department representatives felt this

suggestion had great merit. The names of Colonel Sexton and General

Gerow were also mentioned, as were Mr. Charles Suydam and Dr.

Claude E. Forkner. The latter two were considered to be particularly

promising.

Iran. Top Secret.

27.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, May 16, 1951.

Brief Informal Summary of the Points Raised in the Discussion

at the 91st Meeting of the National Security Council of the

Position of the United States With Respect to Iran

The Secretary of State opened the discussion by informing the

Council of the most recent British proposal requesting United States

support if the British felt compelled to send military forces into Iran to

prevent forcible seizure of the A.I.O.C. by the Iranian Government. The

Secretary of State requested the guidance of the President and Council

in deciding what course should be followed.

He commenced by explaining that he was unalterably opposed to

lending any assistance to the British in the event that they decided to

send in troops to take up areas against the legally constituted gov-

ernment of Iran. He believed we should vigorously oppose this British

proposal, which was sheer madness. He pointed to the possibility of

such a move by the British Government opening the way to a Soviet in-

cursion into Iran by invocation of the treaty between Iran and the So-

viet Union, quite apart from the disastrous effect that the British move

would have on world opinion.

The Secretary of State indicated, however, that the United States

might well support intervention if the Communist (Tudeh) Party at-

tempted to subvert the legal government of Iran.

In general, the members of the Council concurred in the views ex-

pressed, but the point was made that we could not afford to be neutral

with respect to the controversy between Britain and Iran. We should in-

deed give vigorous support to the British in reaching an equitable set-

tlement short of any proposal to assist them if they resorted to the use

of armed forces against the present Iranian Government.

In this connection it was pointed out that the Iranian Prime Min-

ister and Government had unilaterally broken a contract and that such

a breach of contract was not only wrong in itself, but was likely to set an

example and precedent which would induce Iraq and other countries

to suppose that they could undertake similar unilateral action. This was

a highly contagious situation which we should do all in our power to

check.

The suggestion was also put forward that if all negotiations on the

governmental level failed to produce a reasonable settlement of the oil

controversy, it might be possible for private American oil men to act as

intermediaries between the British and the Iranians. Such a proposal

was strictly confined to the proffer of good offices, it being clearly un-

derstood that no one advocated any plan which involved an American

oil company taking over the operations of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Com-

pany. If such moves were under consideration by private American

business men, it was agreed that they should be discouraged.

It was further pointed out that while the United States Govern-

ment should eschew the use of force against the present Iranian Gov-

ernment, either unilaterally or along with the British, in preventing sei-

zure of the oil concession, this should not be regarded as constituting a

precedent which would prevent the United States ever undertaking the

use of military force in certain contingencies in the future. We might ac-

tually be compelled under certain circumstances to do so.

February 1951–February 1952

Finally, it was suggested that it would be well to explore the possi-

bility of an agreement between the British and Iranian Governments

which would give the oil concession to the Iranian Government as it

was demanding, but would continue to permit the British to control the

actual distribution of the oil to the consumers in the Western world and

prevent the Soviets from securing it.

28.

Special Estimate

SE–6

Washington, May 22, 1951.

CURRENT DEVELOPMENT IN IRAN

Conclusions

1. The clash of interests between Iran and the UK over Iran’s oil re-

sources has reached a critical stage with the elevation of Mohammad

Mossadeq, the leader of the ultra-nationalist National Front group, to

the premiership. Although a real effort will undoubtedly be made to

reach a compromise settlement, a solution will be achieved only with

great difficulty. In any event, there is little indication that Mossadeq

and the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (AIOC) will modify their respec-

tive stands in sufficient time to permit an early settlement of the issue.

2. Although there are important elements opposed to Mossadeq, it

is unlikely that he can be removed from power so long as the oil ques-

tion remains a burning issue, except by violence or by the establish-

ment of a semi-dictatorial regime under the aegis of the Shah. In the

present highly inflammatory state of Iranian public opinion, an attempt

to set up a non-parliamentary regime would involve grave risks which

the Shah has thus far shown no willingness to take.

3. As a result of the present impasse, the following critical develop-

ments may occur before a settlement is reached:

SE–6 Current Developments in Iran. Top Secret. According to the note on the covering

sheet, the estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence on May 18. The

Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of

State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff participated in the

preparation of this estimate. All members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee con-

curred in this estimate, except as noted by the Director of Intelligence, USAF, with regard

to paragraph 4.

a. Mossadeq might take physical possession of the oil installations

now operated by the AIOC. He may also require the British employees

of AIOC to leave the country.

b. The UK has indicated that it will not employ force in Iran

without prior consultation with the US. It is unlikely that the UK would

attempt by force to forestall or counter physical occupation of the oil in-

stallations by the Iranian Government, but the UK could and might

land troops in Iran for the actual or alleged purpose of safeguarding

British lives in the event of further violence or sabotage.

c. There is a serious possibility that the landing of British troops in

southern Iran, for whatever reason, would be taken by the USSR as a

pretext for sending its troops into northern Iran.

d. In the event of further demonstrations and violence, which may

well occur at any time, the Tudeh Party might be able to seriously

undermine internal security. This danger would be increased if, as is

possible, Mossadeq legalizes the status of the Tudeh Party or is un-

willing to use Iranian armed forces to maintain order.

e. The flow of Iranian oil to Western markets, which was recently

curtailed for about two weeks, might be again interrupted by a recur-

rence of strikes in the oil field area or by a, b, c, or d above.

4. Any intensification of the current crisis would give the USSR

added opportunities for exploiting the local unrest and might eventu-

ally enable the USSR to deny a large part or the whole of the Iranian oil

supply to the Western Powers.

Discussion

1. Mohammad Mossadeq, Iran’s new Prime Minister, is an extreme

nationalist. He will attempt to curtail severely foreign influence in Iran

and to adopt a neutralist policy toward the East-West struggle. As he is

also an impractical visionary and a poor administrator, it is unlikely

that he will do very much to solve the country’s critical economic and

social problems. Nevertheless, because he is an astute politician and

has strong popular support on the oil issue at least, he will probably not

be easily displaced while that issue is still unsettled. In internal affairs

Mossadeq has criticized former Iranian governments for their failure to

achieve social benefits for the people and has opposed measures de-

signed to restrict freedom of speech, assembly, and the press. Politi-

February 1951–February 1952

cally, he has urged that the Shah be stripped of power and that the

Majlis become the dominant factor in the government. However, he

does not believe that the present members of the Majlis truly represent

the interests of the Iranian people and advocates electoral reform.

2. Mossadeq is at present in a strong political position, despite the

facts that he has few personal followers in the Majlis or in the tradi-

tional ruling class as a whole and that he is disliked and distrusted by

the Shah. Unlike his predecessors, he is not dependent on the Shah’s

favor or on factional politics in the Majlis. He has come to power as the

leader of a national movement which has aroused intense popular sup-

port. This circumstance has caused the Majlis to nominate him to the

Shah and compelled the Shah to appoint him to office. Fundamentally

his strength derives from, and is in direct proportion to, the intensity of

feeling against the British over the oil issue. Although other critical

problems will plague his administration, they are not likely to cause his

downfall so long as the oil crisis remains a burning issue. Mossadeq’s

campaign against the AIOC has had the support not only of his Na-

tional Front group but also of the Fedayan Islam (the small terrorist

group of religious fanatics who were responsible for Razmara’s assassi-

nation), the illegal Tudeh (Communist) Party, and probably the great

majority of Iran’s laborers, trades-men, and students, who can signifi-

cantly affect political developments in Iran through strikes, demonstra-

tions, and violence. Both the Fedayan Islam and the Tudeh Party, how-

ever, are constantly attempting to coerce Mossadeq into adopting more

extreme measures against Western interests. Fedayan Islam has appar-

ently unseated its more moderate leader and has threatened Mos-

sadeq’s life. Meanwhile, the Tudeh Party has gone beyond nationaliza-

tion of the oil industry to demand ousting of the US military mission,

refusal of US arms assistance, and closer relations with the USSR.

3. Because of the wide support for Mossadeq’s chauvinistic cru-

sade, few Iranian leaders dared oppose him publicly. His influence in

the Majlis was largely responsible for Razmara’s failure to obtain a re-

vised AIOC agreement and loans from the Export-Import Bank and the

IBRD. He condoned the assassination of Razmara on the grounds that

the latter was traitorously lenient in his negotiations with the AIOC. Fi-

nally, he pushed the oil nationalization bills through the Majlis against

the wishes of the Shah and Prime Minister Ala. Many of the Majlis dep-

uties probably voted for the measures against their better judgment,

succumbing to the emotionalism of Mossadeq’s appeal or fearing the

consequences (possibly including assassination) of opposing the

measure.

4. When Hussein Ala was Prime Minister, Mossadeq was

chairman of the Majlis Oil Commission appointed to draw up recom-

mendations for taking over the AIOC installations. The Shah, Prime

Minister Ala, and moderate members of the Majlis probably hoped that

some agreement could be patched up with the AIOC before Mossadeq

could complete his work. Mossadeq, however, reported to the Majlis

more than a month ahead of schedule. Increased bitterness toward the

UK, reinforced by the intervening strikes and violence in the oil field

area, kept emotions high throughout the country and simplified Mos-

sadeq’s job in obtaining prompt Majlis approval for his recommenda-

tions. The new law sets up a government committee to act as trustee for

the oil properties until an Iranian Company can be established and pro-

vides for setting aside 25 percent of oil revenues to meet future claims

of the “former company.” Mossadeq’s precipitate move to force action

on the oil issue resulted in the immediate resignation of Ala.

5. Although the responsibilities of office may to some extent act as

a sobering influence on Mossadeq, he will almost certainly attempt to

implement the nationalization law and gain effective control of the oil

installations in southern Iran. He might be willing to conclude a man-

agement contract with AIOC, under which the latter would operate the

oil installations under the direction of an Iranian company. However,

he would probably prefer to obtain the technical assistance Iran needs

by means of separate contracts with individual specialists. If, in fact,

Mossadeq is able to reach a settlement with the AIOC which will sub-

stantially increase Iran’s oil revenues and provide for Iranian supervi-

sion of the oil installations, he will have achieved his purpose. Al-

though his prestige would be high, his position would probably be

rapidly weakened by any considerable decline of anti-British feeling or

by his inability to cope with Iran’s fundamental economic and social

problems. There is some danger that he might attempt to maintain him-

self in power by turning his chauvinistic crusade against the US. He

might even refuse to accept further US military aid and request the US

military missions to leave the country.

6. In view of the fact that both Iran and the UK have a very great

interest in the uninterrupted production of Iranian oil, a real effort will

undoubtedly be made to reach a compromise settlement. However, in

view of the attitude of both governments, a settlement can probably be

reached only with great difficulty. The 11-man Oil Committee has al-

ready threatened to revoke the residence permits of AIOC’s foreign

staff unless the AIOC turns over its oil installations to the Iranian Gov-

ernment. The UK has taken the position that Iran has no right unilater-

ally to abrogate its contract with AIOC and, therefore, no right to ex-

propriate the oil installations under the guise of nationalization. The

UK has proposed the establishment of a new British company to run

operations in Iran, which would include Iranians on the board of di-

rectors; equal sharing of profits; and a progressive increase in the

number of Iranians employed by the company. Mossadeq will un-

February 1951–February 1952

doubtedly turn down this offer, for it manifestly fails to meet the re-

quirements of the oil nationalization law. The proposal certainly does

not represent the final British position. However, a serious danger

exists that critical developments will occur before the parties, particu-

larly the British, have sufficiently modified their respective positions to

permit initiation of genuine negotiations.

7. The present impasse in the oil situation may lead to any one or

more of the following critical situations:

a. Mossadeq is committed to a policy of expropriation. On the basis

of his past actions, it is extremely unlikely that he will accept anything

less than effective Iranian control of the oil industry. Consequently, if

there is no early relaxation of the British position, he will probably at-

tempt to take physical possession of the oil installations even at the risk

of closing down the whole industry.

b. The UK has indicated that it will not employ force in Iran

without prior consultation with the US. It is unlikely that the UK would

send its troops into the oil field area to forestall or counter occupation

of the oil installations by the Iranian Government, but the UK could

and might land troops in Iran for the actual or alleged purpose of safe-

guarding British lives and property in the event of further violence or

sabotage. The British Government is under public pressure to adopt a

strong policy against Iran, and British officials have indicated that they

will have to consider very seriously resorting to military force if Iran

unilaterally seizes the oil installations. If British troops landed in

southern Iran and Iranian forces were already in the area or were sub-

sequently sent into the area, for whatever reason, there might be

clashes between British and Iranian troops with inevitable serious con-

sequences, probably including an interruption in the flow of oil. More-

over, the landing of British troops in southern Iran might be taken by

the USSR as a pretext for sending troops into northern Iran.

c. Anti-British feeling will remain strong, and the danger of dem-

onstrations and violence will continue. Mossadeq has consistently op-

posed martial law and restrictions on the freedom of speech, assembly,

and the press. One of his first acts in office was to remove a ban on May

Day demonstrations in Tehran, and martial law may soon be lifted in

the Abadan area. Furthermore, although the Tudeh Party has begun to

attack Mossadeq, he may yield to its demand for legal status. There is a

danger that the Tudeh Party may attempt to take advantage of Mos-

sadeq’s leniency to foment disturbances throughout the country and

that Mossadeq will be unwilling to use Iranian armed forces to main-

tain order. In view of the tension and general unrest in the country,

Tudeh activity might seriously undermine internal security.

d. If Mossadeq takes physical possession of the oil installations, he

will undoubtedly seek foreign assistance in operating the oil industry.

29.

Memorandum From Henry Villard of the Policy Planning

Staff to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Staff (Nitze)

Washington, May 24, 1951.

IRANIAN SITUATION

On the basis of a talk with Allen Dulles last night, and with one of

his operatives just returned from Iran, I offer the following further com-

ments in respect to the oil nationalization situation:

1. Nationalization has gone so far in the minds of the Iranians that

there is no prospect whatever of a “negotiated” settlement. Feeling is

running so high that the best that might be salvaged from the present

situation is an operating contract for the British, although even this is

only a possibility. We might as well reconcile ourselves to a fait ac-

compli as far as nationalization is concerned but should not allow the

principle of compensation to go by default.

2. The Iranians have not yet faced up to the problem of production,

operation and marketing of the oil supplies. The main objective has

Secret.

February 1951–February 1952

been to nail down the nationalization of the company and they are only

now beginning to grapple with the details. In doing so, however, they

are not likely to grant the British any rights tending to preserve a sem-

blance of British ownership, even though it means cutting off their nose

to spite their face. As Ambassador Grady says in regard to the latter

point, they prefer to do it that way.

3. CIA stands ready to proceed at any time with the plan it had in

mind when Ala was Prime Minister, provided a useful purpose can be

perceived. At present, however, the feeling is that such an effort would

be wasted. Ala himself is no longer in a position to utilize the scheme

effectively, and there is no one else who can be trusted. I concur in this

view.

4. An American physician, Dr. Forkner of New York, is scheduled

to leave next week to examine the Shah and diagnose his trouble. No

question of an operation by this American is involved, so I suppose

there can be no objection to the move.

The Iranian Government today delivered a virtual ultimatum to

the AIOC to nominate a representative within one week for the pur-

pose of discussing nationalization of the oil company. Although the

British are reluctant to accept this invitation to “participate in the cere-

mony of digging their own grave”, as Grady puts it, we are urging

them to go ahead. I feel that this represents the last chance the British

may have to pull something out of the fire, by bringing up for discus-

sion the realistic problems of production and marketing.

If the British decline the invitation and the situation deteriorates to

the point where troops must be sent in, it seems to me that this would

mean the end of Iran as a Western-oriented nation. It would completely

disorganize the Government and drive the remnants into the arms of

the Tudeh, with the result that the Tudeh would soon take over the

country, even if it were unable to control the southern part. I doubt that

the USSR would find it necessary to send troops into the north at all.

The better part of Iran would fall into its hands like a ripe apple.

In any case, I should think the use of British troops in Iran would

have serious repercussions not only in the Middle East, but in other

parts of the world as well. Even if no lives were lost, the propaganda

advantage to the Soviet Union of this “imperialistic action” would be

enormous. We should therefore be on our guard against any attitude of

the British which would incite the Iranians to take over the oil fields by

force, leading to the employment of U.K. troops to “protect British

30.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

Iran

2228. Subsequent to receipt useful info contained urtel 2449 Apr

17, reports from another Gov agency have indicated an apparent con-

siderable increase of Brit activity recently among tribal elements, espe-

cially Qashqai segments, possibly designed to promote separatist

tendencies among groups in southern Iran.

In view importance this subj Emb is requested, using own, CAS

and Amconsul Isfahan sources, submit tele report on recent and cur-

rent Brit activities in southern Iran. Report shld not be confined purely

tribal matters but include Brit activities among traditionally pro-Brit

leaders of settled population.

Request ur views whether there is any possibility in event IranGov

attempts seize AIOC properties by force that there wld be resistance

and/or uprising of any sort on part native Iran elements.

Acheson

cret. Drafted on May 26 by P.J. Halle and C.V. Ferguson, cleared by Freeman, and ap-

proved by Rountree.

cance of alleged British contacts with tribes in southern Iran reported in CIA PD 888,

April 18. Grady reported that the British had traditionally maintained contact with

southern Iranian tribes both to protect their oilfields and to provide contingency options

in the event of a breakdown in central government authority or a Soviet invasion of Iran.

sistant Secretary McGhee to H. Freeman Matthews, “Tribal Situation in Iran”; ibid.,

was nothing further to be done about the matter.” (Memorandum of conversation be-

tween Acheson and Truman, May 7; ibid.)

February 1951–February 1952

31.

Progress Report Prepared for the National Security Council

Washington, May 31, 1951.

SUBJECT

Second Progress Report on NSC 107, “The Position of the United States with

Respect to Iran”

It is requested that this Progress Report, as of May 24, be circulated to

the members of the Council for their information.

A—The General Situation

The situation in Iran has deteriorated further since the submission

of the First Progress Report on April 24.

On April 28 the Government of the moderate Prime Minister, Ho-

sein Ala, was replaced by one headed by the extreme nationalist leader,

Dr. Mohamad Mosadeq. Immediately upon his appointment, the Ira-

nian Parliament unanimously voted for the immediate implementation

of nationalization of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, and the Iranian

Government has so far categorically rejected all attempts by the British

and United States Governments to settle the matter by negotiation. The

Iranian Government has made it clear that it regards nationalization of

the company as a fait accompli.

While disturbances have to some extent abated during the period

under review, the atmosphere in Iran remains explosive. The present

Iranian Government not only has done nothing to restore calm but has

shown every indication of desiring to keep the Iranian people at a high

emotional pitch on the oil question lest wiser counsel prevail with a

consequent settlement of the controversy and, in that event, the inevi-

table fall of the Government.

The British Government has informed the United States that it is

prepared to negotiate a settlement with the Iranians which, if other con-

ditions are met, will involve some form of nationalization. The Depart-

ment of State has been informed orally by British representatives that

this willingness to accept the principle of nationalization was conveyed

to the Iranian Foreign Minister by the British Ambassador in Tehran on

May 19.

The British Government has also informed the United States that it

does not contemplate the use of force in Iran, without prior consulta-

tion with the United States, except in the event that it becomes abso-

lutely necessary in order to protect the lives of British subjects.

B—Action Taken by the United States

1. The British Government has now come to the conclusion that the

Iranian desire for nationalization of its oil resources cannot successfully

be denied, and is willing to negotiate. It therefore appears to be in the

national interest of the United States to support the British by all appro-

priate means. It has accordingly:

a. Urged repeatedly on the Iranian Government both in Tehran

and through its diplomatic representatives in Washington the need for

negotiation and has pointed out the great difficulties Iran would face in

trying to operate the oil fields and refinery if the British company were

removed. It has also stressed its strong opposition to the unilateral can-

cellation of valid contracts and attempts by the Iranian Government to

settle a serious international controversy unilaterally. The Iranian Gov-

ernment has been told that this position does not mean that the United

States opposes Iran’s desire for control of its own resources.

b. Made its position in this matter public through a release to the

press on May 18.

c. Stressed to the British Government the need for proceeding with

caution and moderation.

2. With respect to the general situation in Iran, the United States

has:

a. Instructed the American Ambassador in Iran to make clear to the

Shah American support for him. This support will be demonstrated by

concrete assistance in the form of continued economic, military and

technical aid, and the Ambassador was authorized to inform the Shah

production and refining of Iranian oil requires not only technical knowledge and capital

but transport and marketing facilities such as those provided by the company.” For the

32.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

In conversation with Qashqai Khans, we have been told that Brit

have had some recent contact with at least one of their sub-tribes,

namely the Qashquli. The Qashqais claim that they wld cooperate with

Brit only in event of Sov invasion of Iran or establishment of Sov satel-

lite govt in Tehran. Qashqais also informed us that it is possible that

Brit may have some understanding with certain other FARS tribes, in-

cluding the Mamassani, the Arabs, and segments of the Boir Ahmadi.

As was pointed out in Embtel 2449, Brit Intelligence, including

AIOC, has always kept in close touch with tribal leaders near oil fields

and at times has subsidized them so as to enlist their assistance in main-

taining security. At present, in view of recent strikes and tense situation

in oil area, friendship of tribal chiefs in area is important.

Altho we have been unable to obtain specific info, possibility that

Brit may be negotiating with southern tribes should not (rpt not) be dis-

missed. It seems only logical that Brit shld take such action in effort to

maintain order in south if (A) for one reason or another auth of Central

Govt breaks down or (B) if Brit lives in oil area are threatened by mob

action and violence and Mosadeq Govt appears unable control situa-

tion. Also there is always possibility that Brit may attempt to use

southern tribal uprisings as counter pressure on govt (as in 1946),

shld Sov attempt seize control Tehran Govt by infiltration or actual

invasion.

Notwithstanding fact certain tribal grps in south may be to degree

controlled by Brit, it is doubtful whether Brit cld muster sufficient tribal

strength without introducing Brit troops to oppose forceful action by

Iran Govt. This assumes, of course, Iranian troops in south wld remain

loyal to Central Govt. As was reported in Embtel 2847, May 18, PriMin

Mosadeq has already changed a number of officials, including military

commanders, on grounds that those transferred were too much under

Brit influence.

Matter will be followed closely and views of Isfahan will be re-

quested by mail, there being no code facilities between Tehran and Is-

fahan. CAS concurs.

Grady

changes personnel holding govt posts” were “particularly in south Iran.” (National Ar-

33.

Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Office of

National Estimates (Langer) to Director of Central

Intelligence Smith

Washington, June 20, 1951.

SUBJECT

Comments on British Draft Document, JIC (51) 44, “Military Implications of the

Entry of British Forces into Persian Territory”

1. The following are comments of the National Estimates Board on

the British draft document JIC (51) 44, “Military Implications of the

Entry of British Forces into Persian Territory.”

2. The British JIC estimates that armed intervention by British mili-

tary forces would enable the UK to retain effective control of the oil

fields in southern Iran and bring about the replacement of the present

Iranian Government by a more moderate one that would be “prepared

to negotiate” on the oil issue. We believe that the British JIC (a) is too

optimistic concerning the Iranian political reaction to armed interven-

tion in Iran, and (b) underestimates the adverse reaction of the United

Nations in general and the Near and Middle Eastern countries in

particular.

(a) In view of the recent upsurge of fanatical Iranian nationalism,

we doubt that a more moderate Iranian Government would come to

power. Although the Shah and some of the members of the parliament

might be disposed to negotiate, Mossadeq and the National Front

would be under heavy pressure from inflamed nationalist public

opinion as well as from the pro-Soviet Tudeh Party to resist the British

to the bitter end. In these circumstances, the Iranian armed forces might

seriously damage the oil installations before the British could establish

firm control of the area. Moreover, if the British proceeded with the oc-

cupation of the oil fields, the resulting panic and confusion are at least

as likely to lead to virtual collapse of the central government as to the

formation of a more moderate one. In such a situation the Tudeh Party

might be able to seize control of the central government. If the USSR

should in the meantime have occupied northern Iran, as the British JIC

believes it likely, the Tudeh Party probably could count on enough So-

viet assistance not only to maintain political control in Iran but also to

make British operation of the oil fields increasingly difficult. While we

agree with the British JIC that the USSR probably would not initiate a

Memos for DCI (1951) (Substantive). Top Secret.

34.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 25, 1951.

SUBJECT

Arrival in New York of Mohamad Hosein and Khosro Qashqai

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Gerald Dooher

Mr. C. Vaughan Ferguson, Jr.

Mr. Dooher called me from New York to report the results of his

luncheon with the Qashqai brothers who arrived in New York today.

He said the ostensible reason for the visit was that Mrs. Mohamad Ho-

sein Qashqai is expecting another child in the immediate future and the

Qashqai family wished it to be born an American citizen. The real pur-

pose of the visit, however, is to establish some sort of contact with the

United States Government whereby the Qashqai tribe may be able to

establish “stability” within Iran.

cret. Drafted by C. Vaughan Ferguson, Jr., of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian

Affairs.

February 1951–February 1952

While in this first meeting the brothers were naturally rather secre-

tive about their mission, Mr. Dooher believes that what they actually

want is a large sum of money in the neighborhood of a million dollars

which they would use to buy off the southern garrison in Iran. The

brothers feel that Prime Minister Mosadeq will either die or resign

within a very short time and that this will be followed by a period of

complete chaos in which it will be necessary for there to be some stabi-

lizing influence. Although not so stated, it seems apparent that the

Qashqais envisage establishing an autonomous regime in southern Iran

out of this chaos and that they need money to make sure that there is no

resistance to their designs on the part of the Iranian Army.

Mr. Dooher stated that the Qashqai brothers are solidly in favor of

nationalization, are strongly supporting Prime Minister Mosadeq at

present, and have become very anti-British. He said that for reasons

which could not be stated over the telephone the recent telegram from

Tehran reporting an approach by the Qashqais to the British Embassy

should be discounted.

The brothers will proceed to Washington shortly and desire to

meet with Ambassador Wiley, Justice Douglas, Mr. Allen Dulles as

well as Mr. McGhee and other appropriate officers in NEA. Mr. Dooher

stated that the Qashqai tribe plans to leave one of the four ruling

brothers in the United States.

35.

Note by the Acting Executive Secretary of the National

Security Council (Gleason)

Washington, June 27, 1951.

THE POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES

WITH RESPECT TO IRAN

REFERENCES

C. Progress Reports by the Under Secretary of State on NSC 107, dated May 2

and May 31, 19514

D. Two memos for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated June 21,

E. NIE–6; SE–66

The National Security Council, the Secretary of the Treasury and

the Director of Defense Mobilization, at the 95th Council meeting with

the President presiding (NSC Action No. 500), considered the draft

statement of policy on Iran contained in NSC 107/1 together with the

views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the recommendations of the Senior

NSC Staff with respect thereto contained in the reference memoranda

ommended by the Senior NSC Staff except for their proposed para-

proposed by the Secretary of State at the meeting. NSC 107/1, as

amended and adopted, is enclosed herewith.

February 1951–February 1952

Accordingly, the National Security Council, the Secretary of the

Treasury and the Director of Defense Mobilization submit the enclosed

statement of policy for consideration by the President with the recom-

mendation that he approve it and direct its implementation by all ap-

propriate executive departments and agencies of the U.S. Government

under the coordination of the Secretary of State.

S. Everett Gleason

Attachment

Washington, undated.

STATEMENT OF POLICY

proposed by the

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

Iran

1. It is of critical importance to the United States that Iran remain

an independent and sovereign nation firmly aligned with the free

world. Because of its key strategic position, its petroleum resources, its

vulnerability to intervention or armed attack by the USSR, and its vul-

nerability to political subversion, Iran must be regarded as a continuing

objective of Soviet expansion. The loss of Iran by default or by Soviet in-

tervention would:

a. Threaten the security of the entire Middle Eastern area and also

Pakistan and India.

b. Deny the free world access to Iranian oil and threaten the loss of

Middle Eastern oil. These developments would seriously affect

Western economic and military interests in peace or in war in view of

the great dependence of Western Europe on Iranian oil, particularly the

refinery at Abadan.

c. Increase the Soviet Union’s capability of threatening important

United States–United Kingdom lines of communication.

d. Damage United States prestige in nearby countries and, with the

exception of Turkey, seriously weaken if not destroy their will to resist.

e. Be one in a series of military, political, and economic develop-

ments, the consequences of which would seriously endanger the secu-

rity interests of the United States.

For these reasons the United States should continue its basic policy of

taking all feasible steps to make sure that Iran does not fall victim to

communist control.

2. The immediate situation in Iran is such that, if not remedied, the

loss of Iran to the free world is a distinct possibility through an internal

communist uprising, possibly growing out of the present indigenous

fanaticism or through communist capture of the nationalist movement.

It is important that there be a government in power in Iran on the side

of the free world, capable of maintaining internal order and deter-

mined to resist Soviet aggression. The United States should therefore:

a. Continue to extend political support, primarily to the Shah as the

only present source of continuity of leadership, and where consistent

with Iran’s ability to absorb it, accelerate and expand military, eco-

nomic and technical assistance by the United States Government when-

ever such assistance will help to (1) restore stability and increase in-

ternal security, (2) strengthen the leadership of the Shah and through

him the central government, (3) demonstrate to the Iranian people the

intention of the United States to assist in preserving Iranian independ-

ence, and (4) strengthen the ability and desire of the Iranian people to

resist communist subversion and pressure. The United States should,

unless it would be detrimental to United States policy in a particular in-

stance, coordinate these programs closely with the United Kingdom

and solicit British support and assistance for them.

b. Bring its influence to bear in an effort to effect an early settle-

ment of the oil controversy between Iran and the United Kingdom,

making clear both our recognition of the rights of sovereign states to

control their natural resources and the importance we attach to interna-

tional contractual relationships.

c. Continue special political measures designed to assist in aligning

the Iranian Government with the free world and promoting internal se-

curity in Iran.

d. Encourage whenever opportune the adoption by the Iranian

Government

of

necessary

financial,

judicial

and

administrative

reforms.

e. Encourage the Government of Turkey and other governments

whose influence might be effective to adopt a more active general

policy in Iran with a view to acting as a moderating influence and to

creating closer ties between Iran and stronger free nations of the area.

3. Although assurances have been received, the United States

should continue to urge the United Kingdom to avoid the use of mili-

tary force in settling the oil controversy. The entry of British troops into

Iran without the consent of the Iranian Government would place

British forces in opposition to the military forces of Iran, might split the

free world, would produce a chaotic situation in Iran, and might cause

the Iranian Government to turn to the Soviet Union for help. However,

should the lives of British subjects in Iran be placed in immediate jeop-

ardy by mob violence, the United States would not oppose the entry of

February 1951–February 1952

British forces into the danger area for the sole purpose of evacuating

British nationals on the clear understanding that this would be under-

taken only as a last resort and that the British forces so introduced

would be withdrawn immediately after the evacuation was completed.

In the event of a British decision to use force against the advice of the

United States, the situation would be so critical that the position of the

United States would have to be determined in the light of the world sit-

uation at the time.

4. Because of United States commitments in other areas, the cur-

rent understanding with the United Kingdom that it is responsible for

the initiative in military support of Iran in the event of communist ag-

gression should be continued but should be kept under review in light

of the importance of Middle Eastern oil, the situation in Iran, British ca-

pabilities, increasing United States influence in the Middle East, and in-

creasing United States strength.

5. The United States should be prepared in conjunction with the

United Kingdom to counter possible communist subversion in Iran

and, in event of either an attempted or an actual communist seizure of

power in one or more of the Provinces or in Tehran, to increase support

of the legal Iranian Government. Such plans and preparations should

envisage joint support to the legal Iranian Government including:

a. Correlated political action and military discussions by the

United States and the United Kingdom. The dispatch of British forces at

the request of the legal Iranian Government to southern Iran should be

supported in every practicable manner by the United States in the

event of a seizure or a clearly imminent seizure of power by Iranian

Communists. The United States should be prepared to give the British

in this event full political support and to consider whether or not mili-

tary support would be desirable or feasible.

b. The conduct of special political operations by the United States

and the United Kingdom.

c. Coordinated United States–United Kingdom support for pro-

Western Iranian elements.

d. Efforts to induce nearby countries, particularly Turkey, to assist

the legal Iranian Government.

e. As desirable, consultation with selected countries to attain sup-

port for the United States position.

f. The perfection of plans concerning the handling of the matter by

the United Nations when that becomes necessary.

6. In the event a communist government achieves such complete

control of Iran that there is no legal Iranian Government to request

Western assistance, and pending further study of this contingency by

the United States and jointly with the United Kingdom, the position of

the United States would have to be determined in the light of the situa-

tion at the time.

7. In the event of a Soviet attack by organized USSR military forces

against Iran, the United States in common prudence would have to pro-

ceed on the assumption that global war is probably imminent. Accord-

ingly, the United States should then immediately:

a. Seek by political measures to localize the action, to stop the ag-

gression, to restore the status quo, and to ensure the unity of the free

world if war nevertheless follows. These measures should include di-

rect diplomatic action and resort to the United Nations with the objec-

tives of:

(1) Making clear to the world United States preference for a

peaceful solution and the conditions upon which the United States

would, in concert with other members of the United Nations, accept

such a settlement.

(2) Obtaining the agreement of the United Nations authorizing

member nations to take appropriate action in the name of the United

Nations to assist Iran.

b. Consider the possibility of a direct approach to the highest So-

viet leaders.

c. Place itself in the best possible position to meet the increased

threat of global war.

d. Consult with selected allies to perfect coordination of plans.

e. While minimizing United States military commitments in areas

of little strategic significance, take action with reference to the aggres-

sion in this critical area to the extent and in the manner which would

best contribute to the implementation of United States national war

plans.

8. In view of the current situation in Iran, the United States should,

individually and where appropriate jointly with the United Kingdom,

examine what additional steps, political and military, might be taken to

secure or deny Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Bahrein.

36.

Memorandum for the Record

New York, June 29, 1951.

The following points were made by the Qashqai brothers at a lun-

cheon party June 27 and a dinner party June 28. I have added my per-

sonal comments:

1. Ten members of the Qashqai ruling family and tribe arrived in

New York June 25. The purpose of the trip was stated to be to establish

a home for Mrs. Nasser Khan, the wife of the Il-Khan, and her children

as well as for the pregnant Mrs. Mohammad Hosein Khan. This home

will be in Santa Barbara, California. The Khans have deliberately

planned that Mrs. Mohammad Hosein Khan will give birth to an Amer-

ican citizen. In my opinion this indicates that the Qashqais have chosen

sides already in any eventual conflict between the Soviets and the West

in Iran. Their dependents already are being “evacuated” to friendly

territory.

2. It appears that one of the four Khans (on a rotating system) will

be in the United States at all times. This, in my belief, looks like the be-

ginning of a liaison arrangement.

3. Khosrow Khan is here as an emissary of Prime Minister Mos-

sadeq. One of his missions is to influence American public opinion in

favor of Iran. I have seen the letter from Mossadeq to Khosrow Khan in-

structing him to carry out this mission.

4. The Khans believe there are two stable forces in Iran; one the

Tudeh Party and the other the Qashqais. What they appear to mean is,

two well-organized forces who can count on disciplined followings. In

their opinion the Western world would do well to cultivate the only

one of these two forces available to them, namely, the Qashqais.

5. Khosrow Khan states that the Iranian Army’s effectiveness was

shattered by the bullet that killed Razmara.

6. They believe that for $3,000,000 the four most important army

garrisons in Iran could be purchased by any bidder. And for

$10,000,000 the entire army could be bought. I detected in these state-

ments the desire that some wealthy uncle place these sums at the

Qashqai’s disposal when such purchases became desirable; namely, if

there were a Tudeh coup in Tehran or other cities.

7. The Khans seem alarmed at the prospect of disorders in Abadan

when the workers remain unpaid. They think that Tudeh might make

quick capital of such a situation.

cret. Drafted by Gerald F.P. Dooher.

37.

Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Office of

National Estimates (Langer) to Director of Central

Intelligence Smith

Washington, July 6, 1951.

SUBJECT

Iranian Developments

1. There is a serious danger that, unless the UK or the US adopt

policies which will maintain the flow of Iranian oil to the West, Iran

will be forced to turn to the USSR for assistance or will suffer an eco-

nomic collapse. In either case, Iran would probably come under Com-

munist domination within a few months.

2. At the present time the UK appears to be prepared to close down

the AIOC installations in Iran, withdraw all British personnel from

Iran, and boycott Iranian oil rather than submit to Iran’s terms. It is un-

Memos for DCI (1951) (Substantive). Secret. There is no drafting information on the

memorandum.

February 1951–February 1952

likely that these tactics will induce Iran to accept a compromise

settlement.

3. US oil companies apparently are not planning to come to Iran’s

assistance but, like the UK oil companies, are planning readjustments

to provide alternate sources of supply for markets previously satisfied

by Iranian oil. The US has set up a Foreign Petroleum Supply Com-

mittee, representing 19 major US companies operating abroad, for this

purpose. The activities of this and similar bodies in the UK and

Western Europe would make it difficult for Iran to find tankers to

transport, and customers to buy, its oil even if it obtained individual

technicians from various countries to maintain production. The flow of

oil from Iran might be maintained to some extent, but it would prob-

ably be a small proportion of the flow maintained by AIOC and would

probably provide Iran with less of an income than it received from

AIOC. If the Iranian oil industry were shut down completely for any

length of time, Iran would find it almost impossible to recapture its

former markets. Iran’s crude oil could be replaced almost immediately

by expansion in other fields and its refined products after about six

months by building other refineries in Western Europe.

4. If Iran cannot sell its oil to the Western world, it might turn to the

USSR for assistance. Because of transportation difficulties, the USSR

could probably not for some time use more than a small proportion of

Iran’s potential production. However, with Russian technicians in the

southern oilfields, Iran would be lost to the West; and the consolidation

of Iran as a Soviet Satellite would be only a matter of time.

5. The current US policy2 of supporting the Shah, extending mili-

tary, economic, and technical assistance, and bringing our influence to

bear on Iran and the UK in the oil controversy appears hardly adequate

to the situation. If Iran’s stability (and therefore its vulnerability to

Communist pressure) depends on the continued flow of its oil to the

West, US policy-makers are confronted with the following critical

questions:

(a) Can we afford to let the British abandon Iran and permit the oil

industry to close down knowing that even under ideal circumstances it

will take several months to revive it and that in the meantime Iran may

be forced to turn to the USSR for assistance or may collapse internally?

(b) If, as now seems probable, the British leave Iran, how long can

we permit Mossadeq to “stew in his own juice” before coming to his

assistance?

38.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, undated.

IRAN

A tribal revolt in the South led by the Qashqais would suggest

British collusion, even though the Qashqais are violently anti-British.

The U.S.S.R. might plausibly invoke the treaty of 1921 in the event of

such an uprising. Very confidentially, the Qashqais state categorically

that they will not recognize any government in Iran formed with Tudeh

(Communist) participation, and will formally notify the “powers” in

Drafted by John Wiley of the Bureau of European Affairs, former Ambassador to Iran.

The memorandum is attached to a July 6 memorandum from Lucius D. Battle, Special As-

sistant to the Secretary of State, to the Executive Secretariat, which reads: “Ambassador

John Wiley left the attached memorandum with the Secretary today. He said that he had

recently had tea with some of the group referred to in the memo. Ambassador Wiley feels

that the strength of this tribal group is great and that in this situation we could even have

the roots of a world war. Could this be passed on to Mr. McGhee for his information?”

39.

Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Current

Intelligence, Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence

Agency

SIC No. 9750

Washington, July 11, 1951.

EFFECTS OF CLOSING DOWN THE IRANIAN OIL INDUSTRY

Four aspects of the Iranian oil crisis merit appraisal as the close-

down of production approaches:

(1) The loss to the West of crude oil supplies previously obtained

from Iran might be compensated for within some months by expanded

production elsewhere; the loss of the refined products cannot be made

up so easily.

(2) Without oil income, the Iranian Government faces bankruptcy,

internal unrest, and, at worst, Communist control of the state.

(3) The Iranian crisis has stimulated nationalist sentiment in other

Near Eastern countries, to the detriment of the political and economic

position of the West.

(4) In the event that Soviet Russia, either through pressure tactics

or because Iran turned to it in desperation, should gain control of the oil

Intelligence Memorandums. Secret.

industry, it could transport part of the Iranian production to the USSR

and Communist China, but would require years to exploit it fully.

Effect on World Oil Supply

The withdrawal of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company would almost

completely close down the Iranian oil industry, which currently ac-

counts for approximately 7% of the free world’s supply of crude oil and

of its refined products and 16% of its crude oil from Iran. About 25% of

the UK’s domestic needs are supplied by the AIOC. South Asia gets

close to 70% of its oil and oil products from Iran.

Within a year, expanded production in Iraq, Kuwait, and Saudi

Arabia could probably make up for any loss of Iranian crude supplies

without a special program of new drilling. Output in Saudi Arabia has

been continuously expanding; Kuwait, which first began producing

after World War II, already produces nearly as much as Saudi Arabia.

The amount of crude oil currently exported from Iraq is limited because

the government has insisted, for political reasons, on closing the pipe-

line from the Kirkuk oil field to the refinery at Haifa, Israel. By 1952,

with the opening of the new 30-inch pipeline to the Mediterranean via

Syria, present Iraqi export capacity will be almost doubled; by the fol-

lowing year it can reach two-thirds of the 1950 output.

The most serious repercussion, from a world supply angle, of the

closing down of Iran’s oil industry would be the loss of refined

products from Abadan—550,000 barrels (approximately 78,570 metric

tons) per day. This will cause a major dislocation in world oil supplies.

The expansion of refinery facilities in Western Europe, anticipated by

1953, however, will make that area largely self-sustaining except in fuel

and diesel oil.

The loss of Iranian oil will be most seriously felt in the area east of

Suez, particularly in India and Pakistan. With the exception of Haifa,

currently operating at about 25% of its 85,000 barrels (approximately

12,140 metric tons) per day capacity, the Near East refineries are at

present working at full capacity, with their products all committed.

Supplying South Asia by tankers from more distant refineries would

put a strain on the already short supply of available tonnage.

Internal Repercussions

The political and economic effects of the stoppage of oil produc-

tion, or even of a last-minute settlement with the Anglo-Iranian Oil

Company, will severely shake the structure of Iran. The Abadan re-

finery will have to close down completely in the near future because of

a lack of storage facilities. Crude oil production will also then cease.

About 80,000 Iranians will be unemployed and the government will

have lost the approximately 40% of its revenue formerly provided by

February 1951–February 1952

oil royalties. The resulting squeeze may be temporarily alleviated by a

sale of government bonds or an increase in the note issue, but it is diffi-

cult to see how the army or the civil service can be kept functioning for

long without pay.

Failure of the present government to keep the oil industry oper-

ating would so reduce popular confidence that the government prob-

ably would not be able to remain in office. Should Prime Minister Mos-

sadeq decide at the last moment that the AIOC is needed to keep oil

revenues from drying up, and attempt to compromise, he might well be

assassinated or removed. A more conservative prime minister, if in-

stalled, would arouse so much antagonism that he could not retain con-

trol. Under such circumstances it is probable that the pro-Soviet Tudeh

Party would maneuver into power a Communist-dominated gov-

ernment. In the demoralized situation envisioned, no overt USSR sup-

port would be needed to turn Iran from the West and place it among

the Satellites.

Should the Tudeh Party gain control of the government, the tribes

of south and west Iran—the oil producing area—might denounce the

Tehran government and set up an independent state. Such a develop-

ment would probably permit the exploitation of Iranian oil to continue

under British management. Certain of the more powerful tribal leaders

have already been in contact with the British.

Reactions in the Near East

The immediate reaction in the Near East to the Iranian oil develop-

ments has been an increased desire for higher royalty payments and for

greater oil production. Militant Iranian nationalism, however, will en-

courage the development of violent exhibitions of nationalism in adja-

cent areas. The loss of Western, and specifically British, prestige will

encourage Iraq to continue its resistance to British and French pressure

to reopen the Kirkuk–Haifa pipeline, especially since the new 30-inch

pipeline to the Syrian coast will soon be completed. There is in Iraq a

body of opinion which has made sporadic attempts to stir up public

sentiment, but its future action will to a large extent be determined by

the outcome of the current negotiations between the Iraq Petroleum

Company and the government. In Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Bahrein,

however, there is almost no chance of nationalization sentiment devel-

oping to any significant degree.

A shut-down of the Iranian refinery would increase Western pres-

sure on Egypt to lift the ban on Israel-bound tankers transiting the Suez

Canal, a restriction which has limited the operations of the Haifa re-

finery to one-quarter of its capacity. Complaints of the Western powers

and Israel will continue unheeded, however, as long as the shortage of

refined products does not affect Egypt directly. Inspired by Iranian na-

tionalism, Egypt can also be expected to step up its present efforts to

dislodge British troops from the Suez Canal Zone and to end the British

administration in the Sudan.

Capabilities of the USSR To Utilize Iranian Oil

With the termination of the control of Iran’s oil resources by the

AIOC, the Soviet Union could capitalize on this opportunity to deny

Iranian oil to the West as well as to augment its own supplies of crude

oil and refined products. In spite of the difficult task of taking over such

a complicated installation as the Abadan refinery, it is believed that the

USSR could provide enough qualified technicians to keep it operating

at a level sufficient to supply the USSR with all the products it is at

present able to transport.

Transporting the oil from Iran would present formidable problems

to the Soviet Union because the Soviet bloc owns only about 1% of the

world’s tanker tonnage; more than 10% of the world’s tanker capacity

is necessary to handle Abadan’s production. Without some tanker facil-

ities from non-Communist countries, the USSR would operate the

Abadan refinery, for some time at least, at the cost of a large loss in pro-

duction. The Iranian railroads at present can carry about 250,000 metric

tons of oil per year. This amount is a small fraction of the USSR’s yearly

domestic output, but it would represent most of Abadan’s annual ca-

pacity for the production of alkylate, the key component in the manu-

facture of high-octane aviation gasoline. An operating staff unfamiliar

with the plant would require at least a year to achieve substantial pro-

duction of alkylate. Supply of an additional 250,000 tons of alkylate

would more than double the USSR’s estimated annual production of

this commodity, which is vital to the conduct of a long-range strategic

air offensive. Overland transport could in time be increased with new

tank cars and possibly with air transport.

The Iranian terrain would make construction of a pipeline to the

USSR a most difficult and expensive proposition, though it is not an im-

possible engineering feat. Such a pipeline could conceivably be con-

structed in two to three years and would presumably be used for re-

fined products. While the USSR might be unwilling to lay so costly a

pipeline in view of Iran’s vulnerability to Western interdiction efforts

in the event of war, there is a strong possibility that such a pipeline

would be built if the Soviet Union were to commence integrating Iran

into the Soviet bloc in time of peace. There is every likelihood that if the

USSR gains control of the oil resources, Iran would be exploited in the

familiar pattern.

February 1951–February 1952

40.

Project Outline Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, July 26, 1951.

Project [less than 1 line not declassified]

1. References

c. Memorandum from Chief, Contract Division, 0/0 for AD/OPC

attached, dated 20 March 1951.

d. Memorandum from Chief, Contract Division, 0/0 for AD/OPC,

2. Problem and Objective

Penetration of tribal areas in general, and Southwestern Iran in

particular, has long been a problem for OPC. The Qashqai tribe, re-

puted to be the strongest tribe in Iran, inhibits a large area in Southwest

Iran that is of particular importance in the development of an escape

and evasion network and as a base for guerrilla warfare activities. Due

to the extreme sensitivity of this area, it has been closed to travel of for-

eign personnel by the Iranian Government. The restrictions imposed

have made the area practically inaccessible to OPC personnel and thus

far we have been unable to supply satisfactory cover for penetration of

the area.

a. The Objective

The object of this project is the penetration of Southwestern Iran

for the purpose of initiating a program of escape and evasion and estab-

lishing drop zones, landing strips, sabotage targets, safe houses, and

supply routes to and from the Persian Gulf; guerrilla warfare potential-

ities and recruitment possibilities of the inhabitants of the area will be

analyzed and exploited.

496, OPC Operational Project Outline, Reel 96. Top Secret. According to an attached

clearance sheet, the plan was developed by [name not declassified] and approved by Acting

ADPC [name not declassified], August 2. Wisner added his approval on August 6 with the

following condition: “Approved—Subject to clear understanding that this does not now

involve a commitment of the amount in excess of [dollar amount not declassified]—and may

not do so until approved by PRC of the survey to be made.”

with developing a covert action capability. NSC 10/2 is printed in Foreign Relations,

3. Proposal

Several factors have now been combined which give OPC an op-

portunity to penetrate the area under discussion. They are: [7½ lines not

declassified].

[2 paragraphs (22 lines) not declassified]

Benefits accruing to OPC from implementation of this project are:

Placement of OPC agents in a hitherto inaccessible area; opportunity to

observe and evaluate the potential value of the tribesman to OPC in re-

sistance and guerrilla warfare activities; opportunities to establish es-

cape and evasion networks, safe houses, and drop zones; and, the

furtherance of good relations between the Qashqai Khans and

tribesmen and the United States as a means of assuring Qashqai coop-

eration in the event of a Soviet invasion or the establishment of a satel-

lite government at Tehran.

4. Risks

[1½ lines not declassified] it is not believed that a great deal of risk is

involved in this project. The advantages listed above seem to outweigh

any risk by OPC and the financial arrangements appear to be secure.

Since the Qashqai are direct benefactors of this project, the possibility of

their revealing the source of funds is extremely remote.

5. Current Status

[1 paragraph (7 lines) not declassified]

6. Budget Data

[2 paragraphs (25 lines) not declassified]

[Omitted here is additional budgetary detail related to the project.]

February 1951–February 1952

41.

Project Outline Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

1. References

a. NSC 10/22

b. NSC 1073

d. Attachment entitled Declaration of Iranian Nationalists

2. Problem

Iran, internally dissatisfied, facing a severe economic crisis,

plagued by pressure from foreign nations, and left without adequate

means of developing into a democratic state in the Western sense,

shows little possibility of becoming master of her fate and architect of

her future. The steady deterioration of the Iranian oil situation has been

of great value to the Soviet Union, and the USSR is prepared, through

the medium of the Tudeh Party of Iran, to capitalize on the chaotic situ-

ation toward which Iran is now heading. On the other hand, the United

States has no Iranian party or group with which to combat the Tudeh/

Communist menace in Iran and the West in general has been unable to

keep up with Soviet policy which, for various reasons, has been dy-

namic, timely and flexible. In view of the importance which Iran is

bound to retain in the international picture, due to both strategic and

economic significance, it is essential that the United States do every-

thing possible to keep the Iranian Government from being subverted or

overthrown by the Communists in Iran.

a. Objective

The objective of this project is to establish an effective force in Ira-

nian politics with which to oppose the Tudeh/Communists. OPC will

back individuals and groups in an endeavor to produce an organized

and directed attack upon the Communists in Iran. It will attempt to

contact, through the indigenous elements it backs, various religious

[text not declassified]. Top Secret. According to an attached clearance sheet, the plan was

classified] on August 10. According to another copy of the outline, this project was ap-

proved by the Project Review Committee on September 6, although with its funding re-

Operational Project Outline, Reel 96)

leaders, political leaders, union leaders, and any other important fac-

tion in Iranian politics.

Lesser, but more specific, objectives of this project include the or-

ganization of demonstrations and counter-demonstrations to offset

those put on by Tudeh; organizing counter, authentic trade unions in

Iran; manipulation of religious prejudice and fanaticism to oppose

Communism; and capitalizing on personal enmity and competition

among enemy leadership.

3. Proposal

In pursuit of the objectives above, it is proposed that OPC subsi-

dize the existing political warfare activities of [3 lines not declassified]

and it is believed that this organization represents a force of great po-

tential in Iranian politics. [4 lines not declassified]

[2 paragraphs (17 lines) not declassified]

Advantages accruing to OPC are believed to be extensive. They in-

clude guidance and control of an effective force in Iranian politics; or-

ganized and directed programs against the Soviets in general and the

Tudeh in particular; establishment of a rallying point for all latent

anti-Communist forces in Iran; an effective channel for the propagation

of U.S. views and policies to counteract the powerful influence of the

Tudeh; and awakening the influential religious elements in Iran to the

danger of Communism toward their religion and God. In addition to

the advantages listed, it will be recognized that such a program, if suc-

cessful, could act as a catalytic agent in a popular reaction against

Communism.

[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]

4. Risks

[2 paragraphs (16 lines) not declassified]

5. Current Status

[4 paragraphs (20 lines) not declassified]

6. Budget Data

It is proposed that this project be set up for a period of one year

with extension being granted on the basis of results obtained by that

time. Estimated expenses for the first year are:

[6 paragraphs (18 lines) not declassified]

42.

Memorandum From the Counselor of Embassy (Richards) to

the Ambassador to Iran (Henderson)

Tehran, August 15, 1951.

SUBJECT

British Views on Future of the Government

Mr. Middleton, Counselor of the British Embassy, in conversation

with me today expressed the firm opinion that every effort must be

made to settle the oil question while Mosadeq is in power, but at the

same time expressed considerable pessimism regarding the outcome of

the negotiations. He then indicated that the British are giving serious

consideration to the situation which may develop in case oil negotia-

tions break down within the next few days.

Regardless of the success or failure of the Stokes Mission he feels

(and I am confident that he reflects the official British Embassy opinion)

that Mosadeq cannot be expected to continue in power for long. Mo-

sadeq himself has indicated that he would resign upon the completion

of successful negotiations with the British. There is evidence that in-

creasing opposition may force him out unless the negotiations are

successful.

The problem of a successor therefore arises. A list of likely candi-

dates for Prime Minister was reviewed by Mr. Middleton who stated

that he had information to the effect that the Shah was toying with the

idea of the appointment of either Minister of Court Ala or Ibrahim

Hakimi. Mr. Middleton characterized Mr. Ala as a man of good-will

but lacking in the force and decisiveness necessary at this critical junc-

ture. Hakimi he dismissed as impossible because of his advanced age

(he admits to 80 years) and his political inactivity in recent years. Other

second-string candidates Mr. Middleton discounted; Zahedi has gone

into eclipse since his resignation as Minister of Interior after the July 15

riots; Sadr Fakhr Hekmat, President of the Majlis, probably does not

have a popular following; Amir-Alai, Minister of the Interior, has not

distinguished himself in public service; and others such as Soheli, the

Ambassador at London, Ebtehaj, the Ambassador at Paris, and Ali

Mansour, the Ambassador at Rome, he dismissed as out of the running.

This review leaves, according to Mr. Middleton, only two likely

successors, Qavam and Seyid Zia.

Qavam, he stated, would probably be the most effective “strong

man” for a short term, and judging from his activities since his return

from Europe, he still has considerable political following; further he be-

lieved that the Shah, who has seen Qavam several times recently,

would not look upon Qavam with disfavor, in spite of their break last

year. However, while mentally alert, Qavam is in ill-health and prob-

ably incapable of carrying the burden of a high government office. Fur-

thermore, he characterized Qavam as a member of the corrupt old-

guard who could not be expected to carry out economic and political

reforms which both the U.S. and the U.K. consider necessary for the de-

velopment of Iran as a bulwark against Communism.

Mr. Middleton therefore returned to the opinion apparently long

held by the British that Seyid Zia, in spite of his obvious disadvantages,

is probably the best candidate presently available. He recognized that

Seyid Zia’s long association with the British would inevitably cause

him to be labeled a British stooge; also Seyid Zia has not held public of-

fice for a number of years. He felt, however, that these disadvantages

were outweighed by (1) Seyid Zia’s progressive and reformist policies,

(2) his mental and physical vigor, (3) his recent friendly association

with the Shah and (4) his comparative freedom from the taint of corrup-

tion. He stated also that of the likely candidates Seyid Zia would be

most amenable to “guidance” from the British and Americans.

Mr. Middleton urged that in the interest of political stability in the

Middle East the U.S. and the U.K. must agree in advance on a parallel if

not identical course of action before a change of the Mosadeq Govern-

ment becomes imminent. In particular, he emphasized that the U.S. and

U.K. must impress upon the Shah the necessity for acceptance of the

strongest possible Prime Minister and that the Shah must be assured of

at least moral support by both governments to the extent that he would

feel confident in such a choice. Otherwise Mr. Middleton foresees the

possible appointment of another weak Prime Minister and the conse-

quent continuation of confused drifting.

The following are my comments on the foregoing:

I am confident that Mr. Middleton was not just making conversa-

tion when he talked to me along the foregoing lines. It seems apparent

that he wanted to be sure that we were thinking of developments

which might be expected in the near future. On the whole, what he had

to say is the same old line served up in a slightly new form. It is even

possible, that the British still feel that they might stand a better chance

of coming to an agreement on the oil question were Mosadeq to be re-

moved in spite of Middleton’s protestations to the contrary.

Mosadeq has said that he is in office for one primary purpose and

that is to nationalize the oil; that he will resign when he accomplishes

that. I am not convinced that this is necessarily true. Mosadeq has had a

February 1951–February 1952

taste of power as Prime Minister and both he and his followers will be

reluctant to give it up. Furthermore, details for the administration of

the next elections must be completed by the end of Shahrivar (Sep-

tember 23). The Government in power before that date is in a position

to appoint officials to run the elections, to determine places of voting,

and otherwise to make arrangements regarding elections. This in the

past has always meant that it is in a position to “rig” the elections. Mo-

sadeq and his followers will be unlikely to give up such an opportunity

unless they are forced to do so.

Another factor which must be considered if Mosadeq goes out is

that he would then be a public hero and would undoubtedly be a leader

of a strong and embarrassing opposition in the Majlis. Any Prime Min-

ister who might succeed him would find it extremely difficult to put

through any legislation against the opposition of Mosadeq.

I am of the opinion that we should go very slow in making any

comments regarding the length of time Mosadeq may be in office or

who should succeed him. We must avoid close identification with any

politician, at least for the present. To do otherwise would leave us open

to accusation of close and sinister collaboration with the British and

would give support to the allegation of intervention in the internal af-

fairs of the country.

Mr. Middleton’s comments regarding the need of a strong Prime

Minister and the almost tragic need of the Shah for moral support from

the U.S. and U.K. both deserve serious attention. But we must exercise

great caution in the manner by which we attempt to assist in this

regard.

ALR

43.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 224

Tehran, August 20, 1951.

RECENT INCREASE IN POLITICAL PRESTIGE OF

AYATOLLAH KASHANI

Summary:

Ayatollah Seyid Abol Qasem Kashani, the fanatical, nationalist Ira-

nian mullah, has recently become increasingly prominent in Iranian

political affairs. His long career is one of constant opposition to British

intervention in the domestic affairs of Iran. The oil nationalization

issue, of an anti-British and highly nationalistic nature, has brought

about an atmosphere in this country which easily lends itself to exploi-

tation by such a man. He has more recently been assisted in elevating

himself to a position of prominence by publicity accorded him in the

foreign press and by the prestige given him through the fact that he

alone among religious leaders received calls from Mr. W. Averell Har-

riman and Mr. Richard Stokes.

His delusions of grandeur have been accentuated by events which

have put him in the limelight of a local political affair having interna-

tional implications. Although under present tense conditions, he has at-

tained a position of influence, that position is founded upon transitory

circumstances. It is doubtful that he could command sustained support

from any large segment of the population. He has neither the support

nor the confidence of his religious colleagues and his pretensions under

a determined attack would prove far superior to his capabilities.

Introduction:

Recently, Ayatollah Seyid Abol Qasem Kashani has become in-

creasingly prominent in Iranian public affairs. Ambitious, opportu-

nistic, fanatical, Kashani’s influence depends primarily on the support

of the poorer and more ignorant classes of the Iranian people, and the

more fanatical elements of the bazaar. From among this following

Kashani can recruit those who would commit acts of violence for real or

imagined offenses against the Moslem faith. He has been implicated in

several assassinations and murders.

February 1951–February 1952

His power springs from these elements and he is careful to main-

tain his influence over them. With such support, Kashani has been able

to frighten into cautious silence many who would otherwise oppose

those causes which for whatever reason he has chosen to espouse. At

the moment, the popular issue—which he helped make popular and

which he is now exploiting to his advantage—is that of oil nationaliza-

tion. The issue and the popular, hysterical attitude toward it on the part

of the great masses of the Iranian people, is perfectly suited to bring out

the “talents” possessed by Ayatollah Kashani by virtue of training, ex-

perience, and inclination.

Background:

Kashani was raised in a highly religious Moslem family. His father

was a religious leader in the Shiah Holy City of Najef in Iraq where the

principal activity, particularly during the days of Kashani’s youth and

even today, revolved around the Shiah pilgrims who came to pay

homage at the tomb of Imam Ali, son-in-law of the Prophet. Educated

by mullahs, he became one himself at an early age. His father opposed

the British in Iraq during World War I and the still-young Kashani

found himself in a Holy War declared by his father and other religious

leaders against all Christians. His father was killed in a battle following

the British landings on the Persian Gulf. Since then he freely threatens

“Holy War” at the least provocation and his hatred of the British, accen-

tuated by later events, verges on the psychopathic.

He continued to oppose British interference in Iranian affairs for

some years after World War I, but he must have appraised Reza Shah

as one stronger than himself for he cautiously kept out of that mon-

arch’s way in spite of the anti-clerical policies which were carried out

during his reign and the continuation of Iranian oil exploitation by the

British.

Following the advent of World War II and the abdication of Reza

Shah, Kashani again took up the task of opposing British activities.

When the Allies occupied Iran, the British promptly imprisoned him in

spite of objections raised by the then U.S. Minister, Dreyfus. His rela-

tive partiality to the U.S. dates from that time.

During the next twenty-eight months of forced inactivity, he never

lost touch with his followers and upon being released he quickly re-

turned to his plottings. This time his activities were directed against

Prime Minister Qavam, who exiled him to the provinces. In early 1949,

after the attempted assassination of the Shah, as a precautionary meas-

ure Prime Minister Mohammed Sa’ed, aided and advised by Army

Chief of Staff Ali Razmara, sent Kashani out of the country again.

The influence he wields was demonstrated when he was elected to

the Majlis while still in exile. He was elected as a National Front deputy

in 1950 along with his friend. Dr. Mosadeq. Both attribute all of Iran’s

shortcomings and misfortunes to British interference in Iran. When

Razmara became Prime Minister, Kashani did not find it difficult to

support National Front policies, particularly in attacking the man

whom both he and Mosadeq believed to be subservient to British influ-

ence and who had been instrumental in bringing about his most recent

exile.

Recent Events:

In the meantime the British oil concession dispute flared up into a

popular movement into which were released all the aggressive en-

ergies of the Iranian people generated by decades of frustration. The

British, through the Oil Company, were identified as the sole cause for

all the difficulties in which collectively and individually the Iranians

found themselves. The nation-wide hysteria over oil nationalization

created an atmosphere tailor-made for a reactionary religious leader

with a flare for political intrigue. He has tried to take full advantage of

it. It should be pointed out, however, that contrary to anything he may

say at the present time, at least until June of last year he had not op-

posed the supplementary oil agreement offered by the AIOC and

under discussion at that time.

Nevertheless, events moved on and he moved with them. With the

unwitting aid of the foreign press in combination with the aroused and

unrequited passions of the Iranian people, Kashani was elevated, and

cleverly helped elevate himself, to an influential position in Iranian po-

litical affairs. Dr. Mosadeq was careful to call on him as soon as he be-

came Prime Minister, and has kept in regular contact with him ever

since. Kashani in turn has supported the Prime Minister. He has at all

critical moments issued messages to the people affirming the necessity

of Dr. Mosadeq’s leadership in the vital oil nationalization issue.

Several months ago Ayatollah Kashani decided not to appear in

public. He has refused to take his seat in the Majlis claiming that to do

so would lower his prestige. He never calls on anyone, but receives ev-

erybody in private audience—in his own surroundings. His messages

to public gatherings are recorded and played back to the audience.

With regard to his Majlis seat, Kashani said that he would go to the

Majlis only in case of an emergency. Perhaps he is waiting for a propi-

tious occasion. In the prevailing tense atmosphere, and over the oil na-

tionalization issue, should Kashani decide to make a public appearance

he would undoubtedly draw together an impressive mass of people.

February 1951–February 1952

At the suggestion of Dr. Mosadeq two weeks ago, W. Averell Har-

riman called on Kashani. As released to the press by Kashani, the inter-

view was practically a Kashani monologue. A few pertinent remarks

from the published version of the interview follows:

“I must tell you plainly, Mr. Harriman, that we have been op-

pressed and robbed by the former oil company for fifty years”. . . .

“Now four hundred Moslems have pinned their hopes on our country.

All the Moslem countries expect us to break the chain put on our feet by

British imperialist exploitation . . .” “Should Dr. Mosadeq compromise,

he will lose the sincere support he is now receiving from the

people”. . . . “I am now working for the union of the Moslem nations,

and also for the union of the peoples of the East. As I told you, I am

trying my best to unite my four hundred million Moslem brethren,

who should be united and who should maintain complete neutrality”.

Shortly after the Harriman interview, Kashani was spurred to

more intense efforts. He spoke now with ever greater authority. He ad-

dressed a message to the people of Khazistan expressing his apprecia-

tion of their patriotism and assistance:

“I expect every effort will be exerted to maintain order. . . . and to

support the government of His Excellency Dr. Mosadeq, and the appro-

priation committee which is working for the benefit of the workers of

Khazistan. I pray that God Almighty will bestow health, happiness and

tranquility upon my dear brethren and that the hands of the merciless

foreigners will be severed. In conclusion, I should point out that the re-

turn to Tehran of His Excellency Hosein Makki, honorable deputy from

Tehran, is temporary and only for medical treatment. He will return

shortly.”

Kashani then addressed messages to Prime Ministers Nehru of

India and Liaqat Ali Khan of Pakistan calling upon them amicable to

settle the Kashmir dispute. He received a reply from both Prime

Ministers.

To digress for a moment at this point, when Reza Shah decided to

break the power of the clergy in Iran one of his first acts was to strike at

its finances. He confiscated the ecclesiastical properties and the man-

agers of the properties were made civil functionaries of the Ministry of

Education. In recent years, despite the growing influence of the clergy

no attempt has as yet been put forth by that clergy to revise the funda-

mental laws made by Reza Shah which stripped it of its power. It is to

the Minister of Education that Kashani now addressed himself. In a

letter to him Kashani urged the Minister to make certain changes in

order to conform to the regulations of Islam. The letter closes:

“I seriously request your Excellency to issue prompt instructions

regarding the foregoing points and expect that you will advise us of

any decision you make to this effect.”

The next move was for The Right Honorable Richard Stokes to pay

him a visit. He, like Mr. Harriman, was subjected to a long harangue.

His repeated requests for permission to leave were ignored while

Kashani talked on. It was during this interview that Kashani made the

following remark:

“Even Dr. Mosadeq, who enjoys the unanimous support of the

people, if he deviated from the nine article law, risks losing not only his

prestige but also risks suffering the same fate as Razmara”.

To Kashani this means anyone deviating from the path of national-

ization as now laid down by Kashani “risks suffering the same fate as

Razmara”.

After the satisfaction of his interview with Mr. Stokes another flow

of “messages” may be expected. The first has already appeared. It is

Kashani’s message to Pakistan on the occasion of its fourth anniversary

of independence. The message ends:

“In conclusion I avail myself of the opportunity to strongly recom-

mend to the authorities, the nation and the press of Pakistan to con-

tinue its previous policy of friendship with its Indian neighbor and not

to take any steps that would undermine the satisfactory solution of ex-

isting differences.”

As evidence of his expanding activities the Tehran newspaper

Keyhan, of August 16 reports the following:

“The correspondent of the newspaper Al Masri has reported that

Haji Amin-ol-Hoseini, the Grand Mufti of Palestine, is a staunch sup-

porter of Ayatollah Kashani. His representative, Mr. Seyid Abdul Jalil

Ankar is now in Tehran to meet Ayatollah Kashani, bringing letters

from the Mufti addressed to him . . .”

Conclusion:

In Kashani’s career there is a thin thread of consistency. Through-

out, he has opposed British interference in Iranian affairs. The con-

sistency ends there, except perhaps for his opportunism. CAS reports

that he can be bribed. He has at least on one occasion made overtures to

the American Embassy here for financial support in return for which,

presumably, he would support United States policies.

44.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Intelligence and

Research

Washington, September 13, 1951.

CURRENT STRENGTH OF THE TUDEH PARTY IN IRAN

Problem

Estimate of the current capability of the Tudeh Party to seize con-

trol in Iran.

NIE–46 Iran. Secret.

Discussion

Since the suppression of the Tudeh following the attempted assas-

sination of the Shah in February 1949, the party has operated openly

through the Peace Partisans and the Society Organized to Fight Imperi-

alist Oil Companies. Up to April 29, 1951, when Mosadeq became

Prime Minister, the usual official method of controlling Tudeh was by

invoking martial law, making arrests, and suppressing newspapers.

Mosadeq, however, lifted martial law, released certain Tudeh leaders

from prison, and appealed to the entire population to maintain order.

Public parades and demonstrations since that time have been tightly

controlled by the participants, with the exception of the demonstration

in Tehran on July 15, 1951.

Since a major objective of Soviet policy in Iran is to end western in-

fluence there, the Tudeh actively supported Mosadeq in his nationali-

zation policy, except when it appeared likely that he might arrive at an

agreement which would retain significant British control in Iran. Al-

though Mosadeq has welcomed all support for nationalization, there is

no evidence that he or any of his principal advisers, except possibly

Abdul Qadir Azad and Dr. Ali Shayegan, have Communist sympa-

thies. They are all, however, strong nationalists.

The Tudeh suffered a significant check as the result of a vigorous

anti-Communist campaign carried on by religious groups during the

month of Ramazan, and a severe setback on July 15 when they engaged

in open fighting with the police and military in front of the Majlis. This

street fight lost them the respect of many Iranians due to Iranian repug-

nance for public rudeness to a national guest (Harriman), and signifi-

cantly chilled the ardor of hangers-on and co-demonstrators.

In addition to the setback in Tehran, the strength of Tudeh in Is-

fahan was recently broken when the chief of police arrested all the

ringleaders, jailing some, exiling some to Bandar Abbas, Yezd, and

Kerman, and giving others suspended sentences. In Tabriz, Tudeh suf-

fered another reversal when the ringleaders among university students

were arrested and jailed. The major significance of these developments

has been to demonstrate openly that there is a strong, effective anti-

Tudeh force which can and will resist Tudeh pressures. This has had a

distinctly wholesome effect in raising public morale.

Information on the numerical and organization strength of the

Tudeh is unavailable, but a reasonably dependable source estimates

the current active membership at 4000.

Tudeh leaders have undoubtedly been instructed by Soviet agents

to agitate for the expulsion of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (AIOC)

and to emphasize alleged British imperialism in Iran. Since support for

Mosadeq is almost universal and anti-British sentiment is intense, it is

very difficult to estimate public support for Tudeh. It is probable that

February 1951–February 1952

Mosadeq himself could get Majlis and non-Tudeh acceptance of any

compromise settlement which he would present and support. How-

ever, should he or a successor government approach an agreement

with the British, Tudeh opposition will probably come into the open. It

may also be expected to offer open opposition if the government pre-

sents any new legislation not related to the oil nationalization issue.

In the event that Mosadeq is forced out of office, part of his large

popular following will probably join the anti-AIOC organization and

ultimately the Tudeh ranks. Since any successor government would

probably have to maintain order by force if it accepts any agreement

which will, in effect, restore the AIOC to its former position in Iran,

Tudeh may be expected to exploit the anticipated popular indignation

to the fullest extent. The allegiance of the security forces, if ordered to

support an unpopular settlement, is doubtful.

The balance of political power in Iran is now held by a third force

composed principally of skilled workers, students, government em-

ployees, teachers, and industrial labor. The spokesmen of this force are

the National Front leaders. Nazi, Soviet, and Western propaganda in

the past 10 years has convinced this group that a better, freer standard

of living is possible in Iran. The contrast between possible methods for

achieving this end—that is, between revolution and evolution—is often

overlooked or disregarded. Unless effective demonstration of evolu-

tionary procedures appear, it is inevitable that increasing numbers of

Iranians will be attracted to revolutionary methods. Cessation of rev-

enues from the oil operations, and the economic dislocations that are

occuring in consequence, will present Tudeh with increasing opportu-

nities to promote revolution. At the present time the Shah’s influence is

practically nil. If the oil controversy continues to be regarded by Ira-

nians as a fight for their national independence, it is probable that revo-

lution will be ultimately accepted rather than acquiescence in any com-

promise which calls for retention of British predominance in the oil

industry.

Conclusion

At the present time, Tudeh is not capable of seizing control. Given

a continuation of the present economic deterioration and/or the re-

placement of the Mosadeq government by one willing to reestablish the

British economic position within Iran, it is possible that that capability

may exist by the early part of 1952.

45.

Study Prepared in the Office of Research and Reports,

Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, September 22, 1951.

THE IMPORTANCE AND AVAILABILITY OF IRANIAN OIL TO

THE USSR UNDER PEACETIME CONDITIONS

[Omitted here is a Foreword.]

Summary

For the purposes of this paper it is assumed that: (1) the USSR will

be willing to invest the necessary effort to exploit Iranian oil; (2) the

USSR will gain unlimited access to Iranian oil production under cir-

cumstances short of global war; and (3) the USSR and Iran will not

have access to US–UK controlled tankers or technicians.

This paper is limited to a discussion of the developments during

the first year of substantial oil shipments from Iran to the Soviet Orbit.

It does not consider the transition period3 that would be necessary for

starting up the refinery and acquiring such transportation facilities as

additional tankers and railroad rolling stock as might be needed.

The potential importance of Iranian oil to the Soviet Orbit is indi-

cated by the estimate that during the first year following the transition

period the Soviet Orbit could import and utilize approximately

2,900,000 metric tons of petroleum products. The USSR, if necessary,

could supply the technicians and materials required to operate the re-

finery at this level. The volume of imports could be increased in subse-

quent years as more and more transportation facilities become avail-

able and the level of production rises.

Of the 2. million tons of petroleum products which the Soviet

Orbit could import during the first year, the USSR could provide

Peacetime Conditions. Top Secret; SUEDE; Dissemination to U.S. Personnel Cleared for

Special Intelligence Information. Sent to DCI, G–2, ONI, AIR, State, AFSA, NSC, JCS, and

OCI.

46.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, September 25, 1951.

1157. 1. Shepherd, British Ambassador, asked Ambassador Hen-

derson have informal tea with him yesterday afternoon. View circum-

stances Henderson accepted although credentials not presented. Con-

versation informal and friendly. Shepherd presented his views

considerable detail, indicating certain differences in interpretation and

approach between U.S. and U.K. Embassies. Various points made by

Shepherd or impressions obtained by Henderson from Shepherd’s

comments set forth briefly below:

2. Shepherd insisted Iranian opposition to British retention control

Iranian oil superficial; did not believe Iranian public in general really

deeply interested; thought if new Govt should come in which would

play down oil dispute, public interest, which had been artificially

aroused, would gradually disappear.

3. He expressed opinion differences between British and American

Embassies in analyses of situation and how best to meet it were partly

responsible for difficulties encountered by Foreign Office and State

Dept in getting together and working out common program. He sug-

gested it would be useful if two Embassies could thresh out matter here

so they could present parallel views and recommendations to respec-

tive govts.

4. Shepherd said British had been severely criticized for interfer-

ence in Iranian internal affairs, but many Iranians while criticizing

were simultaneously insisting British continue to interfere on their be-

half. Believed interference in past as well as in present necessary in

order save Iranians from themselves and their neighbors. He thought

time had come when there should be change in government; nothing

constructive could be accomplished so long as Mosadeq remained in

power; therefore efforts should be concentrated on getting Mosadeq

out at earliest possible moment. One question was whether it would be

better have him succeeded by some “strong” politician like Qavam or

Seyid Zia, or have him replaced by a more colorless PriMin who, after

short interval, would give way to “strong” man. He inclined defend

Seyid Zia expressing opinion latter’s reputation as “British stooge” no

great handicap; had progressive ideas and if in power could prove his

independence of British. Shepherd also thought Ala as compromise

PriMin might be brought in temporarily. He realized Ala did not desire

to be PriMin in such circumstances but might be willing serve as patri-

otic duty. He considered Ala as rather weak, nevertheless he could be

useful.

5. Shepherd thought little would come out of suggestion that Ira-

nian Mission might visit London. He did, however, consider it impor-

tant that Shah had apparently come to opinion that it would be in in-

terest of Iran for Mosadeq to retire. In response to questions, he stated

he had no evidence that Shah was as yet prepared to take any concrete

action to expedite retirement Mosadeq.

6. Henderson told Shepherd he still in process orientation and was

endeavoring obtain views and background. He was not therefore pre-

pared just yet offer suggestions.

47.

Memorandum From Henry Villard of the Policy Planning

Staff, Department of State, to the Chairman of the Policy

Planning Staff (Nitze)

Washington, September 26, 1951.

IRANIAN SITUATION

As I see it the Iranian situation now boils down to the following

facts and conclusions:

1. The British have rejected our suggestions in regard to Moss-

adegh and discussion of the latest Iranian proposals. They persist in

working for Mossadegh’s downfall and profess to have the Shah’s sup-

port of this aim. In this they are employing tactics they have always em-

ployed in Iran and which were a principal cause for the drastic nation-

alization laws. British intrigue is the surest way of increasing Iranian

antagonism and preventing any sort of agreement. The economic meas-

ures employed against Iran have the same effect; they have resulted in

retaliatory action against the remaining AIOC personnel and, by

dooming any deals in foreign exchange, the probable closing of British

banks in Iran. In other words, the British are steadfastly pursuing a

policy which can only aggravate the situation and contains risks of the

most serious kind.

2. Even if the British should succeed in overthrowing Mossadegh,

it would prove a boomerang. In the eyes of the public Mossadegh

would be a martyr to the cause and any successor known to be accept-

able to the British could not last long. The Shah cannot be expected to

move against Mossadegh. In the first place he lacks guts to do so. In the

second place he is aware of the extreme unpopularity of such action.

The removal of Mossadegh by the Shah could only result in an attempt

Secret.

to govern the country by armed force. Even this would probably be im-

possible in view of the unreliability of the Iranian armed forces in the

face of angry public opinion. The British pretend to believe that public

opinion is not a vital factor in controlling the situation, that only the

so-called Teheran intelligentsia really counts, that feeling on the oil

question ebbs and flows, and that opposition to the U.K. is only skin

deep. This is completely contrary to our information and constitutes, I

think, the most fundamental British mistake in their entire inept han-

dling of the problem.

3. My own opinion is that it is no longer possible to reach an agree-

ment which would permit the British to retain any semblance of the au-

thority previously exercised in the Iranian oil industry. I have never be-

lieved in the likelihood of such an agreement, but matters have now

gone so far that it seems essential to recognize the political objective of

the Iranians as distinct from economic considerations. That objective is

not to reach a negotiated settlement on the question of profits or man-

agement, but to drive out British influence in accordance with a literal

interpretation of the Iranians’ communication to the ICJ: “in order to

free themselves from the claws of a usurping company which for long

years has served as a disturbing influence in economic, social and polit-

ical fields in Iran.” Emotion—not logic—is the controlling factor, and

the sooner the British realize they are not wanted in Iran, the sooner can

we approach a possible solution.

4. It seems to me that the time has arrived for a show-down with

the U.K. if anything is to be salvaged from the situation. I think we

should tell the British that because of our deep concern in this crisis we

must abandon our efforts to play the role of honest broker and take a

strong stand. We should say that we propose that U.S. and other for-

eign technicians should be admitted to Iran to run the industry; that

this would involve the complete removal of British personnel from the

scene; and that an attempt should concurrently be made to work out a

contract with Iran for the sale of oil to the U.K. This would be a virtual

capitulation on the part of the British. But they are finished anyway, as

the AIOC personnel will soon have left. On our part we should say that

we would undertake to make the Iranians carry out the terms of a suit-

able sales contract.

It would be a bitter pill for the U.K., and I doubt that they can be

made to swallow it, but the stakes are so high that unless we try some-

thing of this sort a whole chapter of dangers will presently open up.

Henry S. Villard

48.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, October 9, 1951.

OPERATIONS IN IRAN

1. CIA is unable to affect the immediate political crisis in Iran,

which can only be resolved by diplomatic means. Our primary mission

has been to counter Tudeh Communist activities and awaken Iranian

authorities to Communism’s dangers. Activities in these directions met

with conspicuous operational success in August. In September, when

the Tudeh was itself largely inactive, our agents concentrated upon

planning expanded operations and upon the acquisition of intelligence

on Tudeh plans and capabilities. Provided the immediate crisis is re-

solved, we can continue to harass and ultimately nullify Communist

activities in Iran. Within the framework of our primary mission, our ac-

tivities are:

a. [5 lines not declassified] These officials are cooperating with our

agents who, in turn, through penetration of the Tudeh, inform the po-

lice of Tudeh plans. We have succeeded in discrediting the Communist

among the labor elements at the important Tehran tobacco factory, and

have broken Tudeh’s hold on Isfahan labor. As was demonstrated by

our operations during Ramadan, the Iranian clergy is a major anti-

Communist instrument. Accordingly, religious leaders have been mo-

bilized to direct feeling against the Tudeh during the holy month of

Muharram (October). Moreover, a “black” propaganda book (pur-

porting to be a Soviet attack against Islam) has been written, published,

and is being disseminated. Steps were also taken to meet expected

Tudeh demonstrations in October by counter-demonstrations.

b. Our expanded psychological warfare program calls for expendi-

ture of [less than 1 line not declassified] to purchase printing presses and

set up a printing establishment [3 lines not declassified].

c. Progress was made in organizing stay-behind activities. Prelimi-

nary discussions took place with the British in the field in Escape and

Evasion planning, demolition, and general stay-behind activities. Field

surveys by air and road on E&E have been undertaken. We have been

in contact with leaders of the influential Qashqai tribe of southwestern

National Security Council 107 Series. Top Secret. Drafted by Roosevelt and concurred in

by [name not declassified] on behalf of Wisner. The memorandum is attached to a memo-

randum from Roosevelt to Wisner, October 9, that reads: “There is attached herewith for

the Director’s use in connection with the NSC meeting tomorrow on Iran a memorandum

setting forth the recent developments in OPC operations in Iran.”

49.

Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian,

and African Affairs, Department of State

Washington, October 10, 1951.

THE CURRENT IRANIAN SITUATION

The last briefing of the Security Council on Iran dealt with the situ-

ation as of August 22, while Mr. Harriman was in Tehran. The British-

Iranian negotiations which had been brought about through Mr. Har-

riman’s efforts were thereafter suspended. Later, they were broken off

altogether by the British Government as a result of strong public state-

ments made by Dr. Mosadeq. The following is a brief account of devel-

opments since that time.

On September 12, Prime Minister Mosadeq addressed a letter to

Mr. Harriman setting forth certain proposals for a possible settlement

and stating that failure by the British within 15 days to agree to re-

sumption of negotiations would compel the Iranian Government to

expel British technicians remaining in the south. Mr. Harriman de-

clined to pass this communication on to the British as requested by Dr.

Mosadeq, pointing out in friendly terms that the proposals would not

in his judgment provide a basis for new discussions.

Several days later Dr. Mosadeq, through Minister of Court Ala, in-

formally submitted modified proposals to the British Ambassador

Secret. Drafted by Kitchen and Rountree. The paper is attached to a memorandum from

McGhee to Acheson for use as a background summary for the 104th meeting of the NSC

on the same day. See Document 50.

February 1951–February 1952

which, while still far from satisfactory, the Department felt provided

hope that a basis could be found to renew the talks. The Shah himself

believed it highly desirable that the British not reject this overture. Indi-

cations were given that the Iranians might send plenipotentiaries to

London if the British agreed to resume negotiations.

Department officers discussed this new approach with the British

Ambassador in Washington on September 21 and handed him an in-

formal paper urging that the British give favorable consideration to the

Iranian move. They emphasized the desirability of the British re-

maining in a negotiating posture, and expressed the fear that an en-

tirely negative reaction might make a settlement impossible for a long

time to come.

While the British Cabinet was considering the Department’s repre-

sentations, word was received from the British Ambassador in Tehran

to the effect that the Shah was convinced of the need for getting rid of

Dr. Mosadeq and was only concerned as to how this could best be

done. On this basis the decision was taken to reject flatly the proposal

and to offer Dr. Mosadeq no encouragement that the British were pre-

pared to resume negotiations. It was felt by the British that these tactics

would weaken Dr. Mosadeq and strengthen his opposition in the

Majlis. The British Ambassador was instructed to encourage the Shah

in every way to replace Dr. Mosadeq with a government amenable to a

reasonable settlement.

The Department’s disappointment at this action was shared by the

Shah and Minister of Court Ala. The Court has made it clear that it

would be a mistake for either the Shah or any foreign power to try to

effect Dr. Mosadeq’s removal at this time, and our analysis of the situa-

tion confirms that the Shah’s own position would be seriously endan-

gered if he should endeavor to bring this about until the widespread

support in Iran for Dr. Mosadeq has considerably diminished. The

Shah has, however, been made aware of the fact that we would en-

courage him to move if he should feel his position sufficiently strong to

do so.

Dr. Mosadeq reacted sharply to the British reply and on September

24 the Iranian Government announced that the British oil technicians

would be compelled to leave by October 4. Ambassador Henderson

was instructed immediately to see the Prime Minister and the Shah and

to express our grave concern over the expulsion order, urging that it be

not implemented. He undertook in every appropriate way to have the

order canceled and to persuade Prime Minister Mosadeq to show some

reason in this critical situation, but his advice was not heeded. The

Prime Minister categorically refused to withhold the order and de-

nounced the British in the strongest terms.

The cancellation order brought forth from the British new and

strong approaches to the Shah urging him to take immediate action, but

the latter declined to do so. Having been already informed on nu-

merous previous occasions that the United States would not support

the use of force in such circumstances, the British Cabinet, then con-

fronted with the necessity for an immediate decision, decided to take

the matter to the Security Council. The British Government informed

the Department on September 28 of this plan. Before our reaction had

been obtained, a public announcement was made by the British and a

draft resolution circulated to the members of the Security Council. Al-

though the Department doubted the wisdom of this course, and made

clear the reasons for its doubts, it was necessary to assure the British

that we would support them in the Security Council. We urged them,

however, to replace their strongly-worded draft resolution with one

which would have minimum adverse effects and which might possibly

contribute to a solution to the problem. The British made it clear that

their decision to take the matter to the Security Council was based

largely, if not wholly, on internal political considerations as an alterna-

tive to the use of force, and that they would require a strong resolution

to be introduced even if it could not receive the required number of

votes or was vetoed by the Soviet Union. They agreed, however, to un-

dertake to draft a resolution which could receive our diplomatic sup-

port. The British decided before the expiration of the Iranian ulti-

matum to withdraw the technicians from Abadan.

The Security Council was convened on October 2 to consider the

British complaint, and by a vote of 9 to 2 agreed that the item should be

put on the agenda. The question of competence was not then decided,

and several delegations reserved their position in this respect. Subse-

quently, the British and American delegations endeavored to work out

ment 97).

divergency over the nature of a potential U.N. Security Council resolution on Iran. Gif-

ford argued, “we have now reached point where it seems to me there is clear-cut issue

before us: do we condemn or at least imply condemnation of Mossadeq for his continued

irresponsibility or do we in effect condone it by associating ourselves with a res which at-

taches no blame and treats both parties equally?” Gifford concluded: “I hope most ear-

nestly that Dept may be able to give urgent consideration to these points with a view

toward evolving new res which avoids what I consider needlessly provocative tone of

Brit res and, at same time, weak nature of ours.” Full text of the telegram is ibid., pp.

February 1951–February 1952

a mutually acceptable draft resolution. Our efforts to persuade the

British to assume a more conciliatory attitude in the draft resulted in a

sharp reaction in London, and the British Government through various

channels in London, Washington and New York set forth in very strong

terms their dissatisfaction with what they considered to be the lack of

support for their position. The British expressed concern that this lack

of support might result in the question entering into the political debate

in the United Kingdom with consequent harmful effects upon United

States-British relations.

We have, however, now been able to work out a resolution which

goes a long way toward meeting the British desires and which we feel

would encounter minimum adverse reaction on the part of the Ira-

nians. Briefly, this resolution would (a) recount on a factual basis the

principal factors relating to the situation, including the fact that Iran

did not accept the provisional measures of the International Court of

Justice; (b) call for a resumption of negotiations on the basis of the prin-

ciples of the Court’s decision, unless some other mutually acceptable

basis can be found; and (c) call upon all countries to take no action

which would prejudice the rights, claims or positions of the parties.

Dr. Mosadeq, heading a large Iranian delegation, arrived in New

York on October 8 to represent Iran before the Security Council. It is un-

derstood that his efforts will be directed toward denying the compe-

tency of the Security Council in the matter. In so doing he is expected to

make a blistering attack against the AIOC in particular and the British

in general. It is feared that airing the matter before the Security Council

will very seriously prejudice the possibility of successful negotiations.

It would be well if Dr. Mosadeq’s presence in the United States could

be used as an opportunity to bring about a resumption of negotiations

before the Security Council action, although the present British political

situation is such as to make it unlikely that they will or can agree to a

substantial postponement of the Council’s meeting. The Department is,

however, endeavoring in such ways as it can to bring about a resump-

tion of negotiations, although as a practical matter this is probably not

possible until after the British elections on October 25.

Assistant Secretary of State George C. McGhee has had conversa-

tions in New York with Dr. Mosadeq. While these talks have been

largely of a preliminary nature, Dr. Mosadeq has given the impression

that he would like if possible to avoid Security Council action, espe-

cially since he believes that what he must say before the Council would

make it extremely difficult for the British to negotiate with his Govern-

ment; that he in fact wants a settlement with the British and would be

prepared to make some amendments in his previous proposals al-

though he was not willing at the time to agree to all elements of a solu-

tion which might be termed satisfactory; that he would prefer that any

preliminary conversations preceding negotiations be between himself

and United States representatives rather than directly with the British;

that he would welcome a postponement of the Security Council action

to permit time for negotiations; that he would be willing to undertake

negotiations with the British after the Security Council action; that he

understood the political situation in Great Britain and would be willing

to postpone negotiations until after the elections on October 25. He

pointed out, however, that the financial situation in Iran is critical and

will compel the Iranian Government to take action in the very near fu-

ture to relieve the problem.

President Truman has invited Dr. Mosadeq, in line with the usual

courtesies extended to visiting Prime Ministers, to come to Washington

during his stay in the United States. This will provide an opportunity

for constructive talks with Dr. Mosadeq at the highest level. A time for

the visit has not, however, been established as yet.

50.

Editorial Note

According to the official minutes of the National Security Council

meeting held on October 10, 1951, with regard to Iran, the Council “dis-

cussed the current situation in Iran in the light of an oral report by the

Secretary of State.” (National Archives, RG 273, Records of the National

the meeting, the National Security Council also considered an October

February 1951–February 1952

wrote that the “Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the United States

should take most energetic measures, as a matter of urgency, to sup-

port or arrive at the achievement of a solution of the Iranian problem

which will:

“a. Provide for the continued orientation of Iran toward the

Western World (this should receive overriding priority);

“b. Make possible an effective command organization for the de-

fense of Iran in coordination with the other areas of the Middle East;

and

“c. Assure the continued supply of Iranian oil to the Western

51.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, October 12, 1951.

SUBJECT

Analysis of Iranian Political Situation

(It is specifically requested that no distribution of this report be

made outside of the Agency.)

1. Background.

A. Xenophobia. Iran now is anti-Western but is violent only in its

manifestation against the British because their presence in Iran up to

this time has been more substantial than the presence of any other

Westerners (for example, the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, British bank

and business firms backed by a long history of British interests in Iran).

Mossadeq came to power on a wave of xenophobia, the forerunner of

which was the anti-Razmara and anti-court movement (Razmara and

the Shah described as servants of the British). If the United States

should continue to side spectacularly with the British (for example,

Harriman’s refusal to pass to the British Mossadeq’s “ultimatum,” and

the postponement of the $25,000,000 Export-Import Bank loan), the

brunt of anti-Western feeling could easily cover the United States as

well as Great Britain.

B. Dictatorship of the streets. The Mossadeq government is the

prisoner of the “streets.” The “streets” are composed of two main

groups: the followers of Mullah Kashani and the Tudeh Party (with sat-

ellite fronts), both of which are exploiting to the fullest a wave of gen-

uine nationalistic feelings of a broad section of the upper middle class.

Although Kashani’s following is possibly more numerous than that of

the Tudeh, the former has neither the organization, discipline, nor rev-

olutionary and conspiratorial training and experience of the latter. Ac-

cordingly, of the two the more powerful is undoubtedly the Tudeh

Party.

C. The traditional Iranian policy is to maintain the balance of

power between the Soviet Union and Great Britain. The Iranian polit-

ical pendulum is now swinging dangerously toward the Soviet Union

but given opportunities the Iranian should react and turn toward the

West for support (providing the West is not represented by Great

Britain alone).

2. Mossadeq’s government has powerful popular support.

A. Majlis opposition to Mossadeq collapsed on 30 September 1951.

Abdul Rahman Faramarzi announced that the opposition would cease

to attack the government as long as the oil dispute was under consider-

ation of the Security Council. Sources believe, however, that the col-

lapse of this opposition is final. The Security Council debate is a

face-saving excuse. The opposition has gotten “out on a limb,” de-

pending upon British power and Royal Court support. Both failed to

come through with their support and the opposition deputies fear for

their very lives.

B. Moslem religious groups, who at one time might have been di-

verted from Kashani and from his pro-Mossadeq stand, have now ral-

lied to the national front banner. In a letter dated September 1951

Navab Safavi, leader of the Fedayan-I-Islam, made peace with Kashani;

a letter from Burujurdi of Qum (the outstanding spiritual leader of

Iran) to the Shah urged him to support Mossadeq.

C. Kashani’s enormous influence in support of the government

was demonstrated on 3 September 1951 by the general closing of the

bazaars throughout the nation at his request and by the orderliness of

the parades he sponsored in favor of the government on the same day.

D. The Shah has taken a stand in favor of Mossadeq and at least

since 17 September has refused to listen to British entreaties to rally op-

February 1951–February 1952

position in favor of Seyyed Zia Tabatabai. At Mossadeq’s request the

Shah has ordered the Princess Ashraf out of the country (she left in late

September 1951), thereby showing that he would no longer (that is, for

the time being) condone court intrigues in political matters.

E. The Tudeh Party and peace front organizations are backing

Mossadeq, albeit only on specific issues. As long as Mossadeq’s policy

remains intransigent against the British, the Tudeh is behind Mos-

sadeq. The Tudeh does not appear to be in the mood at this time to

make life difficult for the government, as evidenced by the fact that the

Tudeh apparently accepted the police order not to celebrate publicly

3. The British position in Iran has collapsed.

A. [1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]

B. The influence of the British Embassy upon the Shah and his

courtiers has practically ceased to exist, mainly because the Shah is in-

creasingly aware of the strength of the “streets”, and fears the “streets”

at present more than he fears the British. No other Prime Minister prior

to Mossadeq could claim such sponsorship. The Shah dares not talk

back or step out of line. He is fully aware now that the political wave

which brought Mossadeq into power was in great part an anti-court

wave.

C. The campaign of intimidation supported by certain elements of

the National Front and condoned by Mullah Kashani (but not con-

doned by Mossadeq) has contributed toward current elimination of

British-sponsored opposition. (See also paragraph 2 a above.)

4. The Soviet Union is in a relatively strong position to reap

advantages.

A. The Tudeh Party has great potentialities. Although inside infor-

mation is inadequate, the following clues are important:

(1) As early as 1946 the Tudeh had organized workers in Abadan

to a point where they successfully staged a general strike.

(2) Since the Razmara cabinet, the Tudeh has enjoyed greater

freedom of action with correspondingly increased efficiency.

(3) In 1950 the Tudeh organized peace front groups.

(4) In December 1950 the Tudeh was in a position to stage the es-

cape of ten of its leaders from the Tehran jail.

(5) In April 1951 the Tudeh quickly took advantage of the inepti-

tude of British labor relations in Abadan to stage another successful

general strike.

(6) In July 1951 the Tudeh was able to mass ten thousand demon-

strators in the streets of Tehran and organize them in semi-military

order.

(7) In the past year the Tudeh has been signally successful in con-

ducting larger scale propaganda.

(8) An estimate of Tudeh and front groups for the Tehran area in

September 1951 was a maximum of thirty-five thousand, which ap-

pears to be a considerable increase over a year ago.

(9) The economic situation stands to deteriorate further, which

paves the way for further increase in the power of the Tudeh Party.

B. The policy of the National Front at this time plays directly into

Soviet hands.

(1) It has caused misunderstandings between London and Wash-

ington. The breach could be made to widen further.

(2) It calls for the physical expulsion of the British from Iran.

(3) It has undermined the prestige of the Anglo-Saxon powers in

the Near East.

(4) It lays the groundwork for a common front of nationalists in the

Near East against Anglo-Saxon “imperialists.” (This policy, favorable

to the Soviet Union, can be carried out much more smoothly by the

Mossadeq government, a bourgeois government, than by a Tudeh

government.)

(5) The Soviet “siding” with Iran at the Security Council in early

October 1951 has increased sympathy for the Soviets even in the ranks

of the National Front.

C. Note, however, that Soviet influence in Iran has to contend with:

(1) The army, police, and gendarme´rie which represent in the

hands of the Shah and the government comparatively well-organized,

centralized, and massive repressive forces, with noteworthy short-

coming such as penetration in certain quarters, corruption, and so

forth.

(2) Popular resistance to communism which stems from religious

sentiments and a revival of nationalism.

February 1951–February 1952

52.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, October 30, 1951.

1590. 1. Abol Qasem Panahi called on Richards yesterday stating

that he was emissary of Qavam. After reviewing what he described as

“rapidly deteriorating situation” Iran, Panahi stated that many people

now felt that Mosadeq could not retain position as Primin for long after

his return from US. If he failed return with agreement permitting early

resumption oil production his political opponents would brand his

mission a failure. On other hand any likely agreement would involve

arrangements with British and this would leave Mosadeq open to

charges having sold out to British.

2. Panahi then stated Shah had been seeing Qavam and, while

Qavam’s shortcomings well recognized, Shah now prepared accept

him as next Primin in absence any more promising candidate.

3. Qavam had indicated to Panahi that he would have no dealings

with Russians; and that he would have minimum dealings with Brits.

However before taking next steps Qavam wanted to be assured he

would be acceptable to US were he to be called to power.

4. Panahi was told Emb could not indicate opposition to or support

of any specific person or political party. However it was believed US

would cooperate with any political leader coming into power on plat-

form which indicated he would (a) support the constitutional gov-

ernment of the country, (b) take steps to revive oil industry on basis

sound economic considerations, (c) oppose Russian expansion and in-

filtration, and (d) would be willing collaborate with US and other

like-minded Western powers to achieve these ends.

5. Point also made to Panahi that Emb would hope any new Govt

would enlist support young, respectable and forward-looking leaders

for positions of responsibility. Panahi stated Qavam already lining up

likely candidates for number key posts and he thought they would

meet specifications we had in mind although there was “poverty of

leaders” in Iran.

6. Foregoing is of considerable interest as coming from Qavam and

as indication thinking of considerable number Iranians. Richards’ han-

dling of matter has my approval.

Henderson

53.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, November 9, 1951.

SUBJECT

DADPC–CNEA Weekly Meeting, 7 November 1951

PARTICIPANTS

[name not declassified]

[name not declassified]

[name not declassified]

1. [name not declassified] asked [name not declassified] if he had seen

the policy paper on Iran that had been returned for reworking. [name

not declassified] answered that he had not seen it but that he knew of it.

He said that the Senior Staff of NSC wanted it redone and that Mr.

Dulles, who is a member of that staff, had suggested that the [less than 1

line not declassified] and Roosevelt be given the job. The two main faults

with the paper are that it does not really come to grip with the

problems in Iran and it fails to consider our relationships with the

British.

[name not declassified] went on to say that the over-all Iranian situa-

tion is getting worse. Mossadeq is still here and talking about negotia-

ting but at the moment no actual negotiations are taking place. [name

not declassified] asked if the change in British government would have

any effect on negotiations and [name not declassified] said he doubted it

strongly. [name not declassified] said that they were going to have an-

other conference this afternoon (7 Nov. 1951) to look at OPC strategy in

the situation.

[Omitted here is a conversation unrelated to Iran.]

4. [name not declassified] asked if there had been any contact with

British SIS on any of these problems. [name not declassified] said that SIS

had been contacted only on stay-behind activities in the Near East.

54.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, November 16, 1951.

1829. This shld not be shown Brit altho parts re Iranian pol situa-

tion can be used as basis for discussion.

1. Campaign to replace Mosadeq by Qavam has recd setback

during last two days. Yesterday afternoon Middleton, Brit Charge´

d’ Affaires, told me he had learned thru quite good channels that Shah

has again changed his mind and desires no one except Ala, MinCourt,

as next Primin. He asked where our Emb stood re Mosadeq, Qavam

and Ala.

2. I said we had no instructions and expected none on this subject.

Our present position was that Emb shld neither back nor oppose any

candidate. It might look like weakness for it to lean over backwards in

this matter. Nevertheless we preferred appearance of weakness to

policy which might well boomerang. We still were not convinced that

in general interference in Iranian internal affairs was likely in long run

to pay. Of course if any PM shld be clearly leading country down path

towards Communism we wld not hesitate as exception to take moves

to try to save Iran even tho they might be considered as interference.

Such situation did not appear exist at present.

3. Middleton said Shah had recently indicated he wld like former

to ask for audience. Middleton had not done so for fear Shah might ask

searching questions which he shld not answer in absence his Ambas-

sador now expected here within ten days. He might not be able how-

ever longer to evade interview. He was afraid Shah might ask what Brit

wld think of Ala as new Primin. What kind of reply wld I make to ques-

tion this kind as to US position. I said I wld probably reply US had no

intention supporting any candidate; nevertheless I sure I was voicing

views my Govt in saying I considered Ala as man of highest ideals and

principles, loyal and honest, a statesman who wld be a credit to any

country. I thot [thought] however Ala was so kindhearted and so

lacking in guile and pol skill that he might have great difficulty in

coping with situation unless he shld have Cabinet composed in part of

most patriotic statesmen of country skilled in politics and not afraid

adopt strong measures and in part of young energetic men with pro-

gressive ideas willing and able institute necessary reforms. Middleton

seemed agree with me. He also agreed with my expressed belief Ala

had no desire be Primin at this time.

4. Middleton asked me state frankly what I thot of Qavam. I said I

knew latter only by reputation which in some respects not high. I thot it

wld be unfortunate if public shld get idea US supporting him. I be-

lieved it wld also be against our common interests if Iranians shld come

to belief he was Brit candidate. Middleton said he doing best to dissi-

pate impression which seemed to be rather widespread Brit supporting

Qavam. Qavam complicated character. He had recently sent emissaries

who represented his platform in rosy light. For instance, liberal attitude

towards settlement oil dispute (altho not return Brit oil companies to

Iran); agricultural and financial reforms; entry Iran into ME defense

pact; suppression of Commies, etc. Of course these mere promises.

Qavam so tricky no one knew exactly what he wld do if once in power.

Nevertheless Mosadeq with his anti-Brit bias; plus his apparent deter-

mination to keep Iran “neutral” might well lead Iran into clutches of

Russia. I said I appreciated this danger and agreed developments shld

be closely watched. I did not say Qavam had sent US message he de-

sired keep aloof from both Russians and Brit and cooperate with US.

5. Later in evening I had long talk with Ala. He said Shah anxious

know latest US attitude towards Mosadeq and our views re Iranian pol

scene. Was it to be inferred from “special treatment” shown to Mo-

sadeq in Washington2 that US wanted him to remain in power? Were

February 1951–February 1952

press reports to effect that US thot Communism only alternative to Mo-

sadeq accurate? I replied Mosadeq went to US as Primin of Iran with

full backing of Majlis. US Govt therefore had treated him with all re-

spect due to full-fledged rep of Iran. Courtesies and consideration not

shown to Mosadeq as an individual but to head of Iranian Govt. US

prepared cooperate with Mosadeq or any other duly installed Primin

prepared to work with it. Ala said he understood Mosadeq returning to

Iran determined neither to change his policies re oil or to resign. Was

US prepared to give Iran financial assistance so it cld carry on without

oil revenues? I said I not in position answer such question just now. I

thot however it might not be easy for US Govt to give or lend Iran funds

for an indefinite period to compensate it for its loss of oil revenues.

6. Ala asked re attitude US towards Qavam. I again replied US not

supporting or opposing him. It was trying not interfere in internal af-

fairs of country. I asked if it true Shah was not favorable to Qavam’s

candidacy. Ala said “no”, but Shah not yet decided give Qavam full

support. Qavam was outstanding candidate succeed Mosadeq; never-

theless, Shah continued hesitate throw his weight behind him. Unfortu-

nately on November 14 vicious attack had been made on Qavam’s in-

tegrity by Senator Farrokh on floor Senate. Shah deeply regretted this

attack and sent message to Qavam that effect. Since Senator was friend

Shah Qavam was deeply suspicious that Court was in some way in-

volved in this attack. In his chagrin Qavam had applied for passport to

leave country. Shah was still trying dispel this suspicion and persuade

Qavam remain on. I remarked another person was being mentioned for

Primin. Ala replied that other person wld in no circumstances accept

post. He had held it for month prior to Mosadeq and his experience had

convinced him he not cut out for pol life that kind. I said that with

strong experienced and forward looking Cabinet perhaps he might be

able rally country around him. Ala said he thought he cld be more

useful in his present position. Before leaving Ala remarked Shah wld

probably like to see me in near future.

Henderson

55.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 636

Tehran, November 23, 1951.

REF

SUBJECT

Joint Estimate of the Situation In Iran, November 1951 prepared by the American

and the British Embassies in Tehran

While the attached joint study of the American and the British Em-

bassies at Tehran upon the current Iranian situation has been cabled to

the Department in the above reference, this Embassy has believed it de-

sirable to transmit the fully-phrased text decided upon by the two Em-

bassies to provide a complete-reference document for the Department.

The document provides its own commentary, and it might be

added that in the interests of Anglo-American solidarity the British

Embassy agreed that for its spelling of Mosadeq (Mussadiq) it would

accept general American spelling throughout and American usage of

Iran instead of “Persia.”

For the Ambassador:

Roy M. Melbourne

First Secretary of Embassy

Attachment

JOINT ESTIMATE OF THE SITUATION IN IRAN, NOVEMBER 1951

prepared by the American and British Embassies at Tehran

Policy

We assume that the immediate, mutual and overriding United

States–United Kingdom objective in Iran is to prevent that country

from falling into communist hands.

Principal Factors in Iran Today

A. Corrupt and inefficient system of government.

Security Information. Drafted by Melbourne. Received December 12.

February 1951–February 1952

B. Strong popular current of anti-foreign nationalism, personified

and led by Prime Minister Musaddiq, Kashani and National Front

supporters.

C. Constitutional monarchy, headed by indecisive and weak

though well-intentioned Shah.

D. Small oligarchy of landowners and merchants, motivated pri-

marily by self-interest, and currently supporting the constitutional

regime.

E. Running sore of oil dispute with British, with attendant disloca-

tion of Iran’s economy and politics.

F. Security forces in general still loyal to the Shah.

G. Moslem religion which affects all phases of Iranian life.

H. Depressed economic and social conditions of the majority of

the population, with resultant discontent. (Detailed report submitted

separately)

I. Communist exploitation of the situation.

J. Decline of western influence.

A. There are elements in Iran which wish for good government,

honest government, and government for the good of the people. But

they are not in control. Corruption and nepotism are rife. Many offi-

cials great and small take advantage of their positions to extract money

from the people. The result is that there exists a vast gulf between offi-

cialdom and the people. In the absence of any effective, really demo-

cratic reform party the discontent of the people is bound to attract them

towards the extreme of communism.

Corruption and nepotism are as prevalent under the Musaddiq

Government as under previous governments. Likewise, the general

public, accustomed to regarding all governments as oppressive and in-

different to their interests, has little, if any, different feeling for the Mu-

saddiq regime.

B. Iranians in general resent and suspect all foreigners. Their na-

tional pride was inflated by Reza Shah and deflated by the Allied occu-

pation during the war. The national post-war upsurge was vented first

on the Soviets and then on the British against whose oil company in

Iran there had long been a latent feeling of resentment. Nothing that is

likely to happen in the near future is likely to make the Iranians less na-

tionalist in outlook. Regardless of the possible removal or defeat of Mu-

saddiq and his National Front, the public could almost certainly be in-

duced to support another leader or movement in the future which

panders to this nationalism and to oppose what might be considered as

appeasement of the foreigner at the expense of Iran. However, it is im-

portant to recognize the potential ability of politicians in power to con-

trol the police and largely to monopolize the means of propaganda,

which can have at least short-run effects upon the basic nationalistic

feelings of the people.

The above is common ground to both Embassies. They disagree,

however, as to the extent Iranian nationalism will limit the freedom of

action of any future government.

The demonstrated political ability of Musaddiq as a shrewd leader

of the National Front minority and a demagogue who well under-

stands Iranian emotions and character, his personal prejudices against

the British, and his almost megalomaniac desire to act as champion of

the Iranian people in the struggle for “independence” are important

factors to be considered in the present situation. Aside from the popu-

larity of Mussadiq because of his oil program, which thus far seems to

be the only definite program of the National Front, much support is

brought to him by the demagogic Mullah Kashani, who is notoriously

venal and very probably would desert him if any of Mosadeq’s rivals

offered an inducement outweighing the “spoils” which he derives from

his influence with the present government.

C. The Shah might be a factor for stability, continuity of leadership

and resistance to communism in Iran. He appears, however, to have too

little confidence in his own influence; at least he apparently does not

regard it as opportune to endeavor to exert it against the present

government.

He has thus far been unable to use nationalist elements to

strengthen the Crown or to effect much needed reforms in the face of

the landowning-merchant oligarchy.

The Shah realizes that Musaddiq and Kashani, with their fol-

lowers, are anxious to limit his powers and he is also aware that Na-

tional Front hostility towards the Army arises from the fear that he

might use it against them. However, he currently feels if he should ac-

tively try to remove Musaddiq there could be an upheaval in which the

prestige and influence of the Crown would probably suffer.

The disappearance of the Shah would mean the loss to the western

world of a friendly and potentially powerful stabilizing element and

the ensuing struggle for power might lead to chaos which an organized

Tudeh Party would exploit.

D. The landowner-merchant oligarchy, with the support of pow-

erful religious leaders, has been one of the main obstacles to progress of

the Iranian people and to the development of the country’s resources. It

has tenaciously fought for maintenance of the status quo. While sup-

porting the Shah as a stabilizing factor in the country, it has obstructed

February 1951–February 1952

his inclinations towards reforms. This feudal group is anxious to per-

petuate itself and is governed by short-sighted self-interest.

E. The oil dispute with the British, with attendant dislocation of

Iran’s economy as a result of cessation of the oil industry, is the most

acute factor for instability in Iran today. Political and popular emotions

have been increasingly exacerbated by this issue during the past year.

Failure to obtain the usual oil revenues will affect the government bu-

reaucracy and the military forces seriously as salaries and supplies lag

behind. Trade standstill and general economic consequences are dis-

cussed in Section H. Finally, until revenues again begin to flow from

the oil industry, no government, even if so inclined, can turn to public

works or improvement of the miserable social and economic conditions

of the majority of the population.

F. There is still considerable loyalty to the Shah among security

forces. United States advisory missions to these forces assist in main-

taining their effectiveness for internal security.

Nevertheless, the armed forces in Iran are weak reeds for the Shah,

the government and the free world to rely upon. Lower ranks are dis-

contented and ill-paid, many junior officers are receptive to communist

propaganda, and senior officers often are incompetent and corrupt. In

view of the anti-military sentiments and the “neutralist” foreign policy

of Musaddiq, it is not unlikely that United States military missions

could be hampered in their operations and could even be forced even-

tually to leave. This last development would be a serious blow to the

Anglo-United States position in Iran.

G. In the Moslem world religion is both a stabilizing factor and a

serious obstacle to reform. At the same time demagogic religious

leaders in Iran appealing to the intolerant aspects of Islam can con-

tribute towards political instability. This has been the case under the

Musaddiq government when such men as Mullah Kashani have been

gaining increased prominence and influence. They gave to the move-

ment to drive out the British almost the significance of a religious cru-

sade. There are signs, however, that the conservative religious leaders

are disturbed by and opposed to the activities of the demagogues.

H. See report submitted separately.

I. The Tudeh Party is effectively organized as a force in politics and

in industry with an estimated full membership in Tehran of 8,000, in

Khuzistan of 5,000 and a strong membership in Azerbaijan and Gilan.

The demonstration of July 15 showed considerable organizing ca-

pacity. It also has influence in sections of the army, the police and gov-

ernment departments. Its cover organizations such as the Partisans of

Peace are allowed to operate and communist line newspapers are al-

lowed to appear.

It already adopts an extreme line over the oil question and any de-

viation of the National Front leaders from their present extremist

course would add to its propaganda strength. Much of its strength lies

in the Iranian popular misconception of the nature of the Tudeh. It is

widely viewed as an indigenous political movement advocating re-

forms close to the heart of the populace. In fact, many Iranians have not

forgotten certain reforms sponsored by the Party during the time of its

ascendancy.

The average Iranian has an historic suspicion of the USSR, but at

the same time he has an ostrich-like attitude in viewing current Soviet

intentions. He is being diverted by the current oil dispute and commu-

nist efforts to interpret it as Anglo-American imperialism. His imagina-

tion in this regard is continually sharpened by a steady barrage of

clever Soviet propaganda. The USSR is queen of the airwaves in this

area. At any time one can hear Soviet propaganda on the various short

and long wave-lengths in several languages.

At present the communists are spurring the nationalists’ drive to

oust the British from Iran, while trying to link this with their own anti-

American line. When the western powers are driven from Iran and

their influence destroyed, the communists may be expected to intro-

duce the second stage of their long-range objectives—the destruction of

internal rivals for power in Iran.

The United States recent position in the Security Council regarding

the oil dispute has been construed here as substantive support of the

United Kingdom, thus offsetting the previous impression in Iranian

minds that the United States favored the Iranian case, and may be ex-

pected to increase Tudeh potential directly and indirectly through the

resultant tendency of the National Front and its popular supporters to

turn toward the USSR. In time this may create an environment favor-

able to the Tudeh ambition to seize power.

There is little indication of an immediate intention to seize power

by force. However, if an exceptional opportunity presents itself in the

uncertain near future through the disintegration of forces for stability

in Iran, the Party will certainly make its bid. At present it appears that

the Party’s immediate aim is to strengthen its political position by se-

curing the election to the 17th Majlis of a small number of deputies.

These would seek the legalization of the Party, and in this they could

expect support from some right-wing politicians, especially those with

estates in the north, who by this means would try to curry favor with

the Russians. Then the Party would try to increase its influence in the

February 1951–February 1952

government to the extent that the latter could no longer raise effective

opposition to the Party’s extra-legal methods of terror and force.

In the event of the fall of Musaddiq and the advent to power of a

government opposed to the peaceful development of the Tudeh Party,

it seems likely:

1) that the Tudeh Party would adopt more vigorous tactics di-

rected against the government; and

2) that the government in its turn would adopt more vigorous

measures to implement the anti-Tudeh laws.

We believe that it is not yet too late for a resolutely anti-Tudeh gov-

ernment to take fairly effective security action to hamper the develop-

ment of the Party. The fact is, however, that no matter how anti-Tudeh

any government may be, it will in the long run play into the hands of

the communists if it engages in the corrupt practices and possesses the

reactionary outlook of most Iranian governments of recent years.

J. The present direction taken by Iranian nationalism, as exempli-

fied by its attitude towards the British oil interests, has served to de-

crease western influence, particularly the British. British influence has

been effective in the past in keeping the Russians from gaining control

of all of Iran, whereas Soviet policy has sought to eliminate western in-

fluence in Iran and to deny Iranian oil to the non-communist world ex-

cept on Soviet terms.

The present decline in western influence in Iran in turn weakens

Iranian resistance to communism and Soviet pressure. Iranians long ac-

customed to playing foreign powers against each other and over-fond

of hoping that their country can remain neutral may dangerously open

themselves to Soviet penetration to such an extent that, if or when they

turn later to the western world to save them from Soviet domination,

their position will already have become irretrievable. Hence, with this

prospect in view, the relative responsibility of the United States has in-

creased on behalf of the free world in preventing Iran from passing into

the Soviet sphere.

Despite the present outburst of anti-British feeling, the British still

have a body of opinion in their favor which, although temporarily sub-

merged, might be effectively mobilized in certain circumstances. For

instance, if the oil dispute could be settled in a manner inoffensive to

reasonable Iranian nationalist elements, or if the Russians or commu-

nists should make a misstep, the British might still stage a comeback.

56.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

1984. Please do not (rpt not) disclose to British.

1. Middleton, British Charge´ d’Affaires, talked with me today in

extreme confidence re political situation. Said under instructions he

was planning to see Shah within next few days in order to point out

dangers to Iran from present Communist activities. British first-hand

info indicated Communists and fellow-travellers have greatly im-

proved their organization and have penetrated certain Iran civilian

agencies and military institutions. British concerned unless these activ-

ities are checked, there can develop real danger Communist coup.

2. Turning to political situation Middleton said British Embassy

feared if Mosadeq carried out plans for “free elections” result would be

elimination from Majlis of moderate elements and packing of Majlis

with emotional, ignorant national extremists and groups willing to

look to Russia for leadership. Elections would probably come within

ten days and unless in interim something could be done to replace Mo-

sadeq, it would be extremely difficult if not (rpt not) impossible to

bring about reasonable government in foreseeable future. Future for

Iran under present auspices looks so dark he thought he should take

advantage his coming conversation with Shah in order point out

gravity situation and suggest time had come for Shah take action to

have Mosadeq replaced. He intended to send at once telegram to Eden

requesting authority to take such step but before doing so would like to

ascertain what US attitude wld be. He thought Shah might hesitate to

take necessary action unless convinced that both UK and US believed it

should be done. Would I be willing support suggestions made by him

to Shah for effecting change in government?

3. In response my inquiries Middleton said although British not

(rpt not) enthusiastic about Qavam, they still thought latter with his po-

litical experience and well-organized following would have better

chance of replacing Mosadeq than any other political leader. He did not

(rpt not) believe Qavam serious in demanding his passport to leave

country. In his opinion Qavam was merely trying to force Shah to make

decision whether or not (rpt not) to give him support.

4. I told Middleton by no (rpt no) means sure it would be in our

joint interest for US at this juncture join UK in pressing Shah to take

Secret; Security Information; Priority. Repeated to London. Received at 3: p.m.

February 1951–February 1952

steps to effect change of govt. If we both brought pressure on Shah and

change was successfully effected, National Front opposition to new

government would probably be both anti-American and anti-British. It

might be able in cooperation with Communist sympathizers to block

efforts our military and civilian aid missions to accomplish their pur-

poses and might even make it difficult for such missions remain in

country. It might also succeed in stirring up even more anti-Western

sentiment than now exists. If under pressure from us Shah should

make attempt and should fail, Crown as stabilizing element might be

eliminated from Iran public life and National Front government would

be just as bitter against Americans as British and any moderating influ-

ence we might have now would be destroyed. I also was not (rpt not)

happy at idea of throwing support to Qavam, whose past record

created certain doubts as to what he might do when once in power.

5. Middleton said idea was not (rpt not) to suggest to Shah that he

exceed his constitutional powers. It was rather suggest to him that he

inform Hekmat, Pres of Majlis privately that he thought time had come

for Mosadeq to go and that if Hekmat cld obtain petition addressed to

him signed by majority members Majlis asking that Mosadeq be re-

placed he wld take appropriate steps immed. Middleton said he

thought there was good chance that Hekmat cld obtain requisite

number of signatures if he cld tell members Majlis whom he ap-

proached Shah wld be willing to act. Middleton said perhaps it wld be

possible persuade Hekmat rather than Qavam to try organize govt. I

said I certainly thought that Hekmat from point of view world opinion

wld be better replacement for Mosadeq than Qavam. I did not (rpt not)

know, however, whether Hekmat wld be willing to undertake such dif-

ficult task or whether he cld, on such short notice, set up kind of organi-

zation necessary effectively to govern country in face of opposition

which he wld be sure to encounter. Middleton said he also did not (rpt

not) know whether Hekmat wld be willing and ready to undertake to

head govt, that was matter which cld be settled between Shah and

Hekmat. What Middleton wld like to know, however, was whether if

Brit wld undertake to persuade Shah to effect change of govt Amer-

icans wld go along or at least not (rpt not) oppose.

6. I said my tentative position was somewhat as fols: “If Brit shld

make suggestion to Shah along lines suggested and Shah or Ala wld

ask my opinion in matter I wld not (rpt not) wet-blanket idea, neither

wld I urge Shah to take such action. In talking over matter with Ala I

might remind him of our conversation of some weeks ago during

which he told me the Shah had decided that if Mosadeq after returning

Iran shld refuse to change his advisers and policies and shld insist on

new elections under his auspices, Shah wld feel that no (rpt no) matter

what consequences might be he must take steps to remove Mosadeq

before latter cld lead country to ruin. I might after reminding Ala this

conversation ask him whether in his opinion time had come for him to

make decision of this character”. I told Middleton that, of course, my

tentative position might be altered by instructions which I might re-

ceive from my govt or in light subsequent events. I cld not (rpt not)

bind myself.

7. I wld be grateful if Dept wld inform me whether it approves my

reply to Middleton. Present position here extremely critical. On one

hand there is undoubtedly great danger that “free elections” under Mo-

sadeq might result in Majlis dominated by irresponsible elements. On

other hand for US, while maintaining outwardly friendly relations with

Mosadeq, covertly to bring pressure for his overthrow, wld place it in

invidious position regardless whether or not (rpt not) Mosadeq’s over-

throw was effected. It wld not (rpt not) add to US reputation for us to

play double-faced role in Iran. If we think that Mosadeq’s policies are

so dangerous that we must work against him we shld let him know

what we think before taking action. It seems to me, particularly in view

not (rpt not) likely relish idea attempting replace Mosadeq so soon after

latter’s return as natl hero and while latter is probably more popular

with masses than any polit figure in many years.

Henderson

that Mosadeq was now displaying considerable political skills. The efforts of the Queen

Mother to intrigue with Ahmad Qavam, in Ala’s estimation, were likely to backfire. The

Shah had directed Ala to speak to Mosadeq, “who repeated anti-Brit line as entire justifi-

cation his policies of intransigence re oil solution . . . Further, Primin expressed opinion

US would give budgetary aid rather than see Iran go communist, since if economic chaos

came to Iran there would be no chance for pro-Brit govt and communism would result.”

57.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the United Kingdom

2732. Dept disturbed at action suggested by Brit Emb Tehran

Henderson to Middleton. It seems to us requesting Shah at this partic-

ular moment to dismiss Mosadeq is doomed to failure; Mosadeq now

at peak popularity and cld in test of strength probably overthrow Shah

rather than vice-versa. Such an approach therefore, by virtue of posi-

tion in which it wld place Shah, might turn him against Brit.

In view of joint appraisal recently recd from US and UK Embs

Tehran, Dept surprised Brit still believe solution of their problem in

likely event this shld succeed, Dept cannot rpt not see how any suc-

cessor Govt cld adopt more moderate policy for some time to come. To

stay in power or even to stay alive, new PriMin in our opinion cld not

rpt not retreat substantially from Mosadeq’s nationalization policies.

Brit Emb approached Dept Nov 28 on instrs from FonOff and ex-

though proposal as put to Brit apparently contains substantive varia-

tions from that conveyed to us, particularly as regards participation

Brit in Iran oil industry. Brit asking US take no action with respect to US

aid programs in Iran which might harden IranGov towards proposals

now being refined by Bank. Tehran’s 1985 Nov 28 reports Mosadeq also

Secret; Security Information; Priority. Drafted by Ferguson, cleared in EUR, and ap-

proved by McGhee. Repeated Priority to Rome for Secretary Acheson and to Tehran.

very interested in IBRD proposal. While obstacles pointed out in

Deptel 2713 still appear great to us, we are encouraged by attitude

shown by both parties. Shld Mosadeq learn as is inevitable of any Brit

attempt to have Shah dismiss him, he certainly will not rpt not be ame-

nable to any suggestions for solution put forward by Bank or anyone

else, and will see to it that any successor govt cld not rpt not accept any

overtures of this nature.

Accordingly we believe you shld discuss matter frankly with Fon-

Off pointing out while we sympathize with Brit position, our analysis is

that contemplated Brit course of action not only unlikely to produce

any basic improvement in US–UK position in Iran but in present at-

mosphere prevailing there, it contains serious dangers. We firmly be-

lieve Mosadeq’s fall and replacement by suitable alternative must come

about primarily as result internal polit and econ forces. Iran crisis has

arisen in large part out of years of bitter resentment on part Irans

against exactly sort of tactics Middleton is proposing.

While we agree change of govt or change attitude present govt es-

sential if long-range solution is to be found, we cannot escape conclu-

sion Iran people are solidly behind Mosadeq and any attempt by Brit to

have him dismissed wld in all probability result in further removal Brit

from Iran picture. It might also precipitate situation in Iran leading to

assumption of power by Commies or by extremists of Maki–Kashani

type who will not hesitate make deal with Communists.

If, despite above, Brit feel they must proceed with this course of ac-

tion, we will of course not rpt [not] stand in their way. If asked by Shah

for statement US position following Brit representations, we wld take

line suggested by Henderson and tell Shah while we felt Mosadeq

leading his country to disaster and change seems necessary, it is deci-

sion he himself must make and US wld not feel we cld press him one

way or the other. You shld urge Brit not to press Shah take any action

which he in his own judgment thinks inadvisable.

In view Tehran injunction not discuss with Brit Tehran’s 1984, wld

apprec Henderson indicating to London Dept and Rome his views re

Gifford informing FonOff source our info. If London Emb repre-

sentations wld involve serious breach confidence, Henderson shld take

above line with Middleton and request him convey our views London

FonOff.

Webb

58.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,

Central Intelligence Agency

Staff Memorandum No. 171

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

The Tudeh Problem in US Intelligence

1. The questions posed in NIE–462 have once again emphasized

our lack of definite knowledge about the Tudeh Party. We know that

the party exists as a disciplined and dedicated instrument of Soviet

penetration of Iran, that it is the only political grouping in Iran which

has any organizational coherence, and that it is steadily going ahead

with the task of building up its strength to the point where it will be

able to take over Iran. We do not, however, know the names of its

present leaders, and we lack precise information regarding the size and

character of its membership and following, its military capabilities

vis-a`-vis the government security forces, which it is attempting to pene-

trate, and its immediate objectives. Our current information about the

party is largely confined to that obtained from observation of Tudeh

demonstrations, from a scattering of captured documents and propa-

ganda utterances, and from a limited number of low-level informants

within the party recruited by SO contacts directly or by those of the Ira-

nian police, the Iranian Army, [less than 1 line not declassified].

2. This is a highly unsatisfactory situation and one which would

appear to warrant our putting strong pressure on SO, G–2 (whose rep-

resentatives are primarily concerned with army loyalty) and other

agencies to try to do something about it. In exerting such pressure,

however, I think it is incumbent on us to do two things. The first is to

recognize the nature of the problem we are up against. Tudeh is not a

big legal Western-style Communist party which periodically registers

its strength at the ballot box and generally operates on a big enough

scale to afford plenty of opportunities for penetration. It is a relatively

small conspiratorial party, by its own testimony highly concerned

about security, which has applied the cell organization strictly to pre-

vent individual members from knowing too much. If SO manages to

place an agent at the center of one of the three of four important provin-

cial headquarters of Tudeh or in the national Politbureau—and SO cer-

Staff Memoranda—1951. Top Secret; Security Information. The memorandum was prob-

ably prepared prior to December 12.

tainly should be trying—we should be able to get precise answers to

our questions. Until that happy day, we shall have to rely, as we do in

the case of the Soviet Politbureau, on imprecise secondary information.

3. The second task incumbent upon us is to take a closer look at the

estimative value of the information about Tudeh that is available. We

have a fairly complete picture of Tudeh’s early history as Iran’s first

real political party, from the emergence of its leaders from Reza Shah’s

prisons during the war up through 1946, when a Tudeh offshoot ruled

in Azerbaijan, Tudeh leaders held the mayoralty of Tehran and seats in

the cabinet, and Tudeh dominated the labor movement. We have docu-

mentary evidence as to the organizational and ideological travails the

party underwent following the collapse of the Azerbaijan regime, the

breaking of the oilfield strike, and Qavam’s violent campaign of sup-

pression which followed. Signs of Tudeh revival were beginning to ap-

pear when the party was completely banned and a number of leaders

arrested following the attempt on the Shah’s life in early 1949. Avail-

able party documents confirm the impression of another slow revival

following a period of confusion and immobility after the 1949 ban on

the party—first the careful reconstitution of a secure system of cadre

cells, then a cautious recruitment of new members accompanied by a

revival of key elements of the party’s clandestine press. This phase was

completed in late 1950; with the emergence of the oil crisis in early 1951,

Tudeh front organizations moved out into the streets to demonstrate

for peace and oil nationalization. The Tudeh press output increased.

4. These demonstrations, which continued sporadically into the

fall, apparently had the immediate purpose of building up popular

support for Tudeh causes and keeping anti-Western feeling high. Al-

though they provided valuable practice in militant tactics, as well as in

testing Tudeh ability to get out a crowd, there is no indication that the

drillmasters were ordered specifically to fight; such brawls as resulted

appear to have been caused by the intervention of Nationalist Front

supporters.

5. The impression that Tudeh is currently concentrating on

building up popular confidence and support rather than on preparing

for an imminent resort to force is borne out by recent reports. One pos-

sible signpost is provided by a Cominform Journal article of late August

which describes Tudeh progress in glowing terms but points out that

the movement still has a long way to go and indicates that establish-

ment of a popular front government is the next step. There have been

two or three reports, some quite specific, about Tudeh hopes of electing

supporters to the new Majlis. Reports of cell meetings indicate preoccu-

pation with such matters as collection of dues, education, sale of party

publications, and tighter security in view of the recent police seizure of

membership lists and other documents. The SO representative’s pre-

February 1951–February 1952

liminary analysis of the documents seized in the 27 October police raid

on Tudeh’s Tehran provincial headquarters indicated that no Tudeh

plans “of any significance” had been found. I have seen only one report

of Tudeh military preparations, an unconfirmed SO report of some

months back alleging that a terrorist group of 100 men was being orga-

nized in southern Iran. There have been two or three recent reports that

Tudeh recognized that an opportunity to take power might come rela-

tively soon but that it was still unprepared and did not desire a direct

clash at this time with the relatively favorable Mossadeq government.

6. This picture of the development of the Tudeh Party is admit-

tedly based on incomplete information, and our information regarding

specific Tudeh capabilities is even less precise. Even there, I think we

have enough information to reach some reasonably sound conclusions.

Tudeh’s capability for assuming power eventually rests on three in-

terrelated factors in various combinations: its ability to marshal pop-

ular support, either at the polls or in street demonstrations; its purely

military strength vis-a`-vis the security authorities; and its ability to ca-

jole, bribe, or trick other politicians into giving it assistance. These

factors are analyzed below.

a. Popular support. Actual strength of the party and its supporters is

unknown, and existing estimates by US, British and Iranian officials in

(possibly including sympathizers). A rough index is provided, how-

ever, by the size of Tudeh demonstrations, which have specifically been

described in some reports as tests of strength. Tudeh demonstrations in

Tehran this year have never had more than about 5,000 specifically

pro-Tudeh participants and have been markedly smaller in the few

provincial centers in which Tudeh demonstrations have taken place.

These figures are markedly below those of 1946, the last occasion on

which Tudeh had any real pretensions of being a mass party. More-

over, it is significant that Tudeh demonstrators have been not only out-

numbered but actually defeated in street fighting by the National Front

element. Tudeh mass support is unlikely to be a critical factor until the

party can take over a significant portion of the floating support now

aligned with the National Front.

b. Military strength vis-a`-vis the security authorities. There have been

no reports of the existence of Tudeh paramilitary organizations and

only scattering reports of preparations for a military phase. This nega-

tive information is obviously inconclusive. There is some reason to be-

lieve, however, that if the party were preparing for imminent military

operations some indications would show up in reports now being re-

ceived. By way of comparison, there have been numerous reports over

the last few years of Soviet agent activities and imminent revolts

among the Kurds. None of these revolts has materialized. There have

59.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Iran Branch, Near East

and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans ([name not

declassified]) to the Chief of the Operations Division,

Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Helms)

Washington, December 29, 1951.

SUBJECT

Summary of Project Activities during December 1951

A. Political and Psychological Warfare.

[Omitted here is one paragraph of operational data.]

2. Attempts to expose and oppose the Tudeh Party in the National

elections of Iran continue to be the main activity under project [6 lines

not declassified].

Information.

60.

Editorial Note

Prime Minister Mosadeq’s reluctance to accede to the conditions

for a continuation of military aid and the military missions to Iran

under Section 511, paragraphs (a) and (b) of the Mutual Security Act of

1951 posed a problem for the Truman administration. Section 511,

paragraphs (a) and (b), prohibited providing military, economic, or

technical assistance to any nation unless the President determined that

such assistance would strengthen U.S. security and unless the recipient

orandum from Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern,

South Asian, and African Affairs Berry to Secretary Acheson, dated

January 8, 1952, explained that “Prime Minister Mosadeq thus far has

categorically refused to give the assurances required under Section

511(a) of the Mutual Security Act in order to permit continuation after

January 8 of military aid and economic and technical assistance in sup-

port of the military effort. Dr. Mosadeq’s refusal to give these assur-

ances in any form appears to have been based upon his reluctance to

take a position which might be interpreted as aligning Iran irrevocably

with the United States in opposition to the Soviet Union, thus militating

against Iran’s current efforts to maintain a neutral position in the

East-West struggle.” As the Department was flexible in devising a for-

mula whereby Mosadeq could legitimately fulfill the conditions set

forth in the Mutual Security Act, “we proceeded with a plan to obtain

from Dr. Mosadeq in suitable form assurances under Section 511(b) of

the legislation which would permit continuation of ‘simple’ economic

aid. After difficult negotiations even on this point, Ambassador Hen-

61.

Despatch From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

[Despatch number not declassified]

Tehran, January 10, 1952.

SUBJECT

General—Operational

Specific—Summary of Remarks and Opinions Expressed by Mulla Ayatolla

Kashani—5 January

Following transmitted for the record only as it may contribute to

further operations involving the penetration of Kashani’s group.

1. Attached hereto (Attachment 1) is a summary of remarks and

opinions expressed by Mulla Ayatolla Kashani during a conversation

2. The conversation [less than 1 line not declassified] and took place in

a house chosen by Kashani in the Shimran suburb of Tehran on 5 Jan-

uary. [1½ lines not declassified] It was explained [less than 1 line not declas-

sified] to Kashani that we had nothing to ask of Kashani, nor anything

February 1951–February 1952

specific to discuss with him; but that the reason for the meeting was to

afford an opportunity for a frank, informal, friendly exchange of views.

3. Kashani immediately began attacking American policy of

“siding with the British” in Iran, being most outspoken in his views.

His criticism against the United States appeared to begin with

“America’s imposition of Razmara on the Iranian people.” He singled

out U.S. Attache´ Gerald Dooher for special condemnation, and recalled

Dooher’s interview with him during which the former tried to get him

to support Razmara’s candidacy for premiership. Kashani stated that

pious American claims to not interfere in internal Iranian affairs were

belied by Wiley’s and Dooher’s support of Razmara. He also attacked

the United States for its support of the British position in Egypt.

4. [1½ lines not declassified] it is felt that a personal relationship with

Kashani over a period of time may serve to give this Station a better in-

sight into the character and significance of this most important Iranian

and Middle Eastern political figure.

5. In Attachment 2 is a brief analysis of Kashani as a person as

could be gathered in one two-hour conversation.

[name not declassified]

Attachment 1

Summary of remarks made by Mulla Ayatolla Kashani during

1. Iran wants nothing from the United States save to be left alone

and to have American influence used to prevent other powers—partic-

ularly Great Britain—from interferring in Iranian affairs. If Iran could

be left strictly alone and not be molested by foreign powers it could be-

come a rich and populace nation, even without benefit of its oil

resources.

2. My desires, towards which my activities are directed are two-

fold: namely (1) prevention of a third World War in which the Middle

East is involved and (2) opposition to the spread of Communism in

Iran. In order to realize these aims three steps are necessary. We would

like to have the co-operation and support of the United States in car-

rying out these three steps which I shall describe as follows:

A. Aid enabling the small nations with their weak governments to

become strong and prosperous and—above all—truly independent.

B. Removal of all traces of the old imperialism. To bring this about

the United States must use its international power and influence in sup-

port of the exploited colonial peoples and specifically to make it clear to

Britain and France that the United States will not tolerate their imper-

ialistic policies.

3. [C.] Bring about the unity and co-operation of the various Is-

lamic countries so that the Near and Middle East by mutual

co-operation may better resist Communism.

3. Communism

With regard to Communism in Iran the influence of the Moslem

religion and more specifically my own influence has done and will do

more to oppose Communism than $23,000,000 or even $23 billion of

American aid.

4. The next most effective way of preventing Communism in the

Middle East is for the Western powers to abandon their Imperialistic

approach. Persistence of England and France in a colonial policy will

only drive the Middle Eastern peoples into the arms of the Soviets.

5. Point Four and Military Aid From U.S.

I have advised the Prime Minister that Iran should not accept the

$23,000,000 Point Four aid offered by the United States if there are any

strings whatsoever attached which restrict Iran’s Sovereignty, neu-

trality, or liberty of action. We do not need the aid that badly.

6. Similarly I do not believe that Iran should continue to accept mil-

itary aid so long as it binds Iran to any commitments inconsistent with

Iran’s Sovereignty.

(Station Note: Although wording cannot be recalled, Kashani gave

the impression that he was not in favor of military aid anyway.)

7. Solution of the Oil Problem

The World Bank, like other international organizations is pri-

marily motivated by its interest in preserving the privileges of the large

powers and is not truly dedicated to helping the smaller nations. (Sta-

tion Note: The United Nations support of Iran during the Azerbaijan

Democratic separatist movement in 1946 was pointed out to Kashani as

an example of United Nations support of weak nations. Kashani said

that basically the larger Western nations who control the United Na-

tions were motivated by wholly selfish interests in their 1946 protection

of Iran. The United Nations has not acted similarly in the defense of

Iran against British pressure.)

If the World Bank sincerely wishes to find an acceptable solution to

Iran’s oil problem, the following three principles must be adhered to:

A. Absolutely no British nationals may be employed in Iran.

B. The Iranian board of management must have supreme power

over the Iranian oil industry. The Iranian board of management must

have power to hire and fire foreign technicians.

C. Foreign technicians hired by the Iranian oil company should be

replaced by Iranian technicians as soon as Iranian technicians can be

trained.

February 1951–February 1952

8. The greatest assistance which could be rendered by the United

States in solving Iran’s oil problem would be for the United States to

immediately purchase some Iranian oil—even a small quantity—and

arrange delivery of it. This symbol would “open the door” and show to

the World that others can freely buy Iranian oil. The British blockade

would be broken.

9. Middle East Pan-Moslem Activities

I am concerned with Imperialistic activities throughout the Middle

East and Africa. I maintain intimate contacts throughout the Moslem

world and am kept informed about the imperialistic actions of the

French in Morocco and the Jezireh (Syria) and the British actions in

Egypt. I have contacts also in India and Pakistan. If the United States

persists in backing the British and French policy in these countries it

will lose the friendship of the Middle East. (Station Note: Other re-

marks made by Kashani on this subject clearly revealed that he hoped

for a Pan-Moslem Union, was working toward this goal, and had cer-

tain personal ambitions in this direction.)

10. American Contact

It is my desire that our contact be continued. It should be mutually

beneficial for the United States and Iran if our contact be carried on.

(Station Note: [3½ lines not declassified].)

Attachment 2

PERSONALITY SKETCHES

Kashani is unique amongst Persians insofar as he avoids couching

or disguising his remarks in flowery politeness. He is blunt, sometimes

to the point of rudeness, and is candid. His tactics, during the conversa-

tion in question at least, were to sharply criticise and attack Americans

at the beginning, then shift to a more soothing treatment—presumably

calculated to show that he is not a complete enemy of the United States.

He has a definite sense of humor, and a devilish glint in his expres-

sive eyes. But from the role of kindly old man he can abruptly switch to

a tyranical attitude of fierceness. His voice quavers when he talks

which fact does not however detract from his forcefulness.

He exhibits a definite megalomania, characterized not only by ob-

vious vanity but by his trying to monopolize the conversation, not al-

lowing others in a conversation to finish their sentences, disdain for the

words of others etc. He is a most difficult individual to talk with.

Kashani is not a logical or judicious thinker. He gives the appear-

ance of being greatly motivated by emotion but above all by personal

ambition. Kashani thinks in grandiose terms of Middle East crusades

62.

Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Office of

National Estimates (Kent) to Director of Central Intelligence

Smith

Washington, January 30, 1952.

SUBJECT

NIE–46: Probable Developments in Iran in 1952 in the Absence of an Oil

Settlement

“Barring the establishment of authoritarian rule, either by the National

Front or by the conservatives, the Tudeh potential for gaining control

over the country will substantially increase.”

2. The major estimative omission in NIE–46 is the failure to esti-

mate the likelihood of authoritarian rule actually being established.

Many hours of discussion failed to produce unanimity among the IAC

agencies on the divergent views originally proposed by State and the

Board of National Estimates.

3. The Board’s position was that economic and political disintegra-

tion under Mossadeq would occur quite rapidly, that the National

Front would probably not act with sufficient determination to satisfy

popular desires for social and economic reform, and that in the short

NIE–46 Iran. Secret; Security Information.

February 1951–February 1952

run there was at least an even chance that the conservatives would re-

turn to power and rule by authoritarian methods.

4. State, on the other hand, virtually excluded the possibility of the

conservatives returning to power and gave the National Front great po-

tential for remaining in power, for staving off financial breakdown, and

for ruling by authoritarian means.

5. State, during the discussions, moved considerably toward the

Board’s view that financial difficulties would provide an early and se-

vere test for the Mossadeq regime. State also conceded that the Mos-

sadeq government would have to act with will and determination to

control the situation. A compromise was finally reached which in effect

offers two equally likely possibilities—authoritarian rule by the Na-

tional Front or by the conservatives.

6. The Army has advised that it wished to raise several more points

regarding the present draft. The Board did not call another IAC repre-

sentatives meeting on the grounds that State and Navy were com-

pletely satisfied with the present draft. They agreed with the Board that

little more could be accomplished at the working level.

Sherman Kent

63.

National Intelligence Estimate

NIE–46

Washington, February 4, 1952.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN IRAN IN 1952 IN THE

ABSENCE OF AN OIL SETTLEMENT

Conclusions

1. The probability of Mossadeq or another National Front leader

continuing as Prime Minister at least for the present appears strong.

His parliamentary position and that of the National Front will probably

be further strengthened as a result of the current elections. It is unlikely

that the Shah will influence events in the immediate future.

NIE–46 Iran. Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet, this estimate was submitted

by the Director of Central Intelligence, and concurred in by the Intelligence Advisory

Committee on January 31. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organiza-

tions of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, Air Force, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff

participated in its preparation.

2. The maintenance of National Front strength in the present

highly volatile situation will depend primarily on the government’s

success in solving financial problems resulting from the nationalization

of oil and in satisfying the basic economic and social demands which

have been intensified by the nationalization issue.

3. It is unlikely that Iran can sell financially significant amounts of

oil to non-Soviet orbit countries without the acquiescence of AIOC, or

will obtain significant oil revenues from sales to the Soviet orbit

countries.

4. However, the Mossadeq government can meet its essential obli-

gations for two or three months by resorting to the various expedients

available to it without legislative action by the Majlis. It can probably

gain the backing of the new Majlis for measures which would avert a

fiscal breakdown at least through the summer of 1952.

5. Nevertheless, the economic position of Iran will become pro-

gressively more precarious and the Mossadeq government will be

under increasing pressure to satisfy the hopes for social and economic

benefits aroused by the nationalization program.

6. Failure to provide these benefits would be likely to lead many

National Front supporters to turn to the Tudeh Party.

7. It is almost certain that the National Front leaders will have diffi-

culty in agreeing on measures to satisfy popular demand for social and

economic benefits and in obtaining Majlis support for these measures.

Therefore, in order to put through such measures, the National Front

government would probably be forced to adopt authoritarian methods.

8. If the National Front government is replaced by a conservative

government the new government would almost certainly be forced to

make concessions to nationalist sentiment and to rule by authoritarian

methods.

9. We thus believe that barring establishment of authoritarian rule,

either by the National Front or by the conservatives, the Tudeh poten-

tial for gaining control over the country will substantially increase.

However, we do not believe that a Tudeh coup is imminent.

Discussion

The Present Situation

10. Prime Minister Mossadeq and the National Front movement

continue to dominate the political scene in Iran. They have retained the

enthusiastic support, particularly in Tehran, of the urban workers,

shopkeepers, teachers, students, government employees and religious

zealots who, under Mossadeq’s leadership, have seized the political in-

itiative from the traditional ruling groups of wealthy merchants and

landlords. Although his followers in the National Front do not form a

February 1951–February 1952

firmly-knit party, and some are ambitious, self-seeking politicians like

Mullah Kashani and Hosein Makki, Mossadeq will most likely be able

to prevent a split in the National Front in the near future.

11. The oil crisis has not had any noticeable effect on the national

standard of living, and has only begun to affect payment of gov-

ernment salaries. Although the oil industry has provided the Iranian

Government with no royalties since April and no other foreign ex-

change since September, Mossadeq has been able to delay a financial

breakdown by drawing on the reserves maintained to cover issuance of

bank notes and by diverting funds from the Seven Year Plan Organiza-

tion. Civil service, army, and security force salaries are no more in ar-

rears than usual. All the Iranian oil workers formerly employed by the

AIOC are still being paid by the Iranian Government, even though the

vast majority are not fully employed. With regard to most petroleum

products, Iran’s internal needs have been supplied by the Kermanshah

refinery, which has been kept in operation, and by limited production

at the Abadan refinery. Meanwhile, the overwhelmingly peasant ma-

jority of Iran’s population has remained unaffected by the present

crisis. Despite some usual instances of local crop failure, this year’s

food crop has been approximately normal, prices have remained stable,

and there have been no shortages of sugar and tea, the only imported

staples in Iran’s diet.

12. Conservative opposition to Mossadeq is at present disorga-

nized, hesitant, and fearful. This opposition is drawn mainly from the

traditional ruling group, many members of which fear they will lose

their parliamentary seats in elections conducted by the Mossadeq gov-

ernment. Although a substantial majority in the Majlis is basically op-

posed to Mossadeq, most of the deputies have supported him on the oil

issue and acquiesced in Mossadeq’s decision to hold elections while his

popularity was high. Mossadeq’s critics are reluctant to expose them-

selves to the mob hysteria and possible violence which they fear Mos-

sadeq’s group or the Tudeh Party might bring to bear against them.

More important, they have been restrained by the Shah’s failure to

commit himself to support the removal of Mossadeq. Although the

Shah asserts that Mossadeq’s oil policy will prove disastrous for Iran,

he has been unable to agree with the opposition on a suitable successor

to Mossadeq and apparently fears that an attempt to remove Mossadeq

at this time would lead to his own assassination or to a revolution

against his throne.

13. The Communist-dominated Tudeh Party has bettered its posi-

tion considerably during Mossadeq’s tenure of office. Although Mos-

sadeq is basically hostile to Soviet imperialism, his government has

failed to take a clear-cut stand against the Tudeh Party, primarily be-

cause Mossadeq is unwilling to take drastic action against an organiza-

tion which he believes can be kept under control and which supports

the government on the nationalization issue. In addition, some Na-

tional Front leaders and government officials appear to be Tudeh sym-

pathizers. As a result, Tudeh has been able to carry on a program of agi-

tation and demonstrations and has gained increased support, notably

among students, industrial workers, and civil servants. While the size

of the Tudeh Party cannot be accurately determined, we believe its

present strength is much lower than the several hundred thousand

supporters claimed by Tudeh during its heyday in 1946. Recent US and

British-field estimates give a total of about 8,000 actual members in the

Tehran area (with perhaps three or four times as many sympathizers)

and a total of some 5,000 members in the oil field area, in Azerbaijan,

and along the Caspian coast. The Tudeh has succeeded in penetrating

several departments of the government (notably Education and Jus-

tice), although not to the extent of seriously influencing government

policy or operations. Available evidence indicates that Tudeh has had

less success in penetrating the army and security forces.

14. Mossadeq’s current foreign policy represents a compromise be-

tween the basic nationalist desire to eradicate all foreign interference in

Iran and Iran’s need for foreign assistance. Mossadeq and most of his

followers are as much opposed to Soviet as to British interference in

Iran, and also are suspicious of closer ties with the US. They fear that

such ties would lead to direct political or economic penetration which

would oblige Iran to commit itself to the West or antagonize the USSR.

Nevertheless, Mossadeq has recognized, as most Iranian leaders have

in the past, that Iran cannot maintain a completely isolationist position,

and is following out the traditional policy of balancing off the great

powers against each other. Although his followers have not hesitated

to attack the US as well as the UK, Mossadeq has asked that the US pro-

vide emergency financial assistance to Iran until such time as the oil in-

dustry is restored to production. He has simultaneously entered into

negotiations for a new trade agreement with the USSR and has report-

edly sought oil technicians from the Soviet bloc as well as from various

Western countries. He has also reportedly entered negotiations with

Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary for the sale of Iranian oil.

Probable Economic Developments Under Mossadeq

15. In the absence of an oil settlement, Iran will continue its efforts

to sell to any customer. It is unlikely, however, that Iran could sell fi-

nancially significant amounts of oil to non-Soviet orbit countries

without the acquiescence of AIOC and the other major Western distrib-

utors. Moreover, as further discussed below, it is unlikely that Iran

could obtain significant oil revenues from sales to the Soviet orbit

countries.

February 1951–February 1952

16. Although Mossadeq will probably continue to seek US aid to

enable him to meet his budgetary deficit—which would make it easier

for him to stand firm on his own terms for an oil settlement and would

temporarily strengthen his political position—it is increasingly clear

that he opposes the development of closer military and political ties

with the West. He has vacillated on giving formal approval to the con-

tinuance of the US military missions and the military aid program. He

also has strong objections to becoming subject to the US economic ad-

vice. Although he was recently prevailed upon to sign a Point IV agree-

ment, he has thus far refused to provide the assurances that would en-

able Iran to obtain military assistance under the Mutual Security

Program. If he fails to receive US aid to relieve his growing budgetary

difficulties, he may terminate the contracts of the US military missions

and eventually curtail US technical and economic assistance activities

in Iran. However, it is also possible that internal pressures may force

him to go further in giving commitments to the US than he would per-

sonally favor. Meanwhile, he will almost certainly make greater efforts

to expand Iran’s economic relations with other countries including the

Soviet bloc, providing they do not appear to involve foreign interfer-

ence in Iran’s domestic affairs.

17. As an alternative to US aid, Mossadeq almost certainly would

press forward with negotiations now under way with Poland, Czecho-

slovakia and Hungary for the sale of some two million tons of Iranian

oil, and will probably also seek oil deals with other members of the So-

viet bloc or with the USSR itself. However, it is unlikely that the Soviet

bloc could provide enough tankers to move financially significant

quantities of oil from Iran, and thus the sale of oil to the Soviet bloc

would probably not provide Mossadeq with a lasting solution of his fi-

nancial problems.

18. The USSR might attempt to gain political advantages in Iran by

providing Mossadeq with limited advances against future oil deliveries

or by satisfying Iran’s dollar and gold claims against the USSR. Such

measures would have only a temporary effect on the financial position

of the Mossadeq government. We do not believe that the USSR would

be willing to give Mossadeq sufficient assistance to solve Iran’s finan-

cial problems except on terms which he would be unable to accept. The

Soviets probably estimate that their best chance of gaining control of all

or parts of Iran is by allowing the situation to continue to deteriorate

rather than by bolstering any Iranian Government.

19. The loss of foreign exchange as a consequence of the closing of

the oil industry will force the Iranian Government in the coming

months to reduce imports largely to the level which can be financed

from the proceeds of non-oil exports. Because of the high level of ex-

ports which has characterized Iranian foreign trade in the Korean war

period and which is expected to continue at a substantially similar level

for at least over the next six months, and because of the still uncom-

mitted Central Bank holdings of foreign exchange of approximately 30

million dollars, it is improbable that the government would be forced

during the next six months to cut imports to a point where the standard

of living will be seriously affected. Nevertheless Iran’s economic posi-

tion without oil revenues is precarious. The prospects for Iranian-

financed economic development are largely foreclosed. A crop failure

or a decline in exports would lead to quick and serious difficulties. In

any event, maintenance of imports at politically satisfactory levels

would lead to a steady drain on foreign exchange reserves, which, in

time, would leave Iran with no margin for contingencies.

20. The chief impact of the cessation of oil production has up to

now been on the fiscal position of the government. The monthly budget

deficit has increased to about four times the rate of the first half of 1951.

(At the new exchange rate of approximately 60 rials to the dollar the

current estimated monthly deficit would be 6. million dollars.) During

the past four months this deficit has been financed largely by drawings

upon the 40 million dollars of sterling transferred last August from the

note cover. Within a month the remainder of this sterling will have

been sold to the Central Bank for local currency. The government

could, without reference to the Majlis, maintain its current rate of def-

icit spending through April provided it carried through with the bond

drive more vigorously, and in addition took steps to enable the Na-

tional Iranian Oil Company to borrow directly from the Central Bank,

drew upon the 8 million dollars recently acquired from the Interna-

tional Monetary Fund, sold government stocks of wheat and sugar, and

undertook other possible improvisations.

21. If it is to meet its essential obligations beyond April, the Mos-

sadeq government will have to seek legislative authority enabling the

Central Bank to increase the currency issue and make additional loans

to the government. Resort to such tactics, however, would arouse se-

rious opposition in the present Majlis and therefore Mossadeq will

probably not seek this authorization until after the convening of the

new Majlis (now scheduled for late February) in which National Front

strength will probably be sufficient to give the Mossadeq government

legislative authority to meet its obligations through the summer of

1952. The ability of the government to continue to meet its financial

obligations in the absence of adequate oil revenues thus depends upon

its will and determination to resort to the expedients available to it, and

upon its success in persuading the Majlis to follow its lead.

Prospects For The Survival Of The Mossadeq Regime

22. The survival of the Mossadeq government, however, will not

depend solely upon its ability to avert a financial breakdown. The pop-

February 1951–February 1952

ularity of the Mossadeq government derives largely from its success in

“liberating” Iran from British interference. However, the unrest which

has found expression through, and has been intensified by, the oil na-

tionalization issue is not likely to subside now that the AIOC has been

ejected. Although Mossadeq will continue to benefit from popular op-

position to the British, he will have increasing difficulty drawing public

attention away from his failure both to fulfill promises of economic im-

provement and to derive significant benefits from Iran’s oil resources.

He is thus likely to be faced with the possibility of losing popular

support.

23. Although the new Majlis will probably continue to support

Mossadeq on the issue of British interference, the National Front ma-

jority is itself likely to split on other issues. The government will almost

certainly have difficulty in agreeing on and in obtaining Majlis support

for measures which would allay popular demand for social and eco-

nomic benefits. Failure to carry through with such measures would

probably lead many supporters of the National Front, both within and

outside the Majlis, to turn to the Tudeh Party, which is the only disci-

plined party in Iran offering a clear-cut program of social and economic

reform. In order to forestall such a development, the National Front

government would probably be forced to adopt authoritarian methods.

24. The tendency of minority groups and provincial leaders to ig-

nore the writ of the central government would also increase if the Na-

tional Front government failed either to keep Majlis support or to adopt

authoritarian methods. Mossadeq apparently distrusts the army and

the gendarme´rie and has given them little support. This may eventu-

ally have a serious effect on their morale and consequently on their will

and ability to maintain the government’s authority over such poten-

tially separatist elements as the Azerbaijanis, the Kurds, the Bakhtiaris,

and the Qashqais, as well as in Tehran. The ability of the government to

maintain frontier security and collect taxes would decline. A weak-

ening of the government’s central authority would greatly enhance the

danger of a substantial increase in Tudeh influence, not only in Tehran

but particularly among the oil workers in the South and the population

of Iran’s northern provinces. There would also be greater opportunities

for Soviet exploitation.

25. It is probable that either Mossadeq or another National Front

leader will continue as Prime Minister, at least for the present. The Shah

has the constitutional power to dissolve the Majlis and can usually re-

move a Prime Minister from office. He also is Commander in Chief of

the Army and has the support of the Army. It is extremely unlikely that

he would use his power to remove Mossadeq as long as the latter has

the support of the Majlis, since such a move might lead to serious civil

disturbances. If Mossadeq’s popular support weakens, the chances of

his removal by normal political means will increase. In this event, the

land-owning group will probably try to reassert its control over the

central government and may be successful if a suitable leader can be

found.

26. A conservative regime, however, would be confronted with the

same social and economic problems. An attempt by a new government

to obtain an oil settlement on terms presently acceptable to the West

would meet with the most vigorous opposition by the National Front

and the Tudeh Party. Consequently, in order to stay in power and cope

with the situation, such a successor regime would almost certainly be

forced to make concessions to nationalist sentiment and to rule by au-

thoritarian methods.

27. We thus believe that during 1952 there will be increasing de-

mands for social and economic benefits which Mossadeq and the Na-

tional Front will find it hard to satisfy without adopting authoritarian

methods, partly because of the lack of unity in the National Front and

partly because of difficulties in meeting financial requirements. Barring

establishment of authoritarian rule either by the National Front or by

the conservatives, the Tudeh potential for gaining control over the

country will substantially increase. However, a Tudeh coup is not con-

sidered imminent for the following reasons:

a. There is no evidence of appreciable Tudeh penetration of the

armed forces;

b. So far as is known the key ministries (defense, communications,

and internal security) have not been effectively penetrated by the

Tudeh;

c. There is no indication that the Tudeh has an armed paramilitary

organization of any significance; and,

d. There has been strong rivalry between the National Front and

the Tudeh on most matters. We believe this rivalry will continue for the

period of this estimate.

64.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, February 16, 1952.

3118. This estimate Tudeh potential prepared by Emb and con-

curred in by CAS and Service Attache´s supplements Embtel 2943

We believe Tudeh potential inextricably bound with fate Natl

Front Govt and internal stability. Hence, estimate duration Mosadeq

regime without financial resources is basic to calculation of rapidity

with which presently well-organized Tudeh may infiltrate all organs of

power and may successfully challenge Natl Front. Mosadeq Govt may

continue for unspecified period because of popular support and hesi-

tant Shah, with Army, might be reluctant attempt replace him. Therein

appears to lie danger since Mosadeq Govt might hang on and neu-

tralize other anti-communist opposition forces until pro-Tudeh Govt

wld be able assume power.

Oil is only publicized program of Mosadeq Govt, and because of

coalition character Natl Front contains seeds of disunity on domestic

issues. Mosadeq thus far has kept party unity thru need for mutual

support in elections and natl unity, despite deteriorating domestic con-

ditions, by concentrating on anti-Brit issue. He is believed unwilling to

take any stringent actions against Tudeh for fear creating untimely in-

ternal troubles. Govt thus might remain in power while political, eco-

nomic and mil forces deteriorated until split within itself left field open

to Tudeh as only remaining organized and unified opposition.

On basis election returns, which still subject to minor modification,

Tudeh vote Tehran amounts approx 30 thousand. By descending order

Maki is first on list with approx 112 thousand while Tudeh candidate

Qasemi is 14th with approx 29 thousand votes. Despite some rigging

ballot by Govt, Tudeh vote count believed essentially accurate. There

was energetic buying voting cards by Tudeh party from apathetic

non-party voters before and during balloting. (To offset this in use of

ballot count as calculation Tudeh strength is fact families Tudeh voters

more politically active than non-communists.[)] Hence it appears nu-

merical estimate Tudeh strength Tehran and environs approx repre-

sented by vote.

Disturbing feature Tehran elections, despite Natl Front victory in

electing all 12 deputies to which Tehran district entitled, is fact Tudeh-

supported candidates placed in slots varying from number 14 down-

ward. Returns clearly showed Tudeh is strongest organized opposition

force to Govt since no non-communist opposition candidate received

vote equal to that of Tudeh candidate lowest on list. This tends substan-

Tudeh remains only organized political faction in opposition.

Disturbing also is info Natl Front is attempting covertly divert loy-

alty of security forces from Shah to Govt. Mosadeq becoming ever more

suspicious of Shah and may make overt move to undermine his au-

give good fishing to Tudeh.

Henderson

had told him of his suspicions that the Iranian army was unfriendly to the National Front

and “interfering in elections” against National Front candidates. When Henderson told

Mosadeq of his impression that the army had refrained from interfering in politics, Mo-

sadeq replied that “they were rather careful in concealing their activities,” and that such

activities must cease. Henderson closed this telegram with the comment that he was

“somewhat apprehensive from statements made to me during course this conversation

with Mosadeq that gulf between him and Shah is widening and that he may take some

step in not distant future which will result in open breach between them.” (National Ar-

65.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 878

Tehran, February 16, 1952.

SUBJECT

Transmitting a study entitled “The Rise of an Iranian Nationalist”

There is transmitted a report prepared by Mr. John H. Stutesman,

Jr., Second Secretary of Embassy, entitled, “The Rise of an Iranian Na-

tionalist”. This report is a study of the political techniques of Mo-

hammad Mosadeq and as such, is the third in a series of basic reports

which the Political Section of the Embassy is preparing.

Mr. Stutesman has spent nearly two and a half years in Iran. Most

of that time he has been assigned to the Political Section of the Embassy

and he has therefore had a unique opportunity to appraise the origins

and techniques of the Iranian nationalist movement under the leader-

ship of the present Prime Minister, Mohammad Mosadeq. As well, he is

qualified to make the report by virtue of his experience as an official in-

terpreter for two American Ambassadors in many lengthy conversa-

tions with Dr. Mosadeq. This first hand experience has proved most

valuable in preparing this timely and interesting study.

The Embassy commends the report to the Department’s attention

and considers that Mr. Stutesman is deserving of special recognition for

this valuable report.

For the Ambassador:

Arthur L. Richards

Counselor of Embassy

Summary

How did nine Persian politicians win sufficient power to destroy

the concession of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company and to capture gov-

ernment from the men who previously had held power in Iran? An un-

derstanding of this question is sought in this study of the political tech-

niques of Mohammad Mosadeq.

Received March 11. Drafted by Melbourne. The study was drafted by Stutesman. Written

on the despatch is the following comment: “Excellent despatch.” Except as noted in the

footnotes below, the telegrams and despatches cited have not been found.

mitting a Study of the Political Influence of Shi’ism and of the Shi’ite Clergy in Iran.”

[Footnote is in the original.]

First are studied the personal characteristics and ambitions of Dr.

Mosadeq. He has identified his own ambitions with national aspira-

tions. By winning popular support for his emotion-charged policies “in

the nation’s interest” he has succeeded in winning political power.

The nature and profundity of the national emotions to which Mo-

sadeq appeals are then considered. Nationalism, social discontent and

political irresponsibility are basic elements in Iranian politics today.

Iranian nationalism is not unlike other fervent, though usually ill-

defined, nationalist sentiments in Asia. The social discontent and xeno-

phobia of the Persians is also similar to such phenomena in other

countries. Peculiar national vanity and political irresponsibility lead

Iranians to support a Premier who insists that the rest of the world

must accept his uncompromising point of view.

The final chapter of this paper describes Mosadeq’s realism in di-

recting the National Front’s rise to power. His understanding of the

vulnerabilities of his opponents allowed him, by simple opposition, to

cripple previous Governments, to turn a disorganized and selfish

Majlis into an emotional pro-Mosadeq, pro-nationalization group, to

terrify the Shah and, so far successfully, to deal with the entrenched in-

terests in Iran, the communists and other foreign influence.

Mosadeq’s new design for politics in Iran, a country so long ruled

by a clique of old-line politicians, must be known in detail in order to

understand Iranian politics of the past two years and in order to realize

that the future trend of Iranian politics is towards nationalistic leader-

ship of a more or less dynamic character.

I. Introduction

When Mohammad Mosadeq walked upon the scene of recent his-

tory, a new act in Iranian politics commenced. His political techniques

and the national emotions he aroused are power factors for the future.

New leaders will undoubtedly arise, but all will have to charge their

programs with emotion for a mass appeal, and must claim that they

represent Iranian national forces rather than limited cliques or

interests.

Mohammad Mosadeq’s great success came from his recognition of

the power inherent in national and religious prejudices and in popular

acclaim. He removed Iranian politics from the closed arena of corrupt

self-centered intrigue into a broad field in which it was possible to ex-

ploit the passions and credulity of the ignorant and irresponsible

masses. Study of the techniques which he used and the emotions he

appealed to is necessary for observers of Iran’s future.

II. Political Characteristics of Mohammad Mosadeq

Iran is not easily comprehensible to westerners. Iranians have

many different values, respond to different appeals, have customs and

February 1951–February 1952

characteristics quite peculiar to themselves. Mohammad Mosadeq is an

aristocratic Moslem Persian, born to wealth, bound by tradition,

steeped in classic Persian culture. He is proud to be a Persian and he

understands and loves his people. The vices and the virtues he demon-

strates are not unusual characteristics in Iran, although he emphasizes

those aspects of his character which are most useful to his politics.

Patriotism First among these characteristics is love of country. It is

astounding how eagerly Iranians will tell foreign acquaintances about

Iranian immorality and undependability; but, in a perverse way, this

attitude reflects the deep pride in country which all Iranians have. Mo-

sadeq shares this patriotism. Examples of a willingness to join in patri-

otic movements are numerous in Mosadeq’s career, most prominent

among them being his participation in the constitutional reform of 1906

and his determination, while in the Majlis, to prevent the Russians from

controlling northern Persia.

A politician who wants to claim Iranian popular support will have

to emulate Mohammad Mosadeq and build at least a reputation as a

patriot, even leaving other attributes aside. For instance, Hosein Maki

now holds a place in many Persian hearts solely because he demon-

strated battling patriotism in his supervision of expropriation of the

British oil industry in Khuzistan.

Incorruptibility Another characteristic which has won for Mosadeq

a good public reputation is his disregard for the material benefits which

usually accrue to Persian government officials. Many Persians consider

that corruption is the natural state of the human race and refuse to be-

lieve that the tremendously wealthy oil company could not buy Mo-

sadeq to its point of view or at least persuade him to pervert the nation-

alization law to some long-term, devious British advantage.

By his refusal to be bought, Dr. Mosadeq broke the ancient pattern

of bribery which had been used to move most previous politics in Iran.

The old gang of intriguing greedy politicians could not overthrow with

their traditional tactics a Premier who was not interested in cash

profits. Mosadeq’s colleagues, however, do not fail to profit from their

positions under the cloak of the Prime Minister’s peculiar probity.

Infirmities As an aged man, Mohammad Mosadeq naturally finds

the burdens of the premiership extremely wearing. There is no faking

in his need to rest as much as possible. However, as the following story

shows, he sometimes used his weariness to serve political purposes.

Once, in the early days of his premiership, when Dr. Mosadeq

worked in his official office, an important visitor asked to see him with

some request. The Prime Minister, who up to that point had been ener-

getically handling correspondence at his desk, said he would receive

the man in a minute. He then hastily undid his tie and collar, adjusted

some pillows on a sofa and lay down. When the visitor appeared, the

Prime Minister, in a gasping voice, asked him to make his request. The

visitor, horrified to see the Prime Minister so weak, left without making

his request, flattered that Dr. Mosadeq had received him.

His illness also serves to emphasize to the Iranian public that Dr.

Mosadeq is carrying on his duties despite great personal pain. This act

encourages, and to some extent symbolizes to Iranian minds, national

resistance to the British. On April 30, 1951, in his first speech as Prime

Minister, Dr. Mosadeq declared, “I never thought that my health

would ever permit me to accept so important a position, but the oil

question obligates me to take up this heavy burden”.

It is possible that more than age and acting contribute to these

physical infirmities. One of Dr. Mosadeq’s daughters is in a mental in-

stitution. A Persian physician once told Ambassador Grady that he

thought Mosadeq suffered from a form of hereditary insanity. Too

much emphasis, of course, cannot be placed upon this diagnosis; but

there is little doubt that Iran’s Prime Minister is a sick man and his fre-

quent petty passions reflect to great extent his physical infirmities.

Dramatic Personality To his career, Mohammad Mosadeq brings the

most necessary attribute of a demagogue—a dramatic personality. The

fainting and the tears which seem so funny to Americans deeply move

his Persian listeners. He has a superb sense of timing and of symbolism.

A good demonstration of this quality occurred when he left Tehran

in 1951 to present Iran’s case in the oil dispute before the United Na-

tions. At the airport, after the dignitaries and a small crowd had ar-

rived, a car drew up some distance from the waiting plane and the limp

figure of the Prime Minister was helped by attendants past the crowd.

The shrill chanting of the mullahs, the wailing of the crowd, the pathos

of the fainting man, who claimed that he would champion his people

before the world, were all background to the well-timed moment when

the very symbol of Iranian hopes and fears was supported, half-

fainting, in the doorway of the aircraft to take a last look upon his

people. It was very foolish and unstatesmanlike but very moving.

Oratory Mosadeq is a master of the rhetoric which appeals to Per-

sian listeners. His voice, in every speech, ranges from a slow reasonable

note is in the original. Despatch 881 is in the National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy

February 1951–February 1952

tone to shrill accusations. He mixes wit and poetry into debates upon

most serious questions. He plays for emotional reactions from his audi-

ence rather than reasoned approbation.

Even the unemotional politician Dr. Raji once was impressed by a

speech of Dr. Mosadeq in 1950. When asked what Mosadeq had said,

he only could reply, “It was a wonderful speech; it moved us all.”

Perhaps the best recent instance when his oratory won antago-

nistic listeners to his side was in the Majlis on December 11 after an elo-

quent opposition had heaped vituperation and some very searching

criticism upon his Government. The gentle tone with which he pointed

out that he, an old and honorable man, had listened with restraint to

everything the opposition had to say gave the impression that it was

not he but his critics who were irresponsible. He wove into the tapestry

of his speech a thread of reason as though he were a father explaining

to a little boy the need to fight for independence in an evil world. Grad-

ually, he brought the color of anti-British feelings into the design,

moving from reason to emotion almost imperceptibly so that his lis-

teners felt at the end that he had won a victory over national enemies.

Calm study of his speech shows that he did not answer any of the

trenchant criticisms and certainly gave no reason to believe that he

would leave the road down which he leads his country. But even Ho-

sein Ala, Minister of Court, the evening that he heard this speech on

Radio Tehran, eagerly told Ambassador Henderson that Iran was for-

tunate to have Dr. Mosadeq to champion its interests against “its AIOC

incubus”.

Ambitions Mosadeq has shown constant ambition to be the leader

of his people. He shapes his actions often to obtain applause. He has

shown willingness, any time his political position is threatened, to re-

sort to the cheapest kind of political trickery to discredit his opponents.

The futile hopes of his opponents that Mosadeq would resign after

driving out the British oil technicians, leaving to his successor the

heavy burden of recovering the nation’s financial and political stability,

failed to take account of Mosadeq’s desire to hold power. When he won

the premiership he said he would withdraw when nationalization of

the oil industry was completed. As this program neared its end, he de-

clared “reluctantly” that he would stay in power while elections to the

17th Majlis were held. It can be assumed that when these elections near

completion Mosadeq will find another reason to remain the man in

charge.

Mosadeq has shown little shame, conscience, or dignity when

question of his political advantage is raised. An example of this was

given when Mosadeq, in order to avoid weakening his internal political

position, refused to give clear assurance that U.S. aid would be used to

strengthen Iran’s military and economic ability to maintain its inde-

pendence. It was not Mosadeq’s refusal which was so shocking as his

casual remark that for the U.S. offer of 23 million dollars aid, given

freely by Americans to help his weak and threatened country, he

would offer in return “assurances” worth only and exactly that sum.

When it has served his political advantage, Mosadeq has broken

confidence. Prime Minister Hosein Ala, an honest devoted servant of

his country, was led to believe in early 1951 that Mosadeq wanted to

develop legislation to nationalize the oil industry with the concurrence

of the Ala Government. When it appeared, with the sudden passage of

the nine-point Nationalization Law, that the National Front had used

Ala’s confidence only to increase the Government’s embarrassment,

Hosein Ala had no alternative but to resign, thus opening the way for

Mosadeq to assume power.

To gain a temporary advantage before Parliament, Mosadeq has

used slander. On September 5, before the Senate, and on September 9,

before the Majlis, he implied that British policy and money dominated

court officials. He continually has slandered the motives and reputa-

tions of his opposition in the Majlis. Any criticism of his Government

has been labeled by Mosadeq as “pro-British” action.

Determination Unusual among Iranian politicians, Mohammad

Mosadeq has shown an uncompromising determination to obtain what

he desires. This characteristic, worthy in just causes, often becomes for

Mosadeq a form of political fixation. Mesmerized by his own ambi-

tions, he discards advice and reason while steering towards his fixed

objective. If it is demonstrated that this course will lead to chaos, he still

shows an inability, or unwillingness, to change his reckoning.

This peculiar complex has been evident in his long career in gov-

ernment (Enclosure No. 1). In 1917, as Under-Secretary of Finance, he

thought that the best way to save money would be to fire great

numbers from the crowded civil service list. His refusal to believe that

chaos would ensue can be the only explanation for this attack upon the

ancient Persian graft of swollen payrolls. He, of course, had to resign

and the status quo returned.

the slander. [Footnote is in the original. Despatch 341 from Tehran is in the National Ar-

February 1951–February 1952

In 1921, in three fantastic months as Minister of Finance, Mo-

hammad Mosadeq cut all salaries in his Ministry and fired the nu-

merous incompetents. Again, the consequences of this drastic action,

which in itself could have but small effect upon the general inefficiency

and incompetence in government, were not considered. He was dis-

missed by his Prime Minister but he did not lose the capacity to act

upon a moment’s whim without the slightest thought for future conse-

quences. The nationalization of Iran’s oil industry, with all its devas-

tating consequences, is quite a natural idea for him to conceive. Prob-

ably one reason for the vast confusion in Iran’s government is

Mosadeq’s inability to set a new objective now that oil nationalization

is completed.

III. Mosadeq’s Appeal to National Emotions

National Aspirations

There is in Asia a quickening of national aspirations. Recent his-

tory has shown that the ignorance, isolation, poverty and apathy of the

Asiatic masses do not prevent their emotional support of national

causes. The roll of Asiatic nations which, despite antique feudalism and

grinding poverty, have built force from unity in support of national as-

pirations, grows longer every year, headed by such names as Turkey,

China, India and Japan.

The nationalist movement in Iran cannot be viewed as a con-

spiracy of clever politicians who invented the emotion and are but froth

upon an uncomprehending sea. Without leaders, Iranian nationalism

might have remained quiescent for a longer time; but the oratory and

maneuvers which Mohammad Mosadeq and his colleagues used to

gain political support rest upon the profound force of awaking nation-

alism in Iran today.

The failure of the British to recognize this fact and to face the psy-

chological rather than the economic issues in the oil dispute led, more

than any other failure of the West, to the present impasse in Iran. Sir

William Frazer’s classic statement of his Company’s position in early

1951, “There will be no further concessions” could only anger, frus-

trate and unite the Persians. The wave of feeling which engulfed the

British in Iran may have started as a demand for a better bargain; but,

encouraged by its own emotions, it passed far beyond expected

margins of success. The National Front in some part guided but in large

part rode this wave.

Indigenous Nationalism What are Iranian national aspirations? At

this moment they are unformulated, except for the “independence”

urge to drive the British from Iran. Any people bound together by ge-

ography, language, central government and history, are conscious of a

common background which sets them apart from others. Time, in its

story of Prime Minister Mosadeq as “man of 1951”, gave an impression

that he ranked with great philosophical nationalists like Nehru. In fact,

he is much more an opportunist who perceived the potential force in

indigenous nationalism and had the ability to direct it to his support.

Towards the end of 1949, nine politicians11 formed a coalition

whose name, the National Front, showed its determination to win

power from Iranian nationalism. It was not the first time that this ap-

peal has been made in Iran. Reza Shah, after capturing the throne by

force, called for popular support of his nationalist program to give Iran

a new position in the modern world. His son, the present Shah, ap-

pealed to nationalism in 1946 when Iran regained control of Russian-

dominated Azerbaijan. Seyid Zia Tabatabai called his anti-communist

organization the National Will Party. Majlis deputies often have ap-

pealed to national pride, in the fashion of politicians around the world.

But the National Front was the first Iranian political organization delib-

erately to set out to capture popular support in order to gain power.

They sought, in nationalism, the force which was required to break the

closed circle of entrenched governing politicians.

Independence from Foreign Domination First among national aspira-

tions is Iran’s hope to be, as well as seem, a sovereign nation. Such pre-

viously colonial countries as India, Pakistan and Indonesia now deter-

mine their own destinies. The Persians feel that they are behind the

times in Asia and they want “independent” life. It is quite true that,

during recent centuries of European rivalry in Asia, Persia has been

subject to foreign domination. Now, the Persians quite simply want

freedom from this influence.

When Mosadeq leaned forward in his bed to tell Ambassador

Grady sharply, “We value independence more than economics”, he

was not only arguing against American advice that Iran should make a

settlement with the British in order to preserve oil revenues. He was ex-

pressing a heart-felt, earnest belief that by driving out the British, he

would end what he believed to be Iran’s semi-colonial status. This sen-

timent was shared by Persians of all classes. Even the present opposi-

tion to Mosadeq’s Government does not declare that British influence

February 1951–February 1952

should return. Removal of the British from Iran was a necessary part, in

Persian eyes, of winning Iran’s “independence”.

When badly handled, badly publicized oil negotiations in 1950 fo-

cused popular attention on that issue, Mosadeq sensed, like a weather-

vane, the direction in which winds of national sentiment were blowing.

He and his colleagues expanded and exploited the emotions on this

issue; and, calling expropriation “nationalization”, he assumed charge

of a “crusade” to drive the hated British from Iran. Never has he ad-

mitted that he excited or directed this crusade to bring himself to

power. On the contrary, he always claimed, “God only knows that I did

not expect to become Prime Minister . . . I agreed because I realized that

if I did not accept charge of the Government, all our efforts (to pass the

oil nationalization law) and all the endeavors of the people of Iran

would be wasted.”

Antagonism to the British has served many purposes for the Na-

tional Front. Mosadeq’s critics on any issue are portrayed to the public

as British agents. Covering all sources of possible opposition, Mosadeq

once said, “British agents are in the Majlis; British agents are in the

Government; British agents are in the national societies; and British

agents are in the Court”.

Whenever parliamentary votes of confidence are called for, Mo-

sadeq has forced the vote to take a pro- or anti-British character. The

first votes were kept on the issue of the oil nationalization law. “Those

who oppose the Government also oppose the nationalization of the oil

industry”. When criticisms rose that Mosadeq had missed a good

chance to settle the oil dispute to Iranian advantage when the Stokes

Mission was in Tehran, the Prime Minister forced a parliamentary vote

on the Government’s decision to drive out the British oil technicians

from Abadan. Anyone who voted against him would have been classi-

fied as favoring retention of British influence there.

In October, 1951, even previous parliamentary opposition turned

to Mosadeq’s support when he announced that he was going to New

York “to defend the rights of the oppressed and tyrannized Iranian

people before the Security Council”. The question whether his de-

fense was sound or necessary obviously could not be raised when the

in the original. Despatch 333 from Tehran is in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Files

in the original. Despatch 335 from Tehran is ibid., RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files,

note is in the original.]

nation’s defense against the British “tyranny” was at stake. The recent

action of the Government to close all British consulates again drew the

sting from the opposition’s searching criticism of Mosadeq’s disastrous

policies. Anyone who is against him is accused of wanting to keep

British consulates and “influence” in Iran.

The lesson for future nationalist leaders to learn is obvious. An “in-

dependence” movement in these times of developing nationalism in

Asia, provides a sure vehicle to success.

Freedom from Foreign Exploitation of Iranian Resources There is a na-

tional anger at foreign exploitation of Iranian resources. Both national

pride and greed are involved. The Persians naturally resent the impli-

cation that they cannot handle their industries themselves, and they

hopefully expect greater income from their resources if they do not

have to share the profits with outsiders. In close support of these emo-

tions stands the knowledge that a foreign concessionaire will probably

attempt to influence the country’s government.

The antagonism of a people to foreign “exploitation” is not a new

phenonomen in the world. Iran has stripped off the capitulations which

gave foreigners special legal privileges and has blocked or “national-

ized” all concessions except the Caspian fisheries concession to the So-

viets. The boasts of Mosadeq and Maki, his lieutenant in expropriation

of the Abadan refinery, that it would be preferable to leave the oil

below ground rather than allow foreign profiteering are rooted in na-

tional resentment against foreign concessionaires.

In his first speech as Prime Minister, Mohammad Mosadeq de-

clared, “Thanks to God and to the efforts of both Houses of Parliament,

the greatest source of national wealth has returned to us”. Such state-

ments typify the view that Iranian anger against foreign exploitation

makes it unlikely that a foreign profit-sharing concessionaire could re-

turn to Khuzistan.

Neutralism Another of Iran’s national aspirations is the general

hope that it can avoid entangling alliances with the world’s great

powers. The knowledge that Iran has served often in the past as a cats-

paw in the rivalry of Russia and Great Britain, and the fear that Persia

would be involved by its allies in another war encourage this unwill-

ingness to join too closely with the interests of the free world or the

communists. Few Persians will believe American assurances that we

are not rivals of the Soviets in Iran but only want to help Iran withstand

the pressures of Soviet-directed communism.

When Razmara, in 1950, first gave indications that he thought

Iran’s best hope for survival lay not in close alliance with the West but

February 1951–February 1952

in a policy of “neutralism”, he obviously hoped that Iran, like Switzer-

land, could remain outside all major international conflicts. He, and

most Iranians, drew from the battle in Korea a conclusion that Iran, so

far from UN bases, so vulnerable to Soviet might, should avoid any

provocation of the Russians. Also, he saw that a trade agreement with

Russia would restore economic life to northern Persia. And finally, in

true Persian fashion, he felt, as Mosadeq probably also feels, that Iran

cannot afford to antagonize both the British and the Russians simulta-

neously. All Persians look upon their near-destruction in 1907 and in

1941, through Anglo-Russian division of Iran, as a direct result of bad

policy in angering both previous rivals simultaneously.

Mosadeq recognizes the necessity to rely on foreign power to pro-

tect him from Soviet or British aggression. In a conversation with Am-

bassador Grady, he said that he appreciated the American attitude in

the oil dispute since he considered it “protection for Iran”. But he

sponsors and expresses a policy of neutralism. Hosein Ala once refused

the post of Minister for Foreign Affairs for Mosadeq because Ala would

not cut Iran’s ties to the West.

On May 3, 1951, Mosadeq said “our foreign policy shall be based

on support of the United Nations Charter, friendship with all states and

mutual respect for all nations.” Throughout the year which followed,

he held to this pronouncement but refused to make or even seem to

make new commitments or new alliances. His trip to Egypt in late 1951

and his statement that Iran and Egypt had close ties and similar aspira-

tions20 does not represent a military, economic or even sympathetic alli-

ance. It was international blarney, a sop to Kashani’s ambitions to lead

a Moslem “brotherhood”, an easy show of anti-British feeling and,

perhaps most important at the time, something he could show Iranians

who were questioning his failure to obtain a settlement of the oil dis-

pute or American assistance.

In January 1952, when Mosadeq refused to give required “assur-

ances” in order to obtain American military aid, he said he was fearful

of popular and parliamentary outcries if he made what would be inter-

preted as a military alliance with the United States. Whether this view

was either wise or well-founded is not pertinent here. The fact is that

[Footnote is in the original.]

note is in the original. Telegram 2661 from Tehran is in National Archives, RG 84, Tehran

to Department, Nov. 23, 1951). [Footnote is in the original.]

1951). [Footnote is in the original.]

Mosadeq’s foreign policy has been set and he can be expected to follow

it unswervingly.

Since the purpose of this study of Mosadeq’s techniques is to find a

pattern which new nationalist leaders must follow or at least under-

stand, it is important here to state, that, in the writer’s opinion, the na-

tional aspirations described above will be factors in any political move-

ment in the near future in Iran. The words and actions which Mosadeq

has used to cater to and excite these emotions are not the only tech-

niques possible. However, they have proved successful and he will

likely hold to them. Another man could probably score equally well, if

he follows Mosadeq’s example.

Social Discontent

The Gap Between the People and Their Rulers The causes and the char-

acter of social discontent throughout Asia have been described by other

writers. The depressed people of Iran share the suffering and the slim

margin of existence of other Asiatic masses. The great, sordid contrast

between their misery and the luxury of their masters is apparent to the

most casual observer. Iran is ripe for social revolution.

Mosadeq described this situation to Ambassador Grady in their

first conversation. “There has been in Iran a gap between the gov-

ernment and the people . . . This gap, combined with miserable eco-

nomic conditions, has produced deep discontent . . . The greatest force

in this country is public opinion and no government can stand which

does not close the gap between itself and popular opinion.”

In his first speech as Prime Minister, Mosadeq assured his people

that he understood and would take care of their discontent. “The

shadows which were covering our unhappy country will soon give

way to the sun of happiness.”

The organized tours of Tehran slums which officials and news-

paper correspondents had to take in the summer of 1951 emphasized

this aspect of National Front propaganda. National Front speeches

always make some reference to present misery and future blessings if

Iranians will support the National Front. It has been apparent, how-

ever, that Mosadeq has not made any move which might tear the

present social fabric of Iran. He has no program for reform; he claims

no panacea for progress beyond nationalization of the oil industry.

Through hope of social change, Mosadeq has gained a following of

liberal Iranians who see its necessity and who support the National

reported on the conversation in telegram 2650 from Tehran, May 2, printed in Foreign Re-

February 1951–February 1952

Front in preference to communism. His emotional appeals and his

promises of future prosperity have won to Mosadeq great masses of

discontented city workers. The peasant masses have been hard to ex-

cite since any government, even Mosadeq’s is represented to them by

the same oppressive tax-collector or landowner; but vague country-

wide emotions are stirred by Mosadeq’s oratory, to hope for social

betterment.

In another way, Mosadeq has turned social discontent to his ad-

vantage by focusing national irritations and emotions upon the British,

thus protecting his Government’s inefficiency and bankruptcy from

public indignation.

Suspicion of Government Government in Persia is rightly considered

oppressive. The people are suspicious of the traditional selfishness of

authority in Asia. Mosadeq, in constant opposition to governments in

power, became known almost automatically as a champion of the

people.

Once installed in the 16th Majlis, the National Front deputies took

this theme for every speech and every action. The technique was easy.

Every time a government proposal was discussed, the National Front

tore it to bits. They denounced the Saed Government for not decentral-

izing power. They attacked the Razmara Government when it at-

tempted to decentralize authority.

By recognizing the popularity of plain opposition, Mosadeq won a

reputation while crippling any progress of the government in power.

When he became Prime Minister, he said that previous governments

had failed to close the “gap” between the rulers and the people, while

he, basing his strength on popular support, could be opposed only by

anti-national interests. He always seeks to identify the public interest

with his policies and actions. Even so, he recognizes the profundity and

permanence of popular suspicion of any Government and he allowed

only one of the National Front deputies to enter government service.

Penetration of New Ideas After centuries of resignation the Asiatic

people have begun to see a possibility for change. This has been pri-

marily the result of history and of western influence; although in the

past thirty years communist propaganda has played an essential part.

The Persians cannot help but learn about neighbor nations who have

taken destiny in their hands. Inevitably they see indications that Euro-

peans and Americans conceive of higher standards for all people. In-

creasingly they are stirred by communist propaganda.

To the Persian of the lower classes any change is bound to be im-

provement, in his view. The peasant or the city worker is no worse off

than he was a hundred years ago, but today he feels that by some action

he might somehow improve his lot. This is the essential difference be-

tween the past and the present in Iran. It has been hard for many

western diplomats and oil company directors to believe that Iranians

could change. Haji Babal26 has seemed changeless, but the penetration

of new ideas and the propaganda of the communists is bringing change

and increasing discontent with existing conditions.

Mosadeq encourages feelings that Iran and Iranians can have a

better life. In his speeches about oil nationalization, he continually in-

sists that Iranians can change the ancient pattern of bare existence and

exploitation. As the leader and the voice of this discontent he gains

great political strength. At the same time he becomes vulnerable to ex-

tremists of both right and left. Whenever Mosadeq appears to halt or

moderate his headlong course he is denounced by communists and by

extreme nationalists. Popular dissatisfaction will break out if Mosadeq

fails to provide the benefits he promises. The tiger of social discontent

which he has loosed and now rides may eat him yet.

Desire for Leadership A great factor in Iran’s social discontent is the

desire of a confused people for a leader. Persia’s greatest periods of

prosperity and power have been under despotic rule. There is no tradi-

tion in Iran of democracy or of progressive action by an electorate. Al-

though they hated Reza Shah’s oppression, most Persians now refer to

those days longingly and say that Persia needs again a “strong man”.

Mosadeq has taken advantage of the bewilderment and anarchy

which existed in Iran in the ten years following the deposition of Reza

Shah. He has shown ability to lead and organize. Unlike his fellow poli-

ticians, he says exactly what he means to do. He gives a course to

follow, and he wins adherents as much because they seek a leader as

because they share his aspirations.

In a political situation of complete futility and confusion, the Na-

tional Front won great support because it offered leadership. The direc-

tion it pursued was almost less important than its dynamism in an at-

mosphere of weakness and of vacillation. It should not be forgotten,

therefore, that Mosadeq and his brand of nationalists can only be chal-

lenged by some equally dynamic leadership.

February 1951–February 1952

Xenophobia

The courtesy, tolerance and hospitality of the Persian people are

deservedly world famous. Paradoxically, suspicion and dislike of for-

eigners in Persia is just as old and as profound. The members of the Na-

tional Front appeal to the emotions of this national xenophobia.

Dr. Mosadeq is a gentleman of the classic Persian school and his re-

ception of American officials has always been marked by utmost cour-

tesy. Yet, his anti-foreign attitudes are never far from the surface. They

have been expressed publicly throughout his long career of resistance

to foreign pressure or advice. They were clearly shown on May 28,

1951, when he burst out in irritation at Ambassador Grady’s argument

that foreign operation of the oil industry would be beneficial to Iran, “It

would be better for Iran if all foreign influence were removed.”

Religious Fanaticism Religious fanaticism gives, in Persia, a bitter

flavor to the national xenophobia. The Shia mullahs traveling or resi-

dent throughout Iran foster this emotion out of their ignorance and out

of fear that contact with the modern world will destroy their present

power in Iran. Religious bias is exemplified by such extremes as the

coarse man who spits at foreign footsteps in the streets and the cour-

teous host who purifies his dishes after they have been defiled by for-

eign touch.

The Shia sect of Islam sets the Persians apart from other Moslems.

The Safavids built a Shia state to stand against the Sunni Turks and

Arabs. The Persians were politically endangered and they coupled to

their temporal fears religious antipathies. It is true that members of the

sect, in fact some of its holiest places, are outside Iran. This only gives

more strength to the question of the countryman who asks the stranger

not “What is your nationality?” but “What is your religion?”. There is a

deep feeling, based on this religious influence, that outside Persia’s na-

tional confines, except in the homes of a few co-religionists, there are

only enemies.

Mohammad Mosadeq, like most Persians, is not excessively

devout. The superficial aspects of religion appear in his name and in his

references to God in almost every speech. The political advantage he

finds in Islam clearly shows in his close alliance with Mullah Kashani

who now holds extensive influence in the Government.

There is one other great effect which Islam has had upon the mind

and character of Mosadeq. The fatalism of Islam plays an important

[Footnote is in the original.]

part in Mosadeq’s attitudes. Like the Moslem chauffeur who believes

that no matter how recklessly he drives, if Allah wills it, he will not

crash, Mosadeq allows himself the freedom of acting recklessly, certain

that great forces, including God and Fate, will save him or destroy him

as they will, no matter what he does.

Both by personal conviction, by his understanding of Iranian emo-

tions and by the political advantage he will gain, it is expected that

Mosadeq will continue to placate extreme and retrogressive religious

fanaticism. Permission for bigger, bloodier Moharram flagellant pro-

cessions, continued pressure to cut off foreign cultural and educational

influence, will probably result. The nationalist leader who follows Mo-

sadeq will find easily aroused emotions and fanatic following in coop-

eration with Iran’s mullahs.

Pride in Past History It is impossible for a Persian to forget that, in

the past three thousand years of history, his country has often been su-

perior politically and culturally to the rest of the world. He turns, in

modern times, for comfort to past martial and intellectual glories. The

neo-Achaemenian architecture of public buildings in Tehran, the

choice of first names from the Book of Kings, which celebrates legendary

Persian glory, are two of numerous examples of Iranian concentration

on the past.

This introversion leads inevitably to resistance or indifference to

foreign inspiration. It is true that Cadillacs and western education are

marks of wealth and social status in Tehran. It is true that western

fashions, architecture and commodities have changed the facade of

Tehran and its people. But the place remains essentially Central Asian.

Most Persians think their ancient ideas and traditions are the best.

Scholarly attempts to strip Arab words from the Persian language may

be an intellectual affectation, but they rise from a sense of Persian supe-

riority over all things foreign. Mosadeq shares and takes advantage of

this national pride. On September 1, in an address to the nation, he said,

“We must bring to the attention of the whole world the fact that the Ira-

nian nation, conscious of its glorious past history, cannot tolerate any

contempt or humiliation.”

An excellent example of the way he appeals to patriotic pride in

order to avoid parliamentary criticism and to focus hatred on the

British occurred when he addressed the Majlis on September 9. The

Stokes Mission had returned to England, and Iranians were anxious

that they might have failed to make best use of the opportunity to come

to an agreement with the British. Mosadeq declared, and cheers

note is in the original. Despatch 308 from Tehran is in the National Archives, RG 59, Cen-

February 1951–February 1952

showed Majlis approbation, “Iran must regain its past greatness, and

also regain its lost territories. (Cheers). . . . Patriots want Iran to safe-

guard its old greatness. They say that Iran should have the control of

everything she has. (Cheers) The oil which belongs to it should be in its

own hands. (Cheers)”

Compensation for Inferiority With this introversion comes a national

sensitivity to any real or imagined slight of Iranian self-importance.

This is the psychological compensation of a people who feel inferior in

the family of nations and who believe they are behind the times in a

modern world.

Like a youth who thinks that he is man enough to have his own

opinions and his chosen way, Iran resents the patronizing attitude im-

plicit in offers of advice from other nations. The Millspaugh missions,

the British military and financial missions, the Overseas Consultants

and American military and Point IV missions have all met resistance

from Iranians, Mosadeq among them. However, since he became

Prime Minister, Mosadeq has walked softly where questions of Amer-

ican military and economic advisers are concerned, probably because

he hopes that the United States will protect him from British pressure.

Also, and extremely important in Iran, the National Front has fostered

a widely held belief that the United States has sponsored the rise to

power of the National Front. Furthermore, he uses this attitude as par-

tial blackmail to obtain our support in order to have a Point IV program

and to give military advice and aid.

Iranian Vanity and Irresponsibility

International Blackmail Based on Vanity There is no vanity like the

belief of a Prime Minister that, no matter what he does, the rest of the

world, preoccupied with the importance of preserving his country, will

save him from destruction. “If (Iran’s) oil industry collapses and no

money comes and disorder and communism follow, it will be your

fault entirely”.

fate and the mass frustration of a people who have been dominated for

centuries by foreign forces beyond their control give rise together to an

amazing national irresponsibility. It is difficult to emphasize suffi-

ciently the great importance of this Persian resignation to the influence

of the Unseen Hand. There is no limit to their fantasy in this respect.

Many Persians honestly believe the British engineered the nationaliza-

tion of their oil industry in Iran. Many Persians, therefore, blame their

present situation on the British. Prime Minister Mosadeq catered to Ira-

nian suspicions of the British hand in all things when he said to the

Majlis that Mr. George McGhee’s transfer to Turkey resulted from the

pressure of antagonistic British on the U.S. Government. Only under-

standing of this psychological infirmity can make explicable a wide-

spread Persian rumor that the British are behind Mosadeq and that the

Tudeh Party is primarily British-dominated.

Iranian irresponsibility, which blames every ill upon the Unseen

Hand, allows Mosadeq a freedom of action which few political leaders

of the world could have. No matter what he does, he can blame it on the

British and his people will believe him. This seems so incredible that

western readers, unfamiliar with the Persians, will have to take the

statement on faith. As deputy Jemal Emami told Ambassador Hen-

derson in December, 1951, “There sometimes is no barrier between a

Persian and his fantasy”.

February 1951–February 1952

Mosadeq and any other Persian politicians can use this national ir-

responsibility to frame and follow almost any policy. If they fail, they

and their people will blame the Unseen Hand.

IV. Mosadeq’s Political Realism

The Political Realist

Good speech-makers can easily arouse Iranian emotions. To ac-

quire and keep political power, they must be shrewd and realistic poli-

ticians. Mohammad Mosadeq won popular acclaim by easily emulated

techniques, but he showed unusual realism and ability in maintaining

his position and in overcoming the great forces ranged against him. Fa-

naticism leads him in strange channels but his manipulation of Iranian

politics has been masterful.

Understanding Mosadeq has real understanding of the character of

his people and of the factors in Iranian politics today. There is nothing

fuzzy in his thinking on how to overcome or turn to his advantage the

forces which are obstacles to his progress. He recognizes and exploits

the vulnerabilities of his opponents. A leader who does not have this

understanding of political affairs will waste his other talents.

Ruthlessness Mosadeq’s political fixations and ambitions have been

described. His ruthlessness in politics derives from these personal char-

acteristics and has proved a constant source of power in his handling of

previous governments, the Shah, the Majlis, entrenched interests and

foreign influence in Iran. Ruthlessness in action and in attitude is the

basis of his “realpolitik”.

Organization The greatest problems facing any leader in Iran are

the country’s apathy and anarchy. The first comes from public igno-

rance and frustration. The second rises from mutual distrust among all

Persians. One of Mosadeq’s most extraordinary feats has been his

welding of nine selfish, power-seeking politicians into a National Front

which acted in cooperation and submerged individual interest into

common purpose. Organization and refusal to disintegrate is probably

the greatest factor in the National Front’s political success.

Propaganda Advertising men agree that a sales campaign must

have a simple, heavily-repeated slogan. When Mosadeq first came to

power he said he had two programs: implementation of the oil nation-

alization law and electoral reform. Even this platform was soon re-

37 “I and my tribe against the nation; I and my clan against the tribe; I and my

brothers against the clan; and I against my brothers”—Old Persian Proverb. [Footnote is

in the original.]

in the original.]

duced to one plank—oil. The propaganda of the National Front, both

as a Parliamentary minority and as a Government, has depended on

this theme and, without a similarly simple, emotion-charged appeal, no

opposition has been able to succeed.

Control The familiar military trappings of a police state are lacking

in Iran today, but Mosadeq, when crossed, acts as tyrannically as any

dictator, using popular excitement and gangs of thugs to enforce his

will. He told the Majlis opposition bluntly and quite truthfully, “You

dare not step outside the Majlis and criticize the National Front. You

would be torn to pieces by the crowds.”

Professional Oppositionist

Saed Government The Government, the Court and Army controlled

elections to the 16th Majlis, and expected that their influence would be

paramount in Parliament. The National Front minority, elected from

Tehran and Kashan after public indignation led the Shah to order a re-

view of obviously rigged results in the first balloting, found strength in

the fact they were not sponsored by governing authority. They sought

and gained popularity by criticizing every move or proposal of the

Saed Government. Their wholly unconstructive parliamentary tactics

appealed to Iranian convictions that government, traditionally oppres-

sive, would never seek to further public good. Therefore, Mosadeq by

merely pointing out in public that the Government was against him

and that he opposed it won a reputation as a champion of the people’s

interests.

It cannot be said that the National Front brought down the Saed

Government, but its minority obstruction to parliamentary action on

Government proposals weakened both the nation and the Government

and gave the National Front its first advance in public esteem.

Mansur Government The Mansur Government, appointed by a va-

cillating Shah in an attempt to put off the rise of “strong man” Raz-

mara, was easy prey to Mosadeq. The Government’s corruption and

inefficiency was at once a target for parliamentary attacks and a protec-

tion for the National Front since no concerted counter-action could be

organized by the weak Government. Again the National Front’s popu-

larity grew as the prestige and authority of the Government waned.

Razmara Government The full history of the rise and fall of Razmara

could probably not be written. The intrigues of this Premier became so

intricate within a few months of his rise to power that it would be im-

possible to follow the many secret channels he maintained to British

39 “My program concerns the oil and my work is to carry out the nationalization

law”. Address to the Senate September 5, 1951. [Footnote is in the original.]

February 1951–February 1952

and to Soviet sources of promises and pressure, to learn what liaison he

had to various Court and Parliamentary cliques, or to know the extent

of his grandiose ambitions.

It is a paradox that Mosadeq most strenuously opposed the man

who first broke Iran’s close identification with the West and who fo-

cused national attention on an oil dispute with the British. It was the

fight against Razmara that brought the National Front most promi-

nently before the public eye. Again Mosadeq turned to his advantage

what seemed to be the greatest threat against him. Razmara’s reputa-

tion of being a strong-handed military man allowed Mosadeq to cham-

pion parliamentary and press freedom against a tyranny which in fact

did not exist. Mosadeq tilted with a windmill but the whole nation

thought he was fighting a giant. When the “giant” fell, the credit re-

dounded to the National Front.

Ala Government When Hosein Ala became Prime Minister, Mo-

sadeq saw that it could only be an interim appointment while major

forces in Iran worked to establish the next Government. Mosadeq

gained Ala’s confidence and used him to avert much British pressure

on the Shah and Parliament. He used the Ala Government almost like a

stalking-horse as he prepared to ram oil nationalization through an

emotionally aroused Majlis. Ala, who had confidently thought that Mo-

sadeq had been working to prepare constructive legislation, suddenly

was faced with a proposed law which he felt could only bring destruc-

tion of Iran’s economy. When he resigned, he was as much a victim of

Mosadeq’s political realism as Saed, Mansur and Razmara.

Attitudes Towards the Shah

National Front Antagonism to the Monarchy The antagonism of Na-

tional Front leaders to the monarchy antedate the creation of the Front.

Mosadeq was raised in the Kajar Court and has little respect for the

upstart Pahlevis. His personal encounters with Reza Shah’s tyranny

cannot be easily forgotten. His long devotion to constitutional reform

has shown his profound belief that a monarch should have, at most, a

symbolic or ornamental place in Iran’s government.

Kashani has a long record of anti-Pahlevi attitudes, and in early

1949 when the Shah was almost killed, Kashani was among the first ar-

rested. Police brutality to him when arrested did little to abate his ha-

tred of the monarchy. The intellectual radicals in the National Front

have long distrusted Court intrigues and the Shah’s tendency to mix,

unconstitutionally, in Iranian politics. In their more radical moments,

original.]

National Frontists have responded to communist propaganda which

obviously holds no place for the Shah in Iran’s future.

When the National Front became a minority in the Majlis, one of its

most repeated themes was criticism of Court corruption and intrigues.

Princess Ashraf was a favorite target; and, although the Shah, by his

position, was free from direct attack, the National Front did not fail to

blame him indirectly for his Court’s iniquities. Kashani never opens his

numerous “proclamations” with the customary courtesy—“under the

auspices of his Imperial Majesty the Shahinshah”. Hosein Maki, a histo-

rian of some repute in Persia, has written biting criticism of the Pah-

levis. Haerizadeh always called the first Pahlevi, “Reza Khan,” in his

speeches in the 16th Majlis, and he led National Front attacks on

Princess Ashraf’s reputation. Nariman publicly criticized the Shah in

1950 when Razmara was appointed to the premiership without a Majlis

vote of inclination.

Prime Minister Mosadeq’s Control of the Shah When Mosadeq became

Prime Minister, he was aware that his popularity and a strong Majlis

vote of inclination had forced the Shah to appoint him. He later re-

ported to the Senate43 that his pro-British rival, Seyid Zia, had been

waiting with the Shah when the news arrived that Mosadeq had been

acclaimed by parliament. Mosadeq knows the Shah’s propensity for in-

trigue and his natural enemity of strong premiers. Mosadeq found an

antagonist in the Shah and he had to move carefully to prevent effective

use of the potent pressure which the Shah could have brought to bear

upon the Government and the issues of the day.

Again, Mosadeq used to his advantage what seemed to be a threat-

ening force. The very reason why the Shah had undermined previous

Prime Ministers was his fear of being overthrown by a successful

“strong man”. Mosadeq took the problem by its horns and underlined

the Shah’s own fears, pointing out that, if the Shah removed him, the

forces of nationalism which he represented would in turn throw out the

Shah.

It is not admiration for the National Front which has kept the Shah

silent when he could have weakened and perhaps overthrown Prime

Minister Mosadeq. It is a fear that Mosadeq out of power would be

more dangerous to the dynasty than he now is. The Shah recognizes the

dangers of the Government’s present policies, but he feels, as a Court

source recently observed, “He cannot go against the national current”.

February 1951–February 1952

Mosadeq does everything he can to strengthen that opinion and its re-

sultant fear and procrastination.

Thus Mosadeq has avoided the pitfall which the Shah dug for

other premiers. By relying on national forces beyond reach of Court

plots, Mosadeq is protected from the Shah’s most dangerous weapon

and has caught the Shah in his fears of deposition. The control which

Mosadeq now holds upon the Shah can best be illustrated by the fol-

lowing examples.

In September, 1951, Mosadeq insisted that the Shah prevent the

members of his family from intriguing. A court source has reported

that the Shah wept in frustrated rage at the demand, but both Princess

Ashraf and the Queen Mother had to leave Tehran.

In late December, 1951, the Queen Mother, who had returned from

semi-exile in Hamadan, expressed her open support of Qavam to re-

place Mosadeq and sent flowers and candy, with her card, to opposi-

tion deputies in asylum in the Majlis. Mosadeq’s protest took the form

of a threat of resignation from the premiership which the Shah and

Minister of Court Ala begged him to withdraw. He “reconsidered” his

offer to resign, but, in the meantime, the Shah forced his mother to halt

her activities. Shortly after this, Qavam left Iran, reportedly convinced

that the Shah would never act to put him in the place of Mosadeq.

Recently, Mosadeq has shown his low regard for the Shah more

clearly than before, telling Hosein Ala on January 12 that he would not

consult the Shah before making important decisions on internal or ex-

ternal affairs. Also, he has exerted efforts both internally and by re-

fusing U.S. military aid to weaken the Iranian Army upon which the

Shah relies for support.

It has been interesting to speculate about the reasons for Mo-

sadeq’s evident antagonism to the Army. He has always been opposed

to military control of Iran’s affairs. During his political career, Mosadeq

has found the Army usually oppressive. At present, the Army is the

main source of power for the Shah. If he should win control of the

Army, Mosadeq might not be so firm in his opposition but probably he

will always fear and distrust military might.

Conquest of the Majlis

The National Front Minority When the 16th Majlis opened in early

1950, it seemed inevitable that the National Front minority would be

submerged by the apathy or selfishness of their colleagues. It was un-

thinkable that the corrupt, disorganized deputies ever could be stirred

by unprofitable emotions.

It is unfortunately true that the Iranian Parliament rarely has

shown understanding of its constitutional role as a legislature to pass

laws designed to promote the nation’s welfare. On the contrary, most

deputies spend their terms in petty intrigues to further personal or

local interests.

Mosadeq, veteran of parliamentary politics, saw a way to utilize

this situation. He organized his few colleagues into a unit which had

strength of purpose and of cooperation. Party strategy was planned to

gain maximum advantage from the source of each man’s powers.

Kashani, who never took his Majlis seat, was consulted on how to stir

his bazaar following in support of National Front policies. Saleh, Nar-

iman, Shayegan and Haerizadeh had close touch with Iranian intellec-

tuals and leftist liberals. Mosadeq was a great orator and a national

hero. Maki, Baghai, Azad each appealed in different ways to numbers

of admirers. All these men worked to focus the attention they com-

manded towards the National Front rather than upon themselves

alone.

It was this organization and common purpose which gave the Na-

tional Front minority an importance in the Majlis far beyond its actual

strength. A typical, though minor, example of how they forced their

views upon their colleagues was the planned strategy of National Front

deputies to give their previously requested speaking time for pre-

agenda speeches to one man who could, therefore, hold the rostrum for

two full hours rather than the 15 minutes allowed each speaker. By this

cooperation the best orators of the National Front won publicity, atten-

tion and reputation while obstructing legislative action.

The National Front remained aloof from the petty graft which sat-

isfied most deputies. The Government in power could not woo the Na-

tional Frontists with cash or privilege since they were out for bigger

game. Their steadfast opposition to the Government and reiteration of

emotional appeals gradually placed the National Front in the forefront

of the Majlis and won a growing following among the deputies them-

selves. The National Front offered leadership. Even the most apathetic

deputy gained a sense that Mosadeq and his colleagues represented a

new and vital force which offered a way out of confusion and depres-

sion. By 1951, the National Front minority was the most important

force in the Majlis. Parliamentary debates then became mainly

sounding boards for National Front opinions.

National Front Government’s Suppression of Majlis Opposition When

Mosadeq became Prime Minister, he had the unanimous support of

Parliament. The motives for this unanimity were various, ranging from

National Front extreme views to hopes of Seyid Zia’s partisans that

February 1951–February 1952

Mosadeq would hang himself in his responsibilities. It was not for sev-

eral months that questions of a serious nature were raised on the Majlis

floor against Mosadeq’s direction of the nation. The Prime Minister has

avoided all these questions and controlled his Majlis opposition by

three primary methods—parliamentary maneuvers, anti-British moves

and propaganda and terror in Tehran streets.

Good examples of Mosadeq’s shrewd parliamentary tactics were

his maneuvers to overcome, by evading answering it directly, an oppo-

sition interpellation which he was supposed to answer on January 22.

His counter-attack moved along two cleverly coordinated lines. His

first aim, which was successful, was to cause the Majlis to dissolve it-

self, thus preventing an embarrassing session. Pro-Government dep-

uties were told to leave town in such numbers, ostensibly to attend pro-

vincial elections, that by January 22 there was no Majlis quorum in

Tehran. Simultaneously, Mosadeq ordered British Consulates to be

closed and it is clear that he intended, if his strategy of preventing

Majlis sessions failed, to force a vote of confidence upon his anti-British

actions rather than upon the opposition’s interpellation.

At every turn the opposition has been described as British “tools”.

Every speech that Mosadeq has made since he became Prime Minister

has included by direct reference or by innuendo this accusation. The

opposition, outmaneuvered and completely vilified, has never reached

the point where it could marshal strength to overthrow Mosadeq by

parliamentary action.

The auxiliary tactic for suppressing Majlis opposition is constraint

by terror. When opposition deputies and newspaper editors took

asylum in the Majlis in December 1951 they made propaganda from

their action, but they were in real danger and many of them were really

terrified. The thugs who looted anti-Government newspapers, beat up

opposition deputies on occasion, and threatened or attacked the fam-

ilies of the men in asylum, were acting under orders of National Front

leaders. The crowds gathered to demonstrate for Mosadeq on nu-

merous occasions were obviously controlled by terroristic organiza-

tions such as Kashani’s Warriors of Islam and Baghai’s so-called Iran

Workers Party.

In a more gentle way, Mosadeq has terrorized the entire Majlis by

turning to the “people” when he was not satisfied with his reception in

Parliament. On September 6, 1951, when opposition deputies, by re-

fusing to attend, prevented a session quorum, Mosadeq went outside

the building to tell the several thousand people gathered there that they

were the real parliament and that he would deliver his planned speech

to them.

Struggle with the Entrenched Interests

Any political leader in Iran has to face the power and inertia of

Iran’s entrenched, reactionary interests. Mohammad Mosadeq with re-

alism and great shrewdness has played his politics to break up this mo-

nolithic force, first cloaking with nationalist emotions his real ambi-

tions to break the power of old-line politicians in Government, then

defeating conservative elements in the Court and Majlis, and then com-

mencing a direct attack upon the electoral strongholds of the land-

owners and merchants. The wealthy families who have left or are pre-

pared to leave Iran to live abroad show their fears of National Front

antagonism or of the chaos and the communism which many think

inevitable.

Truce Dr. Mosadeq is a wealthy landowner and an aristocrat. His

son’s luxurious house in town is placed on a crossroad with three royal

palaces. Despite his oratory about social reform, most Persians consider

Mosadeq a member of the wealthy ruling class.

When emotions were aroused about the oil dispute, Persians of all

classes were swept with nationalistic fervor. The angriest pro-Mosadeq

speeches heard by westerners at private parties came from the scions of

important Persian families. The antagonism which would have been

expected from the entrenched interests to any politician calling for sub-

stantial change in the existing system was not forthcoming because the

entrenched interests were dominated, in early 1951, by the emotions of

Mosadeq’s oil nationalization program.

It is also true, unfortunately, that the class which in England pro-

duces dedicated and courageous leaders seems generally to produce in

Persia a selfish and weak-willed group of men. When this class can

crush reform without fear of much opposition, it is a potent force.

When Mosadeq appeared on the political scene he was too dangerous a

quantity for either the Shah or entrenched interests to oppose. These

“leaders” mostly spent their efforts to persuade someone else to re-

move Mosadeq.

Piecemeal Defeats Mosadeq’s treatment of the Shah and Court and

his capture and suppression of the Majlis has been described. In these

victories Mosadeq defeated representatives of Iran’s entrenched in-

terests. It is quite possible that a coordinated opposition from the Court

and Majlis, based on contributions and other influence from the land-

owners and great merchants, could have defeated Mosadeq. By per-

suading the Shah against cooperation with the Majlis opposition dep-

uties, by labeling as British agents any courtiers or deputies who were

courageous or aware enough to speak against the National Front, Mo-

sadeq prevented much concerted opposition from the entrenched

interests.

Direct Attack Mosadeq’s timing has been excellent. By the time

elections started for the 17th Majlis he had terrorized the 16th Majlis

and had nullified, to a great extent, the influence of the Shah and of the

Army. When he began to change officials in the provinces, draw up

February 1951–February 1952

lists of National Front election candidates, and prepare to change the

composition of the Majlis which had been almost self-perpetuating for

years, he faced a weakened and divided enemy. The entrenched in-

terests, predominately selfish in character, were divided by Govern-

ment bargains with certain leaders.

Great landowners, merchants and tribal leaders and their repre-

sentatives will be found in the 17th Majlis, but their numbers will have

decreased and they will be faced with a substantial number of deputies

who owe allegiance to the National Front or whose natural inclinations

are toward National Front policies. It is quite true that the morass of

Persian politics will not be drained overnight and Mosadeq may bog

down in corruption and inertia. Also, it is possible that Mosadeq will

join with the full force of the entrenched interests to fight against a

threatening communism. So far, Mosadeq has dealt successfully with

the entrenched interests, and he maintains the initiative in the struggle

with them.

Dealing with Foreign Influences

Anglo-Russian Rivalry Persians of recent generations have been

brought up in the belief that Anglo-Soviet rivalry is the basis of Iranian

independence. The necessity for the Persians to play these rivals off

against each other and some third force, first French, then German and

now American, has developed a traditionally devious foreign policy.

The history of recent foreign influence in Iran’s affairs has been well de-

scribed in Lenczowski’s book Russia and the West in Iran 1918–1948. Mo-

sadeq’s decision to drive out the British required him to establish a new

balance in Iran between Russia and America. So far, he has done this

with consummate skill, and the technique which he has used differs in

each case.

Great Britain and its “Agents” In dealing with the British, Mosadeq

has taken a directly antagonistic approach, accusing them of every sin

and driving first the oil company and then the British consulates from

Iran. There is nothing in his policy but bitter opposition to the British.

Everything they do is wrong and he will neither equivocate nor be rea-

sonable. He wants them out of Iran and he is achieving his objective.

U.S.S.R. and Iranian Communists Mosadeq has clearly shown his

fear of provoking official Russian anger, but he has been willing to fight

the communists in Iranian streets. The extreme nationalist adherents of

Kashani, Baghai and Pan-Iranism, with police protection, have deliber-

ately set upon the demonstrations and establishments of communist

front organizations such as the Partisans of Peace. There is little doubt

that this type of opposition is fruitless since communist strength grows

as Iran’s economic and political chaos deepens. The National Front has

not yet used the weapon of police suppression of the communists al-

though the law prohibiting the Tudeh Party is still in force. Mosadeq is

playing a difficult game of encouraging Russia officially while at-

tempting, by street riots, to prevent communist action.

America And Aid Mosadeq has shown himself rather too realistic

where Iran’s relations with the United States are concerned. He has

used and abused American good will, encouraging the United States to

play the “honest broker” in the oil dispute in order to lay upon the

shoulders of Ambassador Grady, then Mr. Harriman, then Assistant

Secretary McGhee, the blame for failure to “persuade” the British to

Mosadeq’s point of view. He gambles on Iran’s strategic and political

importance in America’s “containment” policy to force American

budgetary aid. He views American efforts to give him aid as evidence

of some international desperation to prop him up. He realizes that

American “desperation” apparently will grow as the Soviet threat to

Iran increases. Therefore, he throws his hands up, in conversations

with American officials, and says in substance “It is too late for me to

change (any of several drastic actions such as driving the British oil

technicians from Abadan, expelling a New York Times correspondent,

closing British consulates in Iran). . . . You Americans must save Iran

anyhow”.

Asiatic “Neutrals” The neutralism of India and the theory of a “neu-

tral” bloc of Moslem states meets the approval of the National Front

and many Persians. Kashani often speaks of an international Moslem

union, presumably under his command. Mosadeq, in Egypt, called for

mutual, though essentially moral, support between Middle Eastern na-

tions. It is doubtful if these vague thoughts will soon become particu-

larly concrete. Certainly, at this moment, the influence of neighboring

Moslem countries is negligible in Iran. But Mosadeq, by paying defer-

ence to this subject of some popular and official interest, shows his re-

alism in handling internal propaganda but shows great ignorance in

believing “neutralism” as a policy will serve the interests of Iran.

V. Conclusion

In military terminology the history of the National Front would be

described as “assembly” and “approach” in 1949 and 1950, “assault” in

the first months of 1951, success in “taking the position” on April 30,

1951 and subsequent “consolidation”, a phase which is now ending as

elections to the 17th Majlis are being held under National Front control.

Study of the characteristics and political techniques of Mohammad Mo-

sadeq shows how the National Front used its political environment to

come to power. A drastic change in this environment may bring forth

new techniques and new leaders; but, if Iran continues approximately

in its present course, even given revenue from oil or other sources, it is

likely that Mosadeq’s example will be followed in the future.

February 1951–February 1952

The national emotions upon which Mosadeq has played are per-

manent and profound in Iran. Hopes that Iran’s aroused nationalism

can be or will be disregarded are unfounded. Nationalist emotions

could possibly be rechanneled or transformed in some way, but they

will not easily be erased. As described, they are considered to be factors

in any situation in Iran under present social, economic and political

circumstances.

It is not necessary for an Iranian politician to have all the character-

istics of Dr. Mosadeq in order to win power, but at least he must be de-

termined, ambitious and able to portray himself as representing na-

tional interests. A character such as Mosadeq’s is unusual, as is the

strong admiration which many Persians have for him. His extreme na-

tionalism, his fantasies and his lack of conscience are not unusual in

Iran. Should he die or be overthrown there are many who, since he has

blazed the way, might replace him, at least in their ability to appeal to

Persian national emotions.

An essential element in the rise to power of the National Front has

been Mosadeq’s shrewd realism. Selfishness and disorganization char-

acterize Persian politics, and Mosadeq has made the most of those con-

ditions. Whoever tries to stand against him or to follow him must have

equal realism. Again, in military terms, Mosadeq’s political ability has

been shown in his consolidation of a position when it was won and his

ability to prevent or overcome counter-attacks.

The great tragedy for Iran is that Mosadeq, who has recognized

and led nationalist emotions, does not now seem to know where he is

going. The methods which Mosadeq used to come to power are fine for

“assault” and capture of power, but, by their own destructive nature,

these methods are not sufficient to bring progress. The Iranian nation-

alist movement which could be used by communists, army leaders, the

Shah himself, a strong reactionary, or by nationalist leaders more ex-

treme than Mosadeq is now entering its most dangerous phase. The

great question for the future in Iran is who will capture and how will he

lead Iranian nationalism in its next phase of development.

Arrested by Reza Shah’s police. Imprisoned in Bir-

jand. Remained in prison five months; was re-

leased due to intercession by then Crown Prince

Mohammad Pahlevi. Returned to his village

under surveillance.

Sept. 22, 1941

Amnestied with other political prisoners.

Continued to live on estate but visited Tehran.

Deputy to Fourteenth Majlis; sponsored bill forbid-

ding government to grant oil concessions

without consent of Majlis.

66.

Memorandum From the Acting Chief of the Near East and

Africa Division, Directorate of Plans ([name not declassified])

to the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Dulles)

Washington, February 20, 1952.

SUBJECT

Appraisal of Activities [less than 1 line not declassified] with respect to the Iranian

Parliamentary Elections

[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]

[name not declassified] concludes that the current election trend, on

the basis of results tabulated thus far, indicates that our primary objec-

tive of denying to the Tudeh Communist Party representation in the

new parliament has met with success, [2 lines not declassified].

Voting began in Iran on 23 December, 1951, and is scheduled to

plement of 136 have been elected. Further reports on the progress of the

elections will be prepared as data become available.

[name not declassified]

Iran. Secret; Security Information.

February 1951–February 1952

Enclosure

SUBJECT

Appraisal of activities [less than 1 line not declassified] with respect to the Iranian

Parliamentary Elections

In a preliminary appraisal of the influence and activities of [less

than 1 line not declassified] with respect to the parliamentary elections

now in process, [less than 1 line not declassified] their fundamental objec-

tives with regard to the Iranian elections were (1) to stimulate in the Ira-

nian authorities a determined anti-Tudeh position; (2) to arouse the

public to active opposition to Tudeh candidates; and (3) to unite the

anti-Tudeh opposition behind those candidates most likely to win

public support. Remarkable success has been achieved thus far with re-

spect to the first two objectives; the third has been more difficult of

achievement, because of local circumstances and conflicting political

ambitions.

Although almost all of southern Iran and much of northern Iran

has yet to vote, the current trend on the basis of results tabulated thus

far in the north and in Tehran points towards the complete failure of

the Tudeh party in the elections, and our primary goal of denying to the

Tudeh representation in the new parliament has thus far met with

success. The significance of this achievement, [1½ lines not declassified] is

underscored by recollection of the parliament of 1944–1946, in which

eight Tudeh party members achieved through solidarity a measure of

success and influence out of all proportion to their numbers.

On the basis of preliminary returns in the northern provinces,

where Tudeh candidates were able to secure only a fraction of the total

vote cast, [less than 1 line not declassified] have become confident of

success throughout the provinces. In the preliminary Tehran results,

based on 100,000 votes out of a total of 140,000, all Tudeh candidates

were badly defeated. In every Iranian constituency thus far reported,

Prime Minister Mosadeq’s National Front party has been victorious,

and the Tudeh party has yet to win a single seat.

[1½ lines not declassified] success in these anti-Tudeh election efforts

depended in large measure on preparatory action in advance of the

elections, which was directed towards arousing the court, the gov-

ernment, the parliament, press, clergy, and the general public to the

Tudeh danger. The riots of 6 December with the attendant upsurge of

popular feeling against the Tudeh, coupled with the elaborate cele-

bration of the liberation of Azerbaijan province from the pro-Soviet

“Azerbaijan National Government” on the eve of the announcement of

elections, marked a definite shift in popular psychology and set the

stage for the anti-Tudeh election campaign.

[5 lines not declassified] Successful efforts were made simulta-

neously to effect a united front on the part of non-Tudeh candidates,

whose political differences were reconciled [1½ lines not declassified].

Following creation of this united anti-Tudeh front, its representatives

toured the area seeking popular support for the front and openly de-

nouncing Tudeh aspirants. [8 lines not declassified] The anti-Tudeh pub-

licity engendered by such events also proved of value in support of our

objectives.

[1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]

67.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,

Central Intelligence Agency

Staff Memorandum No. 211

Washington, March 28, 1952.

SUBJECT

Effect of Recent Developments in Iran on Mossadeq’s Regime

1. The oil negotiations between the Iranian Government and the

IBRD, which began on 14 February, were suspended on 16 March be-

cause of disagreement on four issues:2

a. Iran refused to permit British oil technicians to return to Iran.

The Bank refused to discriminate against the British in this way, not

only on general principles, but also on the grounds that there were not

sufficient oil technicians of other countries available to operate the

Abadan refinery efficiently. Moreover, the Bank assumed that the UK

would not have accepted a settlement which barred the return of

British technicians to Iran.

b. Iran demanded that the Bank concede that it would be man-

aging the oil industry “on behalf of” Iran. The Bank adopted the posi-

tion that it would be acting on behalf of both UK and Iran and that to

accede to the Iranian demand might affect legal aspects of the contro-

versy, in which the Bank did not want to become embroiled.

c. Iran demanded a price formula which would have given it pro-

portionately higher returns from its oil resources than the other oil pro-

ducing countries in the Middle East are now receiving. The Bank main-

tained that Iranian oil would be non-competitive under the Iranian

price formula and suggested various formulas approximating the

50–50 profit-sharing standard in effect in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and

Iraq.

d. Iran demanded the right to sell 30 percent of its production di-

rectly to independent buyers. The Bank supported the British position

Staff Memoranda—1952 (Substantive). Secret; Security Information.

that in any settlement the marketing agent (i.e., AIOC) must have the

right to buy practically all Iranian production.

2. While Mossadeq might have been willing to compromise on the

other issues, he made it very clear that he could not permit British tech-

nicians to return to Iran under any circumstances. There is little likeli-

hood that Mossadeq or any other National Front leader will retreat

from this position or that the British would accept a settlement that

barred the return of British technicians to Iran. Thus, although the talks

have not been formally broken off, there is little chance that they will be

renewed so long as a National Front regime remains in power in Iran.

3. While public opinion in Iran, even among politically conscious

groups, is difficult to assess, there appears to have been considerable

disillusionment at the breakdown of the negotiations with IBRD. Op-

position to Mossadeq in a significant proportion of the press is more in-

tense than ever before, and there has been a notable absence of pro-

Mossadeq demonstrations. Civil servants, members of the armed

forces, and the business community (at least in Tehran) are beginning

to appreciate more fully the critical nature of the government’s fiscal

position and are undoubtedly aware of the possibility that within a

month or two the government may be unable to pay salaries and meet

other payments. The payment of government salaries, which consti-

tutes 80 percent of the budget, has fallen a little more in arrears each

month. The payment of bonuses, a traditional practice at the beginning

of the No Ruz (New Year) holidays, which this year began on 21 March,

has not been made. The government is heavily in debt to government

contractors and has made few payments to them in recent months.

4. The increasing concern of more conservative elements with the

trend of events has been reflected in the Senate, which before it ad-

journed on 19 March seriously considered calling for Mossadeq’s resig-

nation. Its failure to act can be attributed largely to the Shah’s refusal to

support such a movement at this time. The Shah actually advised

against it because he continues to believe that Mossadeq must be com-

pletely discredited before being forced from office. At the same time,

however, the Shah has displayed much more confidence in his own

ability to act decisively “at the right moment” and apparently believes

that Mossadeq’s popularity is really on the wane and that circum-

stances will soon permit him to bring about a change of government. It

is evident, however, that the Shah is unlikely to act against Mossadeq

unless a majority of the deputies in the new Majlis, which convenes

about 10 April, organize an effective opposition movement.

5. Much of the Shah’s self-confidence probably results from the

fact that the armed forces have recently displayed increasing antago-

nism towards the National Front and demonstrated their loyalty to

him. Army leaders have been antagonized by Mossadeq’s attitude

March 1952–February 1953

blocking US arms assistance and his refusal to renew the contracts of

the US military mission. Their opposition to the National Front has

been clearly demonstrated during the current elections. While the army

exerted its influence discreetly and concentrated its efforts in provincial

areas, it was instrumental in defeating a number of government candi-

dates and in effecting the election of anti-National Front candidates.

Morale in the armed forces has recently improved as a result of a purge

of Tudeh sympathizers in the air force and as a result of the Shah’s ac-

tion in dismissing the government-appointed Chief-of-Staff of the air

force and replacing him with an officer in whom he had full confidence.

These developments suggest that any further attempts of the National

Front regime to undermine the strength of the armed forces will almost

certainly result in counteraction by army leaders, as well as by the Shah;

it is extremely unlikely that either these leaders or the Shah would pas-

sively submit to government measures which would weaken the

armed forces to the extent of preventing them from effectively main-

taining internal order. If, for instance, the government attempted to cut

the army budget significantly or failed to meet army salary payments

over a protracted period, the Shah and the army leaders would prob-

ably act decisively to remove Mossadeq from power.

6. The new Majlis, at least initially, will be heavily weighted in

favor of the government. Approximately 60 deputies, out of a total of

136, have already been elected. Of these, probably about 25 are active

supporters of the present National Front leaders, and about 15 are defi-

nitely opposed to the National Front. Most of the remaining 20 would

undoubtedly support the government on the oil issue, but might well

vote against the government on other issues if an effective opposition

movement developed in the Majlis. An analysis of the elections so far

completed indicates that of the 25 hard-core supporters of the National

Front, 12 come from Tehran and 8 from Tabriz. In Tehran, Tudeh con-

stituted the chief opposition and would undoubtedly have elected sev-

eral deputies if the elections had been conducted honestly. The 8 hard-

core National Front deputies from Tabriz are personal followers of the

religious reactionary Kashani, and 3 of them have had connections with

Tudeh in the past. Three or four personal followers of Kashani were

also elected in other parts of the country. The chief opposition in the Ta-

briz area came from the wealthy landowners and tribal elements, who

were astonished at their defeat by, in some cases, impoverished and

unknown mullahs. The elections, which started in December, have pro-

gressed slowly, primarily because of attempts by the government to

block the election of opposition candidates. There appears also to have

been some rivalry between different factions within the National Front,

particularly between candidates supported by Kashani and candidates

claiming the support of Mossadeq. In many districts the counting of

ballots has been stopped and new elections called. Violence has been

unusually widespread even for an election period, and at least 35

deaths have resulted. Because of the government’s fear of Tudeh

strength in Abadan and other oil centers in Kuzistan province, martial

law is still in force there and elections have not even begun. Disturbed,

however, by the recent opposition activity of the Senate and by the pos-

sibility of the Shah’s acting to dismiss them, the leaders of the gov-

ernment have recently speeded up the elections in certain districts in

order that at least a quorum of 69 deputies, which would enable the

Majlis to convene, will be elected by the end of the No Ruz holidays. A

number of tentative conclusions can be drawn from the elections so far:

a. The National Front government had to use fraud in Tehran, and

will have to use fraud in Abadan, to prevent the election of a significant

number of Tudeh deputies.

b. Kashani will have a personal following of about 15 deputies.

c. Outside of Tehran, Tabriz, and possibly a few other large towns,

local notables (wealthy merchants, landowners, and tribal leaders)

have controlled, or will control, the elections. These provincial leaders

are generally unsympathetic to the National Front program, except on

the oil issue. Their representatives will probably win most of the seats

for which elections have not been completed.

d. While the government has been able to prevent the election of a

number of its more outspoken opponents and has increased the

number of its hard-core supporters, a large bloc of deputies in the new

Majlis cannot be relied upon to support the government except on the

oil issue and, at least in theory, has the strength to overturn the Na-

tional Front regime. Moreover, the relative strength of the National

Front deputies will probably decline as the elections are completed.

7. These developments would appear to require some change of

emphasis in a number of the conclusions in NIE–46, “Probable Devel-

opments in Iran in 1952 in the Absence of an Oil Settlement.” The

major conclusions of NIE–46, and the way in which they are affected by

recent developments in Iran, may be briefly summarized as follows:

a. Mossadeq or some other National Front leader will continue as Prime

Minister “at least for the present.” There now appears to be at least an

even chance that Mossadeq will fall from power within the next two

months and some possibility that he will be supplanted by a non-

National Front Prime Minister.

March 1952–February 1953

b. The parliamentary position of the National Front will be strengthened

by the elections. Borne out by recent developments.

c. The Shah is unlikely to influence events “in the immediate future.” Re-

cent developments suggest that the Shah will almost certainly play a

significant part if there is a change of government within the next two

months.

d. Continuation of National Front strength will depend primarily on the

government’s success in solving critical financial problems. Continues to be

valid.

e. Iran is unlikely to obtain significant oil revenues either from the Soviet

bloc or from the rest of the world. Continues to be valid.

f. The Mossadeq Government can meet its essential obligations until the

beginning of April or May by resorting to various expedients. Continues to

be valid.

g. It can probably obtain Majlis support for emergency fiscal measures

which would avert a fiscal breakdown at least through the summer of 1952.

The decline in Mossadeq’s popularity suggests that, even with stronger

National Front representation in the Majlis, he may not be able to ob-

tain Majlis approval for emergency fiscal legislation “which would

avert a fiscal breakdown at least through the summer of 1952.” Such

legislation would probably be opposed by the increasingly vocal con-

servative elements and by the Shah.

h. The Mossadeq Government will be under increasing pressure to satisfy

hopes for social and economic benefits; failure to provide these benefits would

be likely to lead many National Front supporters to turn to the Tudeh Party.

There is as yet no evidence that Mossadeq has made any attempt to im-

prove social and economic conditions or that disillusion and opposition

growing out of his failure to do so has led to any increase in Tudeh

strength. This is not to say that Tudeh influence may not increase in the

future as a result of this or other factors, whether or not Mossadeq stays

in power.

i. National Front leaders will have difficulty in agreeing on reform meas-

ures and in obtaining Majlis support for them. Consequently, the National

Front would probably be forced to adopt authoritarian methods. While there

is some evidence of cleavages in the National Front, particularly be-

tween the Kashani and Mossadeq factions, they have certainly not re-

sulted from differences over possible “reform measures.” Nor is there

any indication that the National Front regime is considering the adop-

tion of authoritarian methods. Mossadeq has relied heavily on Majlis

support. It is difficult to envisage how the National Front could resort

to authoritarian rule without first obtaining control of the army, the

leaders of which have once again shown, in the elections, that they are

almost exclusively anti-Mossadeq.

j. A conservative government would also be forced to rule by authori-

tarian means and to make concessions to nationalist sentiment. While a con-

servative regime would probably have to make concessions to nation-

alist sentiment and take forceful measures against a number of

National Front leaders (and against the Tudeh Party), it might well rule

without martial law and through the Majlis, if, as recent developments

suggest, the Majlis itself is instrumental in causing the fall of the Na-

tional Front regime.

k. Thus, barring the establishment of authoritarian rule, Tudeh potential

would increase. While Tudeh capabilities would obviously be restricted

under authoritarian rule, it does not automatically follow that the

Tudeh potential will increase in the absence of authoritarian rule. (See

8. In summary, recent developments suggest that Mossadeq’s

chances of remaining in power are not as good as was indicated in

NIE–46, although it is extremely difficult to estimate who might suc-

ceed him. If Mossadeq were to resign voluntarily while the National

Front still controlled the Majlis, it is possible that an even more extreme

and uncompromising National Front leader, such as Kashani or Makki,

might come to power. However, it now appears more likely that Majlis

opposition to Mossadeq’s fiscal program would be the immediate

cause of his fall from power, in which event a more moderate National

Front leader or even a conservative might come to power. While such a

successor government might not act with sufficient energy and force-

fulness to achieve a settlement of the oil controversy or prevent con-

tinued economic and political disintegration in Iran, it would be more

likely to do so than the present regime.

9. A further complicating factor in estimating future developments

is the possibility that Mossadeq or the Shah will be assassinated. The

terroristic Fedayan Islam organization has been more active during the

past month and was responsible for the recent near-fatal attack on a

former deputy prime minister to Mossadeq. In the current tense at-

mosphere other groups or individuals may adopt the same tactics. The

assassination of Mossadeq would probably be successfully exploited

by the National Front extremists to maintain themselves in power, al-

though it is also possible that, by symbolizing opposition to the bank-

ruptcy of the National Front program, it would lead to the return to

power of more moderate and conservative leaders. Similarly, the assas-

sination of the Shah might result in the collapse of the monarchy and

the establishment of a republic; however, it is also possible that it

would result in the establishment by army leaders of a military dicta-

torship. By their very nature, such possible developments are unpre-

dictable, although the possibility of their occurring would probably

68.

Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of

State

5970. At request of former Prime Minister Qavam of Iran, Embassy

Officer called at his hotel. Invitation was extended by Parvis Khan Kha-

lili, Afghan subject of Georgian origin, and Khazrai, both in Qavam’s

entourage.

Extremely oriental manner of Qavam made it difficult to fathom

real purpose of conversation. Some light was thrown by Khazrai who

subsequently endeavored to interpret obtuse and vague words of

ex-Prime Minister Qavam. Qavam expressed his admiration, sympathy

and confidence in US and referred to abortive attempt to get in contact

with President in 49 to warn him of dangerous course which Iran was

following. He stressed his unwavering pro-American attitude, and his

attempts to bring American technicians to aid his country during his

Premiership. Deterioration of political and economic situation in Iran

and mounting threat of Communism were described. Only solution to

combat these evils was strong man at head of government.

Qavam then stated that he had no desire to come to power unless

incoming Majlis drafted him to head government. He would not go

against will of Parliament, but would hesitate to accept helm unless he

received assurances that Court would not undermine his position as it

had in past. Shah was referred to in friendly terms but described as

young, weak and easily influenced by his Court Advisers. Qavam

stated that he would be ready to initiate economic and social reforms,

with or without aid from abroad, settle the oil problem with UK and

undertake strong measures against Tudeh and Commie agitation. This

he could not do, however, unless he was assured of complete confi-

dence of Shah and Parliament.

We were asked to transmit to Department Qavam’s desire to work

for salvation his country in close collaboration with US and were re-

quested to obtain response fm Dept before Qavam returns to Tehran.

When we expressed mystification as to what response to what question

was expected, Khazrai, after conferring with Qavam in Persian, inti-

mated that in event latter were to come to power, he would like assur-

ance from US that it would lend good offices with Shah in obtaining

unflinching Royal support. We answered that it would be impossible

for US Government to pronounce on anything so hypothetical, and

added that US Government, of course, was gravely concerned over de-

teriorating situation in Iran and had already shown its concern in

trying in every way possible to assist Iran and strengthen it so it could

maintain itself as independent member of free nations.

Our impression is that Qavam is attempting to ascertain whether

he would have backing of Washington in case he was called upon to

form government. We would appreciate receiving any remarks which

Washington, after consulting Ambassador Tehran, might wish us to

convey to Qavam.

Qavam has been in Europe last 3 months and just recently under-

gone operation in Switzerland for nervous facial tic. He appeared old

but far from extinct. Qavam told us that he had left Iran at time of ar-

rival new Ambassador and, therefore, had not seen him but hoped to

meet him on return to Tehran.

Dunn

March 1952–February 1953

69.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

with purpose endeavoring extract from Emb assurances that US Govt

wld take various steps effect establishment gov headed by Qavam or at

least wld look with favor upon such govt if set up. Some these emis-

saries have urged I press Shah interevene with Majlis or Senate in order

bring about replacement Mosadeq by Qavam. Others have merely

asked that we give assurances that if Qavam shld become PriMin his

govt wld be viewed with friendly eyes by US and US wld be prepared

render substantial financial or econ assistance to his govt. Practically all

these friends of Qavam have assured Emb that Qavam wld be friendly

to West, particularly to US. Within recent weeks some of them have

gone so far as say that if he shld come to power he wld take steps place

Iran openly on side West and bring Iran into Mid-East command. Some

of them have also informed Emb that his health is greatly improved

and that he is planning return almost immediately Iran.

2. Shah continues be antipathetic to Qavam in spite claims

Qavam’s friends that his attitude re Qavam has altered during recent

months. During my talk with Shah on Mar 20 he told me again he did

not (rpt not) trust Qavam and dismissed possibility latter’s return to

power. Ala also told me several days ago he distressed at stories that

Princess Ashraf was mtg Qavam and was conspiring to make him

70.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

France

Washington, April 1, 1952.

5824. Wld appreciate Emb using greatest circumspection (urtel

sible repercussions within Iran shld it become known there has been di-

rect contact between Qavam and US officials but we are disturbed at

presence Khalili and Khazrai during ur mtg. According Dept’s records

both are notorious internatl adventurers and both, particularly Khaz-

rai, may be Sov agents.

Believe best line to take in reply Qavam’s query is that, as he is well

aware from his experience as PriMin, US does not rpt not interfere in

Iran internal affairs and under no rpt no circumstances cld indicate its

preference for any particular candidate for Premiership. This pol wld

of course apply in case of conflict between Shah and any particular

PriMin.

able in present instance since it cld be interpreted by Qavam and his

present associates in Paris as indirect indication of support. We have no

rpt no objection Tehran’s continuing this statement to emissaries in

cret; Security Information; Priority. Drafted by Ferguson, cleared in WE and BNA, and

approved by Berry. Repeated to Tehran and London.

March 1952–February 1953

Iran whose reputations are better than those Khalili and Khazrai. Any

further info present activities these two persons wld be welcome. Wld

appreciate ur repeating all tels this subj to London.

Acheson

71.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans (Roosevelt) to the Chief of the

Operations Division, Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency ([name not declassified])

Washington, April 5, 1952.

SUBJECT

Monthly Division Operations Report of NEA Activity for March 1952

[Omitted here are portions of the report unrelated to Iran.]

3. Reports from Iran during March stressed the progressive deteri-

oration of the economic and political situation in view of Prime Min-

ister Mossadeq’s prolonged failure to reach some settlement of the oil

controversy. Four political trends have become apparent: a) Prime Min-

ister Mossadeq, in spite of maneuvers within his National Front and ev-

idence of waning popularity, is considered capable of remaining in

power and control at least during the early session of the new parlia-

ment. b) The prestige of the Shah is weakening because of his indeci-

sion and vacillation. The throne’s principal support, the Army, remains

loyal but has been subject to constant attack by the National Front and

the Tudeh, the latter having been somewhat successful in penetrating

the armed forces. c) In spite of its poor showing in the recent elections,

which were rigged throughout the country, the Tudeh Party has been

gaining strength, primarily by subversion. The majority of Iranians

continue to be blind to the Tudeh’s development and threat; and the

Government, preoccupied with economic and political problems, takes

no positive action against the Tudeh. d) Xenophobia in Iran is now

being directed against the US since Washington’s statement that no sig-

nificant US economic aid would be granted Iran prior to an oil settle-

curity Information.

72.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, May 9, 1952.

4349. As result instructions rec’d by Brit Emb which lists questions

in different order from Deptel 2441 May 2, we have agreed here to

follow Brit sequence and phraseology of questions.

Before answering questions set, both Embs wish to emphasize that

Iranian situation remains highly uncertain and that it impossible to

assess its course beyond most immediate future. In considering inter-

play of internal Iranian forces and their possible shift with events and

time, we believe that policies of US, UK and USSR toward Iran are at

least as important as internal forces, which in turn react to these foreign

influences. With these observations in mind, there follows estimate of

Iranian situation by two Embassies:

1) Does Mosadeq still have the power to rally public opinion and

dominate any combination of opposition elements?

There no doubt that Mosadeq still has power to keep himself in of-

fice. His prestige has decreased and may go on decreasing; he no longer

has political invulnerability which he enjoyed up to few months ago.

His prestige relatively high, however, particularly in provinces. At

same time so long as he controls Radio Tehran and one or two news-

papers, as well as Government patronage and day-to-day administra-

tion of country, it difficult to see how he can easily be overthrown. As

we have so often pointed out, opposition is uncoordinated and Shah,

who might be rallying point of opposition, is weak and vacillating. Mo-

sadeq’s latest letter to Majlis clearly indicates that he intends

strengthen his grip on political life of country, if necessary by ruthless

exercise his political power. These methods will continue be effective

so long as Natl Front remains united and opposition remains divided.

At moment there no sign any effective combination of opposition

elements.

2) (a) What is present economic and financial situation?

(b) Does Mosadeq or any Iranian Govt have courage or ability to

make full use of country’s resources?

(c) Is financial and economic collapse inevitable and if so is it

matter of weeks or longer period?

(a) This has already been dealt with in latest reports prepared by

Economic/Commercial Counselor in consultation with US/Brit Emb.

(b) It not believed Mosadeq or any Iranian Govt, short of dictator-

ship, cld obtain reduction of Govt expenditures or increase of tax rev-

enue to extent sufficient to make substantial contribution toward bal-

ancing budget. However, it not unlikely Govt cld obtain Majlis [text

missing] on for limited use of remaining gold reserve behind currency

and for expansion of currency required for financing Govt deficit.

Thus, while in our opinion Govt cld not make full use of all country’s

resources, it cld obtain sufficient funds to meet its needs for consider-

able time.

(c) Ultimate financial and economic collapse is believed to be inevi-

table in absence restoration oil income. Such collapse might be matter

of months unless Majlis authorization obtained for use currency gold

reserve and/or currency expansion to support Bank Melli loan to Govt.

With such authorization Govt might carry on thru Iranian year 1331

(until Mar 1953).

3) In event of collapse of central Govt, what is most likely political

development?

We do not believe that collapse of central Govt imminent despite

slow drift toward anarchy. Nevertheless, unity of Natl Front under

strain and it showing certain indecision. Iran’s problems in varied

fields becoming so serious that Mosadeq Govt or its possible successors

probably will be obliged to think in terms of authoritarian govt. This

govt may be a) present Govt or revised Natl Front regime, b) one de-

rived from non-communist opposition groups, c) one frankly con-

trolled by communists or military junta.

(a) We do not believe that oil problem can be solved so long as Mo-

sadeq remains Primin. In absence solution and Western financial aid he

March 1952–February 1953

may at some point make overtures to USSR. He may try include Tudeh-

ists in his cabinet in hope obtaining Soviet economic aid and con-

vincing West that his threats to “turn toward Russia” have reality. If

Natl Front, with or without Mosadeq’s ostensible leadership, shld de-

generate in this fashion, way might be prepared for govt controlled by

communists and installation of regime which wld disregard or over-

throw Shah. On other hand, revised Natl Front Govt conceivable

without Mosadeq which wld remain loyal to Shah and which wld try

strike balance between Free World and Soviet Union. Such regime

might be willing seek solution oil problem and if it succeeds, can

survive.

(b) Opposition combination replacing Mosadeq cld assume office

thru exercise by Shah of his constitutional powers in some form. This

regime wld require full support of Shah and army to exercise authori-

tarian methods in running country and in proceeding against its oppo-

nents. Such regime, which might be strong civilian coalition or military

junta, cld try strike balance between Russia and West or turn openly to

West for support, while seeking in either case solve oil problem.

(c) Dissatisfaction among tribal elements resulting in large-scale

outbreaks difficult for armed forces to control cld be signal for commu-

nist effort to seize control of Tehran and of north with covert Soviet

support. Resultant regime cld be outright communist dictatorship or

military non-communist junta cld be set up to meet threat.

We think that order of likelihood of above occurring is (a), (b) and

(c). We consider most probable development to be that Mosadeq will

remain in power until after World Court decision in June. Thereafter

probability increases of his being replaced by revised Natl Front Govt.

However, if Mosadeq takes active steps to approach the Russians, such

as actually going to Moscow or appointing Tudeh ministers, or if Shah

becomes convinced that Natl Front has weakened to such extent that he

can take action at only slight risk to himself, possibility of (b) wld be

increased.

4) What alternative govts, if any, are in sight? Are they likely to re-

ceive support of Shah to point where he wld use strong measures, in-

cluding military rule?

This question has been largely covered under 3) above. No alterna-

tive Govts as yet visible, nor has Shah as yet indicated his preferences

in this respect. Opponents of Natl Front claim that if there were joint

Anglo-American approach to Shah for removal of Mosadeq and instal-

lation of alternative regime, this wld oblige Shah to act. We doubt

whether such step wld be effective unless considerable pressure were

exerted to convince Shah of great dangers of inaction and concrete ad-

vantages to Iran and to himself to be derived from his intervention. We

believe that Shah might be willing use Armed Forces to support weak

73.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 16, 1952.

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Launcelot Pyman, Former Oriental Counselor, British Embassy, Tehran

Mr. William M. Rountree, Director, GTI

Mr. C. Vaughan Ferguson, GTI

Mr. Pyman has served as British Oriental Counselor in Tehran and

has handled Iranian problems in London for eleven years, with the ex-

Security Information. Drafted by Rountree.

March 1952–February 1953

ception of one year in St. Louis, Missouri. He recently returned to

London for leave and reassignment to Rio. He was sent by the Foreign

Office to Washington to consult with the British Embassy upon Iranian

matters and to participate in the conversations between the Embassy

and Departmental representatives. In this final meeting with Mr.

Pyman before his return to London, we sought to obtain his views

upon several matters, particularly upon possible candidates as Prime

Minister in the event Dr. Mosadeq should resign or fall. Rather than the

usual running account of the conversation, the following reflects the

summary of what Pyman had to say.

It was recognized by both sides that the type of Prime Minister

who would be chosen to succeed Dr. Mosadeq would depend in large

measure upon the circumstances surrounding the latter’s exit from of-

fice. For example, if the strength of the National Front should be greatly

diminished and the Shah’s position strong, he would probably select a

man from the group identified below as “Normal-Type Candidates”. If

the situation should be such that the Shah, even in the face of a strong

National Front position or in circumstances in which the security posi-

tion is difficult, should wish to appoint a strong Prime Minister to gov-

ern in a dictatorial manner, he might consider the appointment of one

of the “Military Figures” listed. Finally, either to perpetuate a National

Front government or mollify the National Front, a Prime Minister in the

third category, “National Front Candidates” might be chosen.

Normal-Type Candidates

1) Qavam—The Shah does not like Qavam and fears that he would

constitute a threat to the Shah’s position. The principal disadvantage of

Qavam as a Prime Minister would be that nepotism and corruption

would flourish, and his political opposition would be such that he

probably would not last very long. The advantages, however, would be

that he is a “strong man” and would check the drift toward anarchy; as

an opportunist he would be prepared to settle the oil dispute upon any

basis which he felt he could “get away with”. He would probably be

appointed only as an interim solution. Qavam is, of course, old, sick

and feeble.

2) Mansur—Mansur is a routine, traditional Iranian politician, and

an opportunist who would make a serious attempt to settle the oil dis-

pute, not so much on the basis of principle as upon the basis of expedi-

ency. While the Shah’s opinion of Mansur is not known, it is believed

that he would find some reassurance in recalling that he successfully

fired Mansur upon “15 minutes notice” in order to make way for the

appointment of General Razmara. The Shah would, therefore, find in

Mansur no threat to his own position.

3) Seyid Zia—The possibilities of Seyid Zia’s appointment are con-

sidered extremely remote. The Shah would be afraid of Seyid Zia since

he might not be able to control him. Seyid Zia is a patriot who wants to

do something for Iran, and that is why he will never be popular with

Iranian politicians. He is regarded as a British tool, and has been greatly

discredited in Iran by this factor. This may also explain in part the

Shah’s attitude toward Seyid Zia, since the Shah has a fixation upon the

British ejection of his father. With a strongly pro-British Prime Minister

in office, his logic is that there is no guarantee this would not happen to

him. The Shah would also be reluctant to appoint Seyid Zia for the

same reasons which make Qavam unacceptable to him.

4) Hakimi—Hakimi, about 90, is the champion of the “Iranian

Youth Movement”. He probably will not again be considered seriously

as a candidate. The Shah remarked recently when Hakimi’s name was

mentioned as a possible Prime Minister, “He didn’t do a damn thing

before and wouldn’t now. Why should he be Prime Minister?”

5) Entezam—There is some evidence that the Shah has been

thinking about Entezam as Prime Minister. He is highly regarded by

the British in terms of ability and integrity. His past record in the Cab-

inet was very good. His obvious difficulty, of course, is that he has been

out of the country for five years and has no political following. On the

other hand this might be said to be an advantage since he is untainted.

While he is not in the National Front or associated with that party, there

has been some talk of his replacing Kazemi as Foreign Minister in the

Mosadeq government upon his return to Iran from Washington.

6) Ebtehaj—An energetic, patriotic man who is liked by the Shah.

There has been some indication that the Shah has been considering Eb-

tehaj as a possible replacement for Mosadeq. His difficulty is that he

cannot get along with his countrymen and engages in running battles

with key political leaders. He would be “good at anything” but Prime

Minister, except under dictatorship of the Shah. He has no Majlis sup-

port, and his appointment is unlikely.

7) Soheily—Soheily, until recently Ambassador to the United

Kingdom, is about the most useful and practical Iranian political figure.

He is a good operator and has the confidence of the Shah, who would

not be afraid of him. He has no strong principles or convictions re-

garding the oil controversy and should be able to “patch up” a deal if

he were Prime Minister.

Military Figures

1) Ahmadi—Ahmadi is a dead political force who is busy collecting

rent for the 500 pieces of property which he owns in Tehran. His level

of intelligence was not eulogized by Pyman.

2) Zahedi—Zahedi, unscrupulous, energetic and ambitious, has a

rare quality of interest in practical problems and how to deal with

them. He is an opportunist and as such would seek a settlement of the

March 1952–February 1953

oil controversy on a realistic basis. He is loyal to the Shah, and an indi-

cation that he is in the Shah’s favor is that the Shah took him to Shiraz

as a member of his entourage. Politically, he is persona grata to the Na-

tional Front which might accept him as a constitutional replacement of

Mosadeq. Also, he is a friend of Kashani. The Iranian non-communist

trade unions like him since, as Minister of Interior, he was very cooper-

ative with them. His position in the Senate is regarded as good, and he

has many respectable political friends both there and elsewhere.

Perhaps also in his favor is the fact that in 1942 the British, regarding

him as a principal link between the Iranians and the Germans, kid-

napped him and interned him in Palestine for a considerable period.

Pyman does not feel that he bears a grudge against the British for this

and Zahedi in fact said, in explanation of his attitude toward the

Germans, that he hopes the British hold no continuing grudge against

him. He is an anti-communist and has a good record as Minister of Inte-

rior and Chief of Police. He is regarded as a leading contender for the

job of Prime Minister, either as a compromise candidate vis-a`-vis the

Shah and the National Front, or as a “dictator” under the Shah.

3) Arfa—Arfa is not a serious contender, although his name has

cropped up from time to time. He is anti-communist and in fact was

jailed by Qavam as being too anti-communist during the latter’s re-

gime. He is unstable and was described as a “wild man”. He has friends

in and near the National Front, although this friendship may derive

from his insuperable hatred of Razmara and his collaboration with the

National Front to oust him. He lives on a farm and is not active polit-

ically now. The Shah’s attitude is not known, although the General and

his wife were formerly among the Palace set.

4) Garzan—Garzan, Chief of the General Staff, is not a likely candi-

date, although his name has been mentioned from time to time. He

does not have a forceful personality although in general he is regarded

as a good military man. He has never played an active role in politics.

National Front Candidates

1) Maki—Although Maki is sometimes regarded as a moderate, it

is believed that he is more an opportunist. As such he would probably

endeavor to settle the oil controversy if he could get away with it. His

firebrand statements in Abadan should not be taken too seriously. His

position on the oil matter is not on the basis of principle but on the basis

of what is to his advantage. Contrary to Mosadeq’s record, that of Maki

is not in opposition to the Shah or the Shah’s prerogatives. A former

Qavam man, Maki has important connections with the Qavam party

and could get the support of a certain number of non-National Front

politicians. His relations with Kashani are probably not good, an im-

portant factor being that in the recent elections he received more votes

as Deputy from Tehran than did Kashani. Although he would be con-

tending with Baghai as Mosadeq’s replacement in the National Front,

he would probably have a majority of the National Front members be-

hind him. Maki has no financial means, having had a meteoric rise

since about 12 years ago when he was an Air Force sergeant. After that

he was a “hack journalist” and a minor government employee. He is

probably anti-communist at the moment for reasons of self-interest

rather than conviction. All things considered, he would not be too bad

as Mosadeq’s replacement.

2) Baghai—Baghai’s influence is limited to his own small segment

of the National Front, and is therefore not regarded as a likely candi-

date. His relations with Kashani are not as good as Maki’s.

3) Kashani—Kashani sees his role as that of influencing develop-

ments from behind the scene. It is unlikely that the role of Prime Min-

ister is one in which he sees himself, and thus he would not seek ap-

pointment, although such a possibility should not be excluded.

4) Busheri—Busheri does not have much of a personal following.

He is a light-weight with no administrative capacity or solid ability of

any sort. However, as the most moderate of the National Front leaders,

he would be a possible compromise candidate. He would probably ear-

nestly seek to settle the oil question, but probably is without convic-

tions upon the matter. His relations with the Shah are much better than

those of any other National Front man, and the Shah would have little

fear that Busheri would endeavor to usurp his prerogatives.

5) Martin [Matin]-Daftari—“Neutralist Joe” is for a sterilized Iran.

His idea is that if there are no Western interests in Iran, Iran would not

be the object of USSR hostility; if there are no Russian interests in Iran,

the West would not be mad because Persian oil is going to the Soviet

Union. “Say nothing, do nothing and the Soviets will not know Iran is

there.” He is within the fold of the National Front, is moderate, al-

though ineffective. Some members of the National Front dislike him

and consider him a British spy. As Prime Minister, his political philos-

ophy would lead him to insist on a form of oil settlement so that he

could say to the USSR that the British or Americans have no control of

the operation in south Iran. He would endeavor to obtain face-saving

devices, but might render it possible to come to some agreement. He is

regarded as a possible candidate, although the considerations which

might lead to his appointment would far more likely lead to the ap-

pointment of Busheri who would have all of Matin-Daftari’s advan-

tages and few of his disadvantages.

6) Shayegan—He is regarded as a narrow and bigoted man. He

shares Mosadeq’s views on restricted royal prerogatives, and does not

have good relations with the Palace. He is in very bad health and may

not want the job of Prime Minister even if he could get it. He has indi-

March 1952–February 1953

cated a strong desire to be President of the Majlis and is actively

seeking that office.

7) Saleh—Saleh is in the “dog house” but perhaps this is to his

credit. As Minister of the Interior he refused the National Front pres-

sure to cancel certain elections which were going against the chosen

candidates, and as a result was forced out. He has very few friends in

the National Front. The British regard him as honest and intelligent, but

extremely hardheaded. In 1946 he was responsible for the fusion be-

tween segments of the Iran Party and the Tudeh, but apparently lost his

propensity for the communists. Less has been heard recently about his

communist sympathies. His appointment is considered extremely

unlikely.

In summary, it would appear that if the Shah has a free choice and

if constitutional methods are to prevail the most likely candidates

would be Qavam, Mansur, Soheily and Entezam, possibly in that order.

If a strong dictator-type Prime Minister is sought, Zahedi would be the

leading contender. As a purely National Front candidate Maki would

be the most likely, while Busheri’s chances would be good as an all-

around compromise. If such a compromise is sought, however, Zahedi

would also qualify in this category.

Turning to other subjects, we discussed with Pyman the appoint-

ment of a British Ambassador to Iran. Pyman said that he and Charge´

d’Affaires Middleton had recommended against the appointment of

any ambassador under present circumstances. He felt that the arrival of

a new ambassador at this time would be grossly misunderstood and

misrepresented in Iran and that difficulties might be created from the

very outset. If, however, there is a change of government in Iran the ar-

rival of an ambassador might have practical and psychological advan-

tages. While a firm decision has not to Pyman’s knowledge been made,

no disagreement to this suggestion was voiced to him in the Foreign

Office.

Regarding the British case before the International Court of Justice,

Pyman felt that the chances of a favorable decision were about 50–50. In

discussing the consequences of the ICJ action, Pyman said that the

British position would probably be much more difficult if the decision

should be unfavorable. On the other hand, it is hard to see how a favor-

able decision would have any great influence upon the situation.

74.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, May 21, 1952.

SUBJECT

Interview with the Ghashghais—May 20, 1952

At the request of State Senator David van Alstyne of New Jersey, I

met with Messrs. Nasser Ghashghai and Abdullah Ghashghai. It was

understood that we were not to discuss the oil situation but the inter-

view was for the purpose of advising me of what the Ghashghais con-

sidered to be dangerous trends in the army in Iran.

The interview was devoted to that activity with the fear expressed

by Nasser Ghashghai that much of our military equipment might be

building up military strengths only to fall into the hands of the enemy,

the Russians, if there were any overt action at all. It is their belief that

many of the young army officers are inclined to the Communists, will

not fight to defend their country, and that these young officers are sub-

verting many of the troops who are therefore not worthy of having

American arms given to them. They spoke glowingly of course of the

fighting spirit of the Ghashghai tribe and of the fact that the Ghashghai

tribe was attracting to it the support of other tribes, all of whom would

fight firstly to defend their country against any invader. Their partic-

ular warning was that our chief of the military mission should be ad-

vised to be careful as to the kind of equipment and to who obtained the

equipment since they were fearful that it would arm the wrong people.

One other question which they raised concerned the method of our mil-

itary mission’s operation in Iran. They said that in effect the mission

stayed in Tehran, sat mostly behind desks, talked only to those who

spoke English, and therefore really were not able to appraise the senti-

ment and feeling of the people of Iran. If they were able to circulate

more and talk to more of the people throughout the country they

would be aware of the dangers in the present method.

I stated only that in all of our aid programs of course we dealt with

the government in authority but that I appreciated their interest in

coming and that our meeting would be informal and off-the-record. No

reference was made to the oil situation other than that the people of

Iran were losing their income due to the current situation which they

March 1952–February 1953

hoped would soon end and Nasser stated that in his opinion it would

be a wise thing if America could make a loan to his country.

William C. Foster

75.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, May 24, 1952, noon.

4540. 1. Ala Min Court asked to see me yesterday afternoon. He

told me he wanted talk in utmost confidence re problem facing Shah.

Until several weeks ago Shah’s policy of not (rpt not) intervening in po-

litical situation seemed to have widespread support although certain

opposition circles were inclined be critical at his passivity. As situation

has continued decline increasing number Iranian polit leaders have

been insisting that Shah take some action to prevent complete ruin of

country. He was afraid that Shah’s policy of non-intervention was now

commencing seriously to affect his prestige. Country was looking to

Shah to take some kind of action. Question was what kind of action

shld he take and at what point.

Shld Shah take steps to effect removal Mosadeq before May 27 ten-

tative date departure for Hague?2 If he did and Internatl Court shld de-

cide against Iran Shah and new govt wld certainly be blamed. Shld

Shah try bring about fall of Mosadeq after latter had concluded his ar-

guments at Hague and before he had returned to Iran? Such course

might be construed as cowardly. It might be said Shah had not (rpt not)

dared remove Mosadeq while latter was on Iranian soil. Suppose Shah

shld decide await Mosadeq’s return before effecting his removal. Mo-

sadeq might dawdle on his way back. He might stop over in Switzer-

land or elsewhere in meantime financial situation of country might

have resulted in internal disorders. Furthermore if Shah shld bring

about removal Mosadeq now, in Hague, or after his return what cld his

successor do to relieve financial situation? If Bank Melli shld be unable

Security Information; Priority. Repeated to London. Received at 8: a.m.

furnish more money new govt wld probably not (rpt not) be able pay

govt salaries and other current expenses.

It seemed now quite clear US cld not (rpt not) help Iran overcome

its financial difficulties except with advance approval of Brit Govt. That

approval not (rpt not) likely be given until Iran had met such condition

as UK may prescribe for oil settlement. It wld take considerable amount

of time for agreement to be concluded even if both govts take concilia-

tory attitude. But Iran had no (rpt no) knowledge which wld cause it to

believe Brit wld take conciliatory attitude. It not (rpt not) impossible

UK seeing that Iran’s situation was desperate might stiffen its demands

to such extent that new govt finding itself unable meet them wld col-

lapse. Even if US Govt wld be willing come to rescue new Iranian Govt

financially without awaiting settlement oil question there no (rpt no)

reason believe it had funds readily available for such purpose. Perhaps

Congressional action wld be required. Ala said he wld be grateful for

such advice and suggestions as I might be able give him on confidential

personal basis.

2. We are convinced in view unyielding attitude assumed by Mo-

sadeq and by Brit Govt no (rpt no) settlement oil problem possible so

long as Mosadeq remains as PriMin. Mosadeq’s retirement therefore

seems condition precedent to reaching oil settlement. Nevertheless hes-

itate in view lack of knowledge of Brit intentions give Ala advice. I as-

sume Brit prefer that we do not (rpt not) know their intentions and that

we give no (rpt no) advice. It seems to me that some of Ala’s worries are

justified. I cld not (rpt not) therefore brush them lightly aside and sug-

gest he tell Shah he shld get rid of Mosadeq now. I therefore told Ala I

could appreciate his perplexities and was sorry I had no (rpt no) ready

answer for all of them. Before venturing offer any advice I wld like give

whole matter careful thought. Ala said he wld talk to me again in day

or two. He afraid however it already too late for Shah take any decisive

action before date set for Mosadeq’s departure.

3. I asked Ala who in his opinion seemed likely at this juncture to

succeed Mosadeq. He said number of candidates. Among old line poli-

ticians there were Qavam, Mansour and Hakimi. He did not (rpt not)

seem enthusiastic about these three. He said Entezam’s name was also

cropping up again. He spoke of Entezam in somewhat warmer tones.

Busheri was anxious for job. Maki also had been talking like a candi-

date to Shah. Ala seemed doubtful that either of these men had neces-

sary prestige. He said among Natl Front group Shah was particularly

impressed with Saleh. Shah liked Saleh’s courage and determination in

dealing with Kashani. Saleh seemed to have integrity as well as

strength. I expressed doubt re Saleh. I said I understood he was even

more stubborn than Mosadeq in matter oil dispute. It my under-

standing in past had displayed appeasement tendencies in dealing

March 1952–February 1953

with Russia and international Communism. On several recent occa-

sions he had indicated his opposition to presence US advisers in Iran. I

did not (rpt not) judge qualifications of Iranian politicians entirely by

their attitude re US advisers but that attitude might be symptomatic of

their approach toward problems basically affecting future of Iran. Ala

said perhaps Saleh cld be persuaded take more friendly attitude

toward West. I pointed out Saleh reputed to be even more stubborn

than Mosadeq. I was not (rpt not) however well acquainted with Saleh

and did not (rpt not) wish do him possible injustice by expressing

opinions of him based on hearsay.

4. Ala asked me if I had any idea as to kind of agreement re oil

which wld be acceptable to Brit. I replied in negative, pointing out I

was, however, aware of several kinds which wld not (rpt not) be ac-

ceptable. I added I thought Brit might still be willing accept proposals

similar to those made by Internatl Bank. I was not (rpt not) in position,

however, speak for Brit. I asked Ala why he did not (rpt not) discuss

problem direct with Brit. He said he did not (rpt not) like to do this

without knowledge Mosadeq and Mosadeq wld, of course, object to in-

formal conversations. Ala expressed concern re matter Brit oil techni-

cians. He afraid Brit had in mind entry several hundred. He thought

perhaps country might be able tolerate arrangements under which say

20 percent of foreign technicians wld be Brit. He not (rpt not) sure. Situ-

ation in south explosive and appearance in oil areas of even relatively

small number Brit technicians might result in violence and sabotage on

wide scale. Eventually number Brit technicians might be increased but

at beginning number shld be extremely limited. I said one aspect of

problem seemed be that fairly large number Brit technicians needed to

reopen refinery. Ala said many Iranians still cld not (rpt not) under-

stand why technicians other than Brit cld not (rpt not) be found for

most of jobs in which foreign experts needed. There was tendency

among Iranians believe polit rather than technical reasons responsible

for insistence that Brit experts necessary for operation Iranian oil

industry.

above.

Henderson

76.

Editorial Note

Prime Minister Mosadeq departed for The Hague in May 1952 to

await the judgment of the International Court of Justice with regard to

its jurisdiction over the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute. The British had filed

a complaint against the Iranian Government with the ICJ on May 26,

diction in the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute for two reasons. First, ICJ juris-

diction depended upon the terms under which any country acceded to

the International Court of Justice. In its declaration of October 1930, the

Government of Iran, in the view of the ICJ, had made clear that the ju-

risdiction of the ICJ could relate only to disputes between Iran and

other countries over the terms of treaties signed after the date of the

declaration. The British had argued that the ICJ’s jurisdiction extended

to the adjudication of disputes arising from all treaties signed by the

Government of Iran at any time. As the ICJ rejected that argument, the

U.K. Government could not invoke the most-favored-nation status ac-

corded British nationals in Iran in the Treaty of 1857 to establish

standing under the jurisdiction of the ICJ. Secondly, the ICJ rejected the

British argument that the agreement reached between the Government

of Iran and the AIOC of April 29, 1933, constituted a treaty between the

United Kingdom and the Government of Iran. Despite the fact that the

U.K. took the dispute between the AIOC and the Government of Iran to

the League of Nations and thus facilitated the agreement of April 29,

1933, that agreement, according to the ICJ, still constituted a simple

concessionary agreement between Iran and a company and thus the

U.K. had no standing.

For the full text of the ICJ’s judgment, see “Anglo-Iranian Oil Co.

Case (United Kingdom v. Iran) Preliminary Objection, Judgment of July

22nd, 1952”, International Court of Justice, Reports of Judgments, Advisory

the day of Qavam’s resignation and Mosadeq’s reinstatement as Prime

Minister on July 21, 1952, the Department of State commented in tele-

gram 585 to London, July 26, that “The Hague Court decision coin-

ciding with Mosadeq’s return to power will further strengthen his

public position.” See Document 99.

77.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

he told me that Shah had already requested Mosadeq in view of deli-

cate situation of country to return to Tehran immediately after latter

had completed presentation of Iran’s case at Hague (see paragraph 6

Tehran about June 13. Ala said shortly after Prime Minister’s arrival

Majlis and Senate would probably be called upon to give government

vote of confidence and Shah was seriously considering advisability of

exerting his influence as discreetly as possible to bring about vote lack

confidence. Ala therefore would like see me in nearest possible fu-

ture to discuss further various points reached in our conversation of

2. I met Ala June 5 his office. Ala said that questions uppermost in

mind of Shah and his advisers were:

A. Would British assume conciliatory attitude towards new gov-

ernment if latter should endeavor in reasonable and friendly way reach

quick agreement regarding oil problem?

B. Even if British should prove conciliatory it might take some time

before agreement could be negotiated and funds from oil would be

made available to Iranian Government. How could new government fi-

nance itself during interim?

C. If British Government should not (rpt not) be conciliatory and

efforts new government to find reasonable and fair solution oil

problem should fail what would happen to new government and Iran

in view present financial situation? Shah was hesitating in view his lack

knowledge as to what Brit or US might do to make move which might

result in Mosadeq’s involuntary resignation because he and new govt

might find themselves in impossible financial situation with govt bank-

rupt and no (rpt no) financial relief in sight. Mosadeq and his sup-

porters cld then claim that they had worked out plans for saving

country from financial ruin which they had been unable put into effect

because with backing of Shah they had been ousted by govt which had

no (rpt no) solution to offer. Ala asked if there was any hope whatso-

rity Information; Priority. Repeated to London. Received at 2: p.m. Printed with redac-

ever that US wld be willing assist new Iran Govt financially in case that

govt shld take what US wld consider as reasonable attitude re oil

problem and shld make honest effort bring about quick solution that

problem.

3. I told Ala so many factors involved in hypothetical situation pre-

sented by him I cld not (rpt not) give categorical answer. Said I had

reason believe however that if present or future govt shld adopt course

of action which wld make it clear that Iran itself was doing all that it

reasonably cld be expected to do in order to finance itself from its own

resources, including oil, US Govt wld do what it cld in circumstances

save Iran from collapse. I then outlined to Ala points A, B and C of

giving him what I understood to be way in which US Govt was

thinking at present time. US Govt was of course not (rpt not) in position

to make any commitments re what it might do in situation which might

involve unanticipated factors. Ala expressed appreciation and asked if

I wld object if he wld pass on to Shah who is at present on Caspian Sea

for weeks “rest” what I had told him. I replied in negative and said I

would be glad to discuss matter myself with Shah on his return in case

latter shld desire me to do so.

4. Reverting to problem of who successor of Mosadeq might be,

Ala referred particularly to Hakimi, Qavam and Mansour. He said that

there was strong feeling in Senate that situation of country made it nec-

essary for some widely respected personality of broad experience to

take over as PriMin and to bring into his cabinet other political leaders

also of imposing stature. If, for instance, Hakimi shld come into power

he might bring into his cabinet people like Mansour, Rais (former

MinFonAff in Razmara cabinet), Djam, etc. I said that I had heard that

Qavam was reputed to dislike having imposing figures about him, he

was to want only “yes-men” in his cabinet. Ala said he thought I had

been correctly informed. If Qavam shld become PriMin cab might be

made up of comparatively young so-called “technicians” rather than

elderly statesmen. Ala said he had noticed me talking with Hakimi on

preceding evening and he wondered what kind of impression Hakimi

should do in the event Mosadeq was removed from office. Acheson authorized Hen-

derson to discuss with Ala, at the Ambassador’s discretion, the following three consider-

ations: (a) that the U.S. felt as committed to the independence of Iran as it did to the inde-

pendence of Greece and Turkey, but that the oil dispute rendered it difficult to extend aid

to Iran that would be effective; (b) that should the oil dispute be resolved, the U.S. would

extend such aid to Iran that could be absorbed constructively and that Congress would

allow; and (c) that the U.S. could not comment on whether the Shah should dismiss Mo-

sadeq, but it would nevertheless wish to emphasize its view that no solution to Iran’s

problem could be found in absence of a solution to the oil dispute. Telegram 2742 is

March 1952–February 1953

had made. I said that it had been difficult for me to believe that Hakimi

was really 82 years old. He seemed to me to have energy and alertness

of well-preserved man of 65. Ala said Hakimi was continual surprise to

his friends because of his excellent physical condition and mental

alertness.

During recent trip of Shah to Shiraz Hakimi had shown more

stamina than most younger men in Shah’s party. For first time Ala

spoke in rather favorable way of Qavam. He also said Shah had been

impressed by Mansour during his recent convs with latter. Altho

Mansour had been charged with public dishonesty in his past career

these charges had never been proved. Ala asked what my impression

had been of Mansour during my various convs with him. I said that I

not (rpt not) in position to adequately judge but if Mansour had ability

to put into practice what he preached he shld make excellent PriMin. I

cld not (rpt not) but wonder however why in his last term as PriMin he

had not (rpt not) accomplished what he now said shld be done. I asked

Ala if Shah was still considering Saleh as possible successor to Mo-

sadeq. He said Saleh had made excellent impression on Shah and Shah

had not (rpt not) as yet dismissed him as possibility. I remarked if Shah

and his advisers wanted new PriMin to be of natl stature I had some

doubt that Saleh had requisite standing in the country. Ala agreed but

said in view Shah’s liking for him Saleh cld not (rpt not) as yet be

dropped from running. I asked Ala if he might not (rpt not) be willing

reconsider his own decision not to accept PriMin job. Ala said no (rpt

no). He said he did not (rpt not) believe he had qualifications for

shouldering difficult and delicate responsibilities which new PriMin

must face.

4 [sic]. I asked Ala whether Shah had yet tentatively worked out

manner in which change of govt might be effected. Ala said no (rpt no).

Great pressure was being brought to bear on Shah however to decide at

once who new PriMin was to be and to permit several of his most

trusted advisers know what his decision was so that plans cld be made

in advance for selection of new cabinet and so that feelers cld be sent

out re solution of oil dispute. Ala said he wld talk to me again within

next few days in case any kind of definite decision was made. Altho

Shah is apparently seriously toying with idea of making move to get rid

of Mosadeq and altho he is beginning to realize that his prestige is suf-

fering because he has permitted sit of country to deteriorate over such

long period without intervention, nevertheless he has in past shown

himself to be so indecisive and cavillating that we cannot (rpt not) as-

sume in advance that he will not (rpt not) find some excuse for failing

to take action.

5. For last two months supporters Qavam have been trying make

arrangements for us to meet. They have made numerous suggestions

78.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

4812. 1. Nothing sufficient interest warrant tel occurred Turk Emb

ever, for me meet Qavam and observe his apparent relations with other

prominent Irans such as Ala, Hakimi, Rais, etc. He seemed to be in sur-

prisingly good mental and fair physical condition. He was poised, af-

fable, showed lively sense of humor. His personality dominated grp, all

cret; Security Information; Priority. Repeated to London. Received at 11: a.m.

March 1952–February 1953

mbrs who showed him marked respect. Relations between him and

Hakimi, which at one time were strained seemed cordial as were those

with Ala. I avoided pol convs during even but agreed have dinner

quietly with Qavam on June 10, at home mutual friend.

2. I learned on June 10 that Shah, who had been planning stay in

Caspian resort until June 16, had unexpectedly returned evening June

9. Rumors immed began fly about reason return. It was alleged for in-

stance that conspiracy had been discovered among high army officers

to effect coup d’e´tat in coop with Tudeh. It was also said that disagree-

ments had developed between Shah and Ala over who shld be new

pres of Majlis. Another story was Shah had returned in order make nec

preparations for new PriMin to replace Mosadeq. In order obtain Ala’s

analysis current pol situation, I made appointment see him noon June

11 and also asked him arrange mtg for me with Shah.

3. During private dinner with Qavam at house our mutual friend I

again found Qavam alert and energetic. He was by no (rpt no) means

somnolent, senile character described by certain columnists. He stated

at outset his willingness assume responsibilities PriMin in case Shah

shld desire him do so, but insisted he not (rpt not) seeking job. He did

not (rpt not) ask me to give him support. Qavam told me he had always

advocated friendly relations with US; had made enemies in certain grps

in past by showing preference for Amers when fon advisers seemed

necessary. He defended his appointment Tudeh mbrs in one his pre-

vious cabs on ground that he believed their actions in office wld disillu-

sion many progressive Irans who at that time thought it possible coop

with Commies. He considered experiment successful since there was

no (rpt no) longer appreciable demand on part any Irans except those

willing see Iran fall under Sov control for coop with Tudeh elements.

He intimated that if Shah wld ask him become PriMin he wld include in

cab such figures as Fhakimi [Hakimi] as MinInt; Soheili and Mansour,

one of whom as MinForAffs. He said he might recommend Entezam as

Min Court and Ala as Amb US. He wld fill other cab positions with

mbrs various previous cabs, possibly including mbrs of Razmara cab

who wld no (rpt no) longer be boycotted. He said he might appt mbrs

various leaders NF to positions resp if they willing to accept. His idea

was make these appointments of such character that country wld begin

again to respect its govt and officials.

4. Qavam said one matter which troubled him greatly was diffi-

culty which he or any other successor Mosadeq wld have in preventing

complete bankruptcy govt. His understanding was govt wld encounter

real finan crisis latter part June. He thought probably quickest way ob-

tain funds was sale oil stored Abadan. Did I think US market perhaps

some US Cos wld be willing under certain conditions purchase this oil.

I replied in my opinion Iran wld be making mistake try sell this oil to

any customer other than AIOC. I did not (rpt not) believe US Govt wld

purchase oil in present circumstances or that any resp US firm wld care

start feud with AIOC by buying it. Qavam asked if there was possibility

that US in order help Iran meet crisis wld give it temporary budgetary

assist. I said I cld not (rpt not) say precisely what US Govt wld do but I

did not (rpt not) think it wld be able give finan aid unless Amer public

cld be convinced that Iran was doing everything possible help itself. At

present US public thought that Iran was not (rpt not) doing all possible

help itself. It considered Iran by assuming unreasonable attitude re oil

dispute, was at least partly resp for its present fin difficulties. Unless

Amer public opinion shld believe that Iran was energetically and sinc-

erely trying settle oil dispute on reasonable and fair basis it wld be cer-

tain to object to extension US finan aid to Iran.

5. Qavam said if he PriMin he wld do everything within reason

come understanding with Brit. But how about Brit? Did I have any

reason believe Brit on their part wld meet friendly Iran approach

half-way? Neither he nor (rpt nor) any other PriMin cld afford capitu-

late entirely. Public sentiment Iran cld not (rpt not) be entirely ignored

even by strong central govt. He wld like to come to equitable agrmt

with Brit not (rpt not) only because he wanted friendly relations with

Brit and because Iran needed fon financial assist but because he

anxious restore Iran’s good name in business world so that fon in-

vestors wld not (rpt not) be afraid to take risks in country. In view its

geographical and intl position econ develop of Iran shld be speeded up.

Fon investments shld therefore be encouraged.

6. I asked Qavam if he had any idea as to kind of solution oil prob

which might be agreeable to Brit, wld restore confidence business

world in country and wld at same time be acceptable to Iran public. He

countered by saying he had intended to ask me precisely same ques-

tion. I told him I not (rpt not) sufficiently acquainted with sentiments

Iran public or with current Brit attitude to venture answer. I said how-

ever that for purpose discussion I might ask him what his views wld be

with re to some kind arrangement under which an intl private com-

pany wld undertake operation oil industry Iran on behalf Iran Govt

and oil produced wld be sold to AIOC at prices to be agreed upon.

These prices wld be so set as to permit sale Iran oil on competitive basis

in world markets and at same time to provide for payment compensa-

tion installments. Qavam said he had been thinking of some kind of ar-

rangements along these lines. Possibility it might be acceptable to Iran

people if intl company wld be of really international character and wld

include Iranians on same basis as natls of other countries. I said I did

March 1952–February 1953

not (rpt not) know what attitude UK wld be to such arrangement but I

was sure it wld not (rpt not) give any consideration to it unless Brit cld

play role in intl company at least as great as that of natls of other coun-

tries and unless there wld be absolutely no (rpt no) discrimination in

employment Brit techs. Qavam said it seemed to him only fair that Brit

shld have participation to same extent as natls other countries and that

Brit techs shld be employed. He thot it important however that such

company shld be of bona fide intl character and that Brit technicians

shld not (rpt not) dominate operation industry. He added it extremely

important for him to know immed Brit current attitude re oil problems.

I help him in this respect. I said I cld not (rpt not) tell him what present

Brit attitude was. I had impression Brit did not (rpt not) desire discuss

this matter with Iranians thru third parties. My suggestion was that

best way to ascertain Brit attitude was to go direct to Brit. He turned to

our host and asked that efforts be made for him to see Middleton, Brit

Charge´ d’Affaires, as soon as possible.

7. Qavam said that if he or any other PriMin shld be successful in

obtaining settlement oil problem he hoped US wld increase its efforts to

help in speeding up econ develop Iran. All Iranians grateful for US Pt

IV assist but something should be done on more massive scale in order

stimulate production of country and restore confidence public in Iran

econ.

8. I outlined to Middleton morn June 11 my conv with Qavam and

told him that probably Qavam wld try to get in touch with him. I also

talked with Middleton along lines suggested in Deptel 2810, June 9

which arrived few moments before my apptmt with him. Middleton

said that he was prepared see Qavam if latter shld desire talk to him.

He added that several days ago he had asked his govt for instrs as to

what he shld say in case he shld be queried by Shah or other Iran leader

as to whether Brit wld be willing to meet half way friendly approaches

of some new Iran govt. He had not (rpt not) as yet recd reply but he

proposed if queried either by Shah (who had indicated that he wld like

see him privately) or by Qavam that altho he had no (rpt no) instrs on

subj he personally was convinced that genuinely friendly approach on

behalf Iran Govt wld find Brit Govt conciliatory and reasonable.

During my various talks with Middleton I have considered it unwise

asked to send a message indirectly to the Shah in order to “greatly reassure him upon an

aspect which must be of major concern in relation appt PM to succeed Mosadeq. Brit

might by suitable means indicate that shld a new govt come to power giving tangible evi-

dence of sincere desire to reach equitable oil agreement, they wld meet such Govt half

way and wld make every effort consistent Brit natl interest and commercial realities ar-

rive promptly at mutually satisfactory settlement.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central

tell him in so many words that Shah had endeavored thru me to find

out what Brit attitude might be if approached by new friendly Iran

Govt. I have however made it clear to him that Shah seemed to be gen-

uinely worried as to whether new govt cld expect friendly and reason-

able treatment from Brit. Middleton indicated to me that he inclined be-

lieve his govt had not (rpt not) made up its own mind as yet what its

final position re Iran oil dispute should be. He said he had impression

there was considerable difference opinion among various groups in

London.

9. Ala told me during my talk with him noon June 11 that Shah had

returned Tehran earlier than planned at earnest request Ala who had

urged him for sake his own prestige to return at once. Ala said rumors

re army plots for Tudeh coup totally unfounded. He added he had sev-

eral very frank talks with Shah since latter’s return. He had urged Shah

to decide at once who successor to Mosadeq shld be to inform that suc-

cessor and to suggest to that successor that he prepare immed for

Shah’s exam tentative list members new Cabinet. He had told Shah that

unless Shah moved with speed and determination respect for him

among leaders of country wld decline to such extent that throne might

be endangered. Financial situation had become so acute that at Cabinet

meeting on June 10 Finance Minister had warned other ministers that

country was now “in state of danger” and that he did not (rpt not) want

to be held responsible for what might happen. Ala said list possible

PriMins now (rpt now) apparently reduced to three, Qavam, Hakimi

and Mansour, in that order. I told Ala of my conversation preceding

even with Qavam pointing out that Qavam had not (rpt not) asked me

intervene on his behalf and that I had no (rpt no) intention doing so.

Ala seemed to be somewhat more in favor of Qavam than he had been

in our previous conversations. Altho he was not (rpt not) enthusiastic

about any of candidates he mentioned fact that Shah also seemed to be

more friendly towards Qavam than previously. He said one advantage

of Qavam was that latter’s stature in Iran so great that foremost leaders

of country wld not (rpt not) feel it below their dignity to serve under

him. He told me I was to see Shah on 11 o’clock morning June 12. He

was sure Shah wld ask my advice and he hoped I wld not (rpt not) hesi-

tate to let Shah know that time had come for positive action. I told Ala I

had been reliably informed that Shah was still intimating in confidence

that US Govt had been and was supporting Mosadeq. I intended

during my conversation with him to try to enlighten him in this respect.

I surprised that in view my various talks with His Majesty and state-

ments which I had made to Ala, Shah seemed misunderstand US atti-

tude. Ala said only explanation he cld offer was that possibly various

persons hostile to Mosadeq had been telling Shah that Mosadeq had

survived thus far only because of US support.

March 1952–February 1953

10. I asked Ala if Shah had worked out plan for bringing about

change govt. Ala said tentative plan was (a) selection by Shah of suc-

cessor; (b) approval by Shah of Cabinet list prepared by person se-

lected; (c) obtaining consent most members on list to accept Cabinet

post; (d) discreet organization of trusted members of Senate and Majlis

into groups prepared act quickly; (e) upon presentation by Mosadeq of

his resignation in accordance with custom fol opening of new Majlis

Shah wld accept resignation PriMin; (f) respective groups in Senate and

Majlis wld then endeavor obtain confirmation new govt. I asked Ala if

he thought all this cld be done secretly. Were not (rpt not) leaks likely

occur? Wld not (rpt not) Mosadeq find out what was going on before

submitting resignation? Might he not (rpt not) launch violent attack

upon Shah and members Royal Family? Was it not (rpt not) likely also

that Mosadeq might find excuse delay submitting resignation to

Majlis? Ala admitted these possibilities but said only other alternative

wld be for Shah to take steps personally to remove Mosadeq without

waiting for vote lack confidence. Shah doubted, however, constitution-

ality move this kind. Ala said that since Shah wanted to act in constitu-

tional manner he wld have to incur risk of being attacked by Mosadeq.

Both Shah and Ala knew that Mosadeq for some time had been col-

lecting evidence of activities on part Shah and Royal Family which if

made public might be damaging. It was possible Mosadeq wld en-

deavor make this evidence public once he became convinced that Shah

had decided he shld be replaced. Ala added that if Mosadeq shld fail to

submit his resignation to Majlis he might be asked by Senate or Majlis

to explain what he intended to do re Iran’s financial situation and if his

remarks shld be unsatisfactory, as they probably wld be, there cld be

vote indicating lack confidence in govt.

11. I asked Ala about struggle for Pres of Majlis. Ala said Shah de-

termined to have Emami (Imam Jumeh). Altho considerable opposition

not (rpt not) only from NF but also from many in opposition who

thought it mistake to have cleric preside over Parliament. Maki had in-

formed Ala on evening June 9 that if Shah’s interference on behalf of

Emami successful National Front members wld leave Majlis and no

(rpt not) quorum cld be obtained. I obtained impression there was

strong divergence between Shah and Ala over this point and that Ala

inclined towards Moazami as compromise choice. Ala admitted, how-

ever, that Moazami, altho not (rpt not) member NF, was close friend

Mosadeq and if elected President might use this position frustrate ef-

fort to have Mosadeq replaced.

Henderson

79.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

wld not (rpt not) hesitate impress on Shah necessity for urgent action.

He feared that Shah who had seemed quite resolute two days ago was

again weakening and becoming indecisive. He knew that I had been

consistently refraining from doing anything which might be consid-

ered as interference in Iranian internal affairs. Nevertheless, he thought

I wld be doing Iran service if I cld say anything which wld encourage

Shah to assume more decisive attitude at this moment so critical for

country.

2. At beginning my conversation with Shah I referred to msg

which he had sent to me through Ala and said I failed understand how

Shah cld have obtained impression that US Govt or I was supporting

Mosadeq. Mosadeq had been named by Shah as Prime Minister and his

nomination had been approved by Majlis. I had considered it my duty

to endeavor to maintain as friendly working relations as conditions

wld permit with Prime Minister of Iran. During my numerous conver-

sations with Shah I thought that I had made it clear to him that in

opinion US Govt and of myself Mosadeq’s policies were pushing Iran

toward ruin. Furthermore, I had also not (rpt not) hesitated in my

various talks with Mosadeq to let him also know that in opinion US

Govt and myself he was fol policies which were not (rpt not) beneficial

to Iran.

Shah said he had thoroughly understood my attitude and had

never had any doubt that I was voicing views of State Dept. Never-

theless, numerous stories had come to him to effect that US press and

many Americans including some US oil companies were supporting

Mosadeq. He had also heard that various American nationals in private

conversations had been saying that choice was between Mosadeq and

communism. He therefore had asked Ala to obtain definite statement

re our attitude towards Mosadeq.

3. I then referred to remarks made by him during previous conver-

sations indicating disappointment at amount and type of military aid

March 1952–February 1953

which US seemed to be prepared to extend to Iran. Endeavored to as-

sure him US deeply interested in future Iran and anxious to strengthen

Iran’s defensive capacity. During this portion our conversation I fol-

He seemed to take my remarks with good grace and to be anxious to

enter into discussion of country’s immediate financial and political

problems.

4. Shah said he deeply concerned at both financial and political sit-

uation. Apparently funds not (rpt not) available to pay portion of govt

salaries due May 20 unless steps wld be taken which might undermine

public confidence in Bank Melli. What wld happen on June 20, next pay

day, no one knew. Although Mosadeq had been requested return im-

mediately after presentation Iranian case at Hague Prime Minister

seemed determined stay on for time in Europe. He might not (rpt not)

get back until after June 20. Meantime, increasing pressure being

brought on Shah to replace Mosadeq at once or encourage Senate and

Majlis vote no (rpt no) confidence in govt. Shah did not (rpt not) see

how he cld do anything while decision of Court still pending. If Court

shld find itself competent, failure Mosadeq policy wld be clear. Mo-

sadeq might resign or steps cld be taken get rid of him. If Court shld de-

cide itself incompetent Mosadeq might again be hero. He likely to an-

nounce that he had won Iran’s freedom, that Iran cld now sell its oil,

and that in short time financial difficulties wld be eliminated. This wld

not (rpt not) be true; Iran wld still have difficulties in selling oil to

buyers who had means to transport it. Nevertheless, Mosadeq wld

probably be able with his false promises deceive public for some time

and until his deceit shld become known it wld be dangerous remove

him. Therefore, nothing cld be done until Court had made its decision

and if decision favorable to Iran it might be impossible do anything for

considerable time.

5. I stressed to Shah desperateness of present financial situation of

country. I said responsible Iranian statesmen seemed now to be fully

conscious of seriousness of crisis which Iran was facing. It seemed to

me they were hesitating from acting because they did not (rpt not)

know what Shah wanted them to do. I doubted that thinking Iranian

leaders would believe that a favorable decision of Court would be of

material assistance in helping Iranian financial difficulties. They would

be quite aware that if Mosadeq stayed on and Iran should make no (rpt

no) constructive move in direction oil settlement Iran would continue

drift towards ruin. These people were looking towards Shah to show

Document 77, footnote 4.

same decisiveness in this situation as he had shown in 1946 when he

had ordered armed forces to clear usurpers out of Azerbaijan. Prestige

of Throne was high this moment. If, however, Shah allowed Iran to con-

tinue drift towards ruin without taking some action himself or indi-

cating to statesmen looking to him so anxiously for guidance that he

would not (rpt not) object to their taking action, confidence in Throne

might ebb to such extent it would be much more difficult to rally

people round it later in last minute effort to save country.

I was expressing these thoughts without having Shah’s back-

ground knowledge. Shah might be aware of various factors unknown

to me. Shah should therefore understand in giving voice to some of my

thoughts I was not (rpt not) venturing to press advice on him.

6. Shah seemed troubled. He said it would not (rpt not) be fair for

Iranian statesmen to blame him if he did not (rpt not) come out for re-

moval Mosadeq at time Mosadeq might again be national hero. If he

should do so Mosadeq could become formidable antagonist not (rpt

not) only to government but to Throne. In any event Shah would be

taking great risk to support replacement of Mosadeq unless he was in

possession assurances that new government would receive almost im-

mediate financial aid from UK or US. With best will in world it would

take considerable time for new government negotiate and sign oil

agreement with Brit. Oil problem complicated. It could not (rpt not) be

solved over night.

Furthermore no (rpt no) new government could exist if it should

capitulate entirely. He was convinced, for instance, that no (rpt no)

government in Iran could live if it should try negotiate oil settlement

outside framework of nationalization laws. Settlement of oil dispute

might require weeks, perhaps months. New government to continue to

carry on might need foreign financial assistance in matter of days.

Where could he obtain assurance of such assistance? If he should be in-

strumental in effecting removal Mosadeq, and successor government

should be unable obtain foreign financial assistance, not (rpt not) only

would that government fall, but Throne would be in jeopardy and in-

fluence those elements in Iran friendly to West would sharply

diminish.

Could he also obtain assurance that British would not (rpt not) try

drive impossible bargain with new government? What had taken place

during recent months in Egypt not (rpt not) encouraging. Egypt in

better financial position, however, than Iran; it could afford to wait.

Delay in receiving financial aid and in effecting settlement oil problem

acceptable to Iranian people would be fatal.

7. I told Shah he should not (rpt not) expect US Government to give

him any fast assurances in advance of financial assistance. Attitude US

people and members of Congress as events unfolded would contribute

March 1952–February 1953

to making of US decision this respect. In my opinion this attitude

would be determined by manner in which Iranian Government ap-

proached oil problem. I was convinced that if US public and Congress

should obtain impression Government Iran trying energetically and

sincerely find fair solution on oil dispute they would not (rpt not) like

to see that government fall merely because it could not (rpt not) obtain

temporary financial aid. Another factor which would influence US de-

cision of financial aid would be attitude UK Government and public.

US would not (rpt not) of course like to take action which would fur-

ther inflame UK opinion against Iran and at same time injure US–UK

relations. Government of Iran by approaching UK Govt in genuinely

conciliatory spirit and with obvious desire find fair solution could

greatly improve atmosphere British-Iranian relations and prepare way

for necessary financial aid as well as solution oil problem.

It might be helpful if Shah could get in touch at once with Mid-

dleton and talk to him with same frankness as to me. Shah said he

would see Middleton before latter departed for UK next week for con-

ference in London but he hesitated talk to him so openly, not (rpt not)

because he did not (rpt not) trust Middleton but because he afraid of

gossip in London with subsequent fatal leak to press. He had had un-

fortunate experience in this regard last autumn. He could have no (rpt

no) objection, however, if I should outline to Middleton what he had

told me about oil problem and financial aid.

8. I said British had made it clear they preferred settle oil problem

by direct negotiations and did not (rpt not) relish dealing through third

party. Although I would inform Middleton of some of Shah’s worries

as expressed by him to me, I hoped he wld also talk with him frankly.

9. Shah said he had been giving considerable thought to problem

of successor to Mosadeq. Seemed to be three approaches this problem:

(A) New Prime Minister to be either member National Front or

someone closely associated with it. Saleh outstanding candidate this

category. Saleh seemed to have progressive ideas, integrity and com-

mon sense. Saleh had made mistakes in past including experiment of

collaboration with Tudeh. He thought Saleh had become wiser. Saleh

might be able mold national movement, strength of which could not

(rpt not) be ignored, into constructive force. If Saleh should go off

wrong direction it would not (rpt not) be difficult remove him. Busheri

also possibility. Busheri, however, sometimes showed opportunistic

characteristics and too much under influence Kashani.

(B) New Prime Minister to be someone who could possibly work

with National Front and at same time would have respect of country’s

leading statesmen. He thought Mansour could play this role. Mansour

experienced, resourceful, persuasive and progressive. He stood half-

way between nationalists and so-called elder statesmen.

(C) Cabinet headed by and composed of elder statesmen. Qavam,

of course, ranked as most prominent of elder statesmen but Hakimi

had almost as great prestige and had perhaps better reputation. Elder

statesman like Qavam or Hakimi could form Cabinet outstanding men

of country who might help tide country over present crisis. He was

worried, however, lest such government might be entirely devoid pro-

gressive ideas. It might be charged such government was pushing Iran

back to 1945 or 1946. On other hand situation during those years prefer-

able to that at present. National Front and Tudeh should, of course, join

in opposing such government which might be compelled take rather

repressive measures during first days its existence to maintain law and

order.

10. I said I could see both advantages and disadvantages in Na-

tional Front government. No (rpt no) doubt there were strong nation-

alist feelings in country which might become positive constructive

force. Six months ago National Front leaders had magnificent opportu-

nity mold Iranian nationalist feelings into form which would be benefi-

cial to country. It seemed to me they had missed this opportunity. They

had played on Iranian nationalism merely to fan flames hatred and

promote prejudice. They had resorted to demagoguery and cheap

tricks. I wondered if so-called National Front has the leadership or vi-

sion to forge new nationalist progressive Iran. In National Front we re-

member intelligent, progressive men who not (rpt not) pleased with di-

rection present government was taking country. I doubted any these

men had experience and prestige to lead Iran out of its present diffi-

culties. I had studied Saleh’s record carefully and was convinced he un-

stable and lacking in judgment. He was at same time so stubborn that if

he once in power he might refuse take advice of Shah or anyone else.

It might be impossible remove him until he had already led

country to ruin. So far as oil dispute was concerned Saleh had on

number occasions indicated himself to be even more irreconcilable than

Mosadeq. He had only lately spoken against presence foreign advisers

in Iran. He was potentially dangerous demagogue in my opinion. Shah

said during his talks with Saleh latter had shown moderation and

common sense. Saleh had, for instance, seemed to be willing to be con-

ciliatory regarding oil problem. I remarked it might be mistake to judge

Saleh on what he might have said for purpose pleasing Shah. Shah

agreed and said certainly he would not (rpt not) be appointed before

very careful examination had been made of his past record and present

tendencies.

11. Continuing my comments I told Shah that members of present

National Front did not (rpt not) necessarily have monopoly on Iranian

nationalism. Perhaps some other groups composed of leaders of na-

tional stature had learned some lessons during last year. Perhaps if

March 1952–February 1953

they should boldly and without apologies stress positive aspects Ira-

nian nationalism, they could divert national movement along construc-

tive progressive lines. It was not (rpt not) necessary that national move-

ment should encourage hatred for foreigners and elimination of

progressive West ideas. I said I did not (rpt not) know Mansour very

well. During my two conversations with him I had been impressed by

his analyses of situation here and by remedies which he had proposed.

I did not (rpt not) know whether he had strength of character or experi-

ence to put those remedies into effect if he should become Prime Min-

ister. Shah knew Mansour much better than I.

12. I told Shah my personal knowledge of Qavam was also limited.

Ever since my arrival in Tehran partisans of Qavam had been asking

US to support his candidacy for Prime Minister. In particular they had

been trying prevail on me to endeavor influence Shah in his favor. I, of

course, had consistently refused become involved in intrigue this char-

acter. Some of Qavam’s friends had for some time tried to arrange for

us to meet. I had refused to meet him surreptitiously or in circum-

stances which might justify belief we were conniving against present

government. Last week, however, I had met him at dinner given by

Turkish Ambassador. Since he was one Iran’s outstanding statesmen

and since at that dinner he had expressed his desire talk further with

me, I had offered call on him.

One of his adherents, however, informed me later that Qavam

would prefer we have dinner together. Accordingly, I had dined with

him on June 10 at house mutual friend. Shah said Ala had told him of

my dinner with Qavam. What kind of impression had Qavam made?

Could I tell him about our conversation? I summarized conversation

with Qavam along lines contained Embtel 4812 of June 12. Shah was

particularly interested in Qavam’s apparent attitude regarding oil

problem. I said Qavam had not (rpt not) even intimated I try to influ-

ence Shah on his behalf. He had, however, told me he was too old have

any personal ambitions and he would accept Prime Ministership only if

he convinced Shah really wanted him head new government. He had

also told me that he would not (rpt not) remain in government for

single minute if at any time he should believe he had lost confidence of

Shah. I said I of course not (rpt not) able judge sincerity of Qavam in

making these remarks. They had had, however, every ring of sincerity.

13. Shah asked what I thought of Hakimi. I said I had had even less

contact with him than with Qavam. I had met him casually several

times and had appointment with him at his house later in day. During

my brief encounters with him I had been impressed by his apparent

sincerity of purpose and his understanding of situation. I had also been

surprised by mental and physical vigor which he had displayed despite

80.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, June 20, 1952.

4925. Candidates for successor to Mosadeq must adjust to one po-

litical fact of present Iranian situation: namely, ingrained reluctance of

cessor to Mosadeq shld have strong administration to reverse present

deteriorating political trend, Shah has not yet made up mind re Primin

he wld want or kind regime which will be required. Decision must

be his since Majlis and Senate apparently will await his initiative

indefinitely.

Emb views re categories of candidates differ in some points from

men Qavam and Hakimi (both of whom in early eighties) from recent

interviews with Amb, appear surprisingly alert, clear thinking, and

cognizant of essential problems now facing Iran. Shah apparently be-

coming more friendly toward Qavam but pressure from Senate behalf

March 1952–February 1953

Hakimi may render it easier for him name latter, whom Shah person-

ally wld prefer to Qavam.

2) “Neutral” candidates, such as Entezam, Soheily and Mansur:

Entezam having been away from Iran for lengthy time not cognizant of

all political forces at work in country and reportedly not particularly

decisive personality. These wld be heavy disadvantages in attempting

to cope with situation. Soheily, while presumably having confidence of

Queen Mother, who currently on very bad terms with her son, Shah,

wld suffer heavily by virtue of previous post as Amb to UK. Soheily’s

reputation for honesty also not entirely clean. Mansur has successfully

placed himself in middle between “neutrals” and Natl Front. He has

reputation as grafter and lacks necessary decisiveness. His weakness of

character may, however, make him more acceptable to Shah and he

may be possible compromise choice.

3) Shah has toyed with possibility Natl Front candidate in order

avoid arousing too great antagonism on part Mosadeq and make tran-

sition less abrupt from present regime. Typically mentioned are

Busheri, Maki and Saleh. Busheri attempts be all things to all men, but

now on cool terms with Mosadeq, and Emb believes lacking in judg-

ment and convictions. He not now being seriously considered. Maki

wld be highly undesirable Primin in view lack background, extreme

ambition, and lack of restraint. He still one of Natl Front leadership tri-

umvirate with Mosadeq and Kashani. Saleh Emb considers unfriendly

US and West and unstable personality.

4) Of mil men suggested for Primin, Zahedi has been most promi-

nently mentioned. At present Shah does not appear likely to consider

seriously mil man for Primin’s post. Zahedi not so popular as Pyman

represented but might be chosen if emergency shld develop.

Henderson

81.

Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Office of

National Estimates (Kent) to Director of Central Intelligence

Smith

Washington, June 24, 1952.

SUBJECT

Approaching Crisis in Iranian Situation

1. Recent developments in Iran suggest that a financial crisis is im-

minent and may lead to the fall of Mossadeq. The Mossadeq gov-

ernment has exhausted readily available expedients to meet its finan-

cial obligations. The Central Bank claims that its reserves are critically

low and has refused to extend further loans to the government. Opposi-

tion elements in the new Majlis blocked government efforts to domi-

nate that body and are in a position to prevent the passage of emer-

gency fiscal legislation that would enable the government to meet its

obligation for a few more months. The press reflects a significant dimi-

nution of Mossadeq’s prestige, and the leadership of the National Front

appears to be losing its cohesion.

2. However, Mossadeq has frequently in the past demonstrated his

ability to re-establish his position and may therefore succeed in weath-

ering this crisis. The outcome of the impending crisis will depend on

several factors which are at present obscure: (a) the unpredictable con-

duct of Mossadeq; (b) the actions of the wavering Shah; (c) the pro-

ceedings in the International Court of Justice; (d) the precise position

the UK might take regarding an oil settlement; and (e) the policy and

actions of the US.

3. Iranian specialists in OIR, G–2, and O/CI concur in the view of

O/NE that under these circumstances a National Intelligence Estimate

on Iran cannot profitably be initiated at this time. OIR is preparing

studies on such key factors in Iran as the Tudeh Party and the economic

situation. In the event that a sudden change in the Iranian situation re-

quires the initiation of a new NIE, much of the basic research for such

an NIE will, therefore, already have been completed. O/NE is keeping

in close touch with OIR on these matters.

Sherman Kent

Memos for DCI (1952) (Substantive). Secret. There is no drafting information on the

memorandum.

March 1952–February 1953

82.

Editorial Note

Elections to the 17th Majlis took place throughout the spring and

into the summer of 1952, and the new Majlis convened formally on

Cabinet to the Shah based on the elected membership of the 17th Majlis

up to that point. Mosadeq included in this submission a claim for con-

trol over the War Ministry, which the Shah refused. As a result, Mo-

sadeq resigned his post as Prime Minister and, on July 17, was replaced

by Qavam.

83.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,

Central Intelligence Agency

Staff Memorandum No. 247

Washington, July 1, 1952.

SUBJECT

An Evaluation of the Significance of the National Front Movement in Iran

1. Since Mossadeq and the National Front came to power in Iran a

little more than a year ago, there has been considerable difference of

opinion among Near Eastern specialists concerning the National Front

movement and its relationship to the basic social changes that are

taking place in Iran. That such social changes are occurring is generally

recognized. Their most important aspect is that a third social group,

composed primarily of urban dwellers, is emerging between the tradi-

tional ruling aristocracy and the mass of peasants. The members of this

group—as a result of increased education, a broader understanding of

political, social and economic problems, greater contact with the West,

and the competitive propaganda of foreign powers—are becoming in-

creasingly aware of their ability to influence events, and their exploita-

tion by political leaders has transformed them into a significant polit-

ical force. While they are also becoming dimly aware of the fact that

their position in society and their prospects for a higher standard of life

are not immutable, they continue to attribute their difficulties almost

exclusively to foreign influence.

Staff Memoranda—1952, Substantive. Secret; Security Information.

2. There is a tendency among some observers of the Iranian scene,

particularly in OIR, to assume that this urban middle class has not only

found expression through the National Front but also that its interests

as a class have been directly represented by the National Front. These

observers have adopted the view that the balance of power has shifted

decisively from the traditional ruling group—the wealthy landlords,

merchants, and tribal leaders—to the urban middle class and that the

“old guard” has lost not only the ability, but even the will, to rule. They

have viewed the nationalization of oil as merely a first step in a com-

prehensive present program to: (a) free Iran from foreign influence;

(b) eliminate the social, economic, and political privileges of the tradi-

tional ruling aristocracy; and (c) introduce major reforms which would

improve the lot of the mass of the population. They have assumed that

the influence of the Shah has already been virtually eliminated and that

any attempt by the Shah to obstruct the National Front “program”

might well lead to the overthrow of the Pahlevi dynasty and the estab-

lishment of a republic. They also consider that the failure of such a

“program” for any reason would induce large numbers of the urban

middle class to shift their allegiance to the Tudeh Party, thereby greatly

increasing Tudeh’s potential and the possibility of Communist domi-

nation of Iran. In short, these observers have assumed that a political

and social revolution has in fact already taken place.

3. The pace of political, economic, and social change in Iran is nor-

mally so slow and the conditions of life of the vast majority of the popu-

lation appear so intolerable by Western standards that it is easy for

Western observers to assume that a major development, such as the

sudden rise to power of the National Front, imminently foreshadows,

or even constitutes in itself, a revolutionary development. Moreover,

the tendency to make such an extreme interpretation of recent Iranian

developments has been supported by the flamboyant personality of

Mossadeq and by the fact that, in the absence of oil royalties, funda-

mental reforms would appear to be necessary if Iran is to remain viable

and independent. Nevertheless, a review of events of the past year and

an analysis of the present situation in Iran suggest that no basic changes

in Iran’s social and political structure have yet taken place. The most

that can be said is that the increased participation of the urban middle

class in political affairs may in time bring about such changes, although

this class itself does not now consciously aim for such changes.

4. The most significant development of the past year has undoubt-

edly been this sudden increase of political activity by the urban middle

class. With the exception of Mossadeq himself, none of the leaders of

the National Front has been a member of the traditional ruling aristoc-

racy and few of them had previously held important government

posts. They came to power not as a result of political bargaining among

March 1952–February 1953

professional politicians nor as a result of the Shah’s support, but be-

cause of widespread popular support for their attitude toward the

British and the oil question. They have repeatedly appealed to the

public (i.e., the urban middle class) for support when intrigue among

the “old guard” threatened to undermine their position. They have

taken over the techniques of mass demonstration first developed in

Iran by the Tudeh Party and have incited the mob against individual

opposition members.

5. The participation of a much larger number of people in the polit-

ical affairs of the country has not, however, resulted in any basic

changes in the political or social system. The direction of political ac-

tivity is still in the hands of the professional politicians, although the at-

tainment of political power has become far more complicated and

success depends at least as much on the development of popular sup-

port as on the arrangement of “deals” and the disbursement of bribes

among the “old guard.” Nor does this increasing political activity on

the part of the urban middle class necessarily indicate that the days of

the “old guard” are numbered and that a “middle class” leader will

now dominate the scene. Developments in the Arab states over the past

twenty years have demonstrated that the pashas—men like Nahas in

Egypt, Nuri Said in Iraq, and President Khuri in Lebanon—are just as

capable of manipulating public opinion and using it to enhance their

own political power and maintaining their prerogatives as leaders who

have sprung from the people. While, therefore, the National Front

leaders have been the first to exploit the political potentialities of the

urban middle class in Iran, it is unlikely that they will have the field to

themselves.

6. A further reason why the National Front movement has not yet

caused, and is unlikely to cause, any fundamental changes in Iran’s so-

cial and political structure is that its leaders have had no inclination to

bring about such changes. As its name implies, it is a national move-

ment, and its sole aim has been to nationalize the oil industry and

thereby eliminate British influence. While it has depended for support

primarily on the urban middle class and opposition has come largely

from the “old guard,” its program has had no class bias. Rarely has it

attempted to exploit what might be assumed to be a latent antagonism

of the under-privileged for the privileged few. During the elections, the

National Front attacked opposition candidates because they were “in

the pay of the British” or “traitors,” not because they were exploiting

their tenants and laborers. Government attempts to shore up its dwin-

dling finances through enforced loans and salary cuts were directed

at the urban middle class as well as at the wealthy merchants and

landlords.

7. The obvious explanation for this absence of class bias in the Na-

tional Front movement is that class consciousness is not yet a political

factor in Iran. While the urban middle class is becoming increasingly

articulate, it is not homogeneous, its intellectual outlook is confused,

and its aims as a social group are so inchoate as to be practically

non-existent. Its political energies are devoted exclusively to the na-

tional aim of eliminating British influence. Beyond that, all that the

members of this group appear to want at present is the opportunity to

plan a more active role in political affairs. In a political sense, therefore,

the needs of these people have been filled, at least temporarily, by the

manner in which the National Front has appealed for their support and

by the National Front’s uncompromising attitude toward the British in

the oil controversy. In other respects, the National Front’s ideas con-

cerning basic reforms and economic development are even less devel-

oped than those of past governments, and the desire of its leaders for

political power as an end in itself is even more apparent.

8. Finally, the impact of the National Front movement on the tradi-

tional bases of power in Iran appears to have been something less than

revolutionary. The Shah, through his command of the Army, continues

to occupy a key position in the state. His reluctance to withdraw his

support from Mossadeq stems from sympathy with the basic policy of

oil nationalization, his desire not to over-step the bounds of a constitu-

tional monarch, and most important of all his conviction that his own,

as well as his country’s, best interests are served by keeping in step

with public opinion. Consequently, his decision not to act against Mos-

sadeq until the latter’s position has been undermined by the course of

events does not in itself indicate that his position is weak. The vital ele-

ments of his position—his prestige in the country, his command of the

armed forces and the loyalty of the armed forces to him—do not appear

to have been seriously affected.

9. Moreover, the position of the traditional ruling group does not

appear to have been seriously undermined, even though its members

have been conspicuously absent from the highest government posts

during the past year. The economic basis of their power, the land

tenure system, has not been touched by the National Front regime, and

because of their wealth they are in a much stronger position than the

civil servants, the factory and oil workers, and the middle class in gen-

eral to bear the economic consequences of the oil nationalization policy.

Moreover, like the Shah, they are beginning to realize the political im-

portance of the emerging middle class and that political power rests

with those who can win its support. For all these reasons the members

of the “old guard” have been “rolling with the punch” during the past

year. They have supported oil nationalization and the elimination of

British influence as strongly as the National Front has itself. However,

they have, particularly since last fall, placed progressively more em-

phasis on Mossadeq’s failure to solve the critical financial and eco-

March 1952–February 1953

nomic problems resulting from the oil issue. In view of the interde-

pendence of the oil problem and the financial situation their attitude is

no more consistent than Mossadeq’s. It is, nevertheless, good politics

and an indication that the political developments of the past year have

not been lost on them. Their attitude toward the oil controversy is,

however, more realistic and prospects for an oil solution would im-

prove if they returned to power. They have at no time lost their control-

ling position in the Senate and Majlis and have the numerical strength

not only to block legislation desired by the National Front but also to

overthrow the government when they consider such action to be

desirable.

10. The foregoing analysis of the National Front movement sug-

gests the following conclusions concerning Iran’s future:

a. There is little prospect of major changes in Iran’s social and po-

litical structure until the urban middle class and the political parties

which represent it develop clearly defined social, political, and eco-

nomic aims.

b. These groups are unlikely to develop such aims so long as their

political energies are concentrated almost exclusively on anti-foreign

policies.

c. In view of Iran’s dependence on foreign trade and foreign assist-

ance, these groups will be afforded continuing opportunities to express

their anti-foreign feelings and are unlikely, therefore, to shift their in-

terest to internal affairs. Moreover, so long as their preoccupation with

foreign influence and their aimlessness with respect to internal affairs

persist, Tudeh influence is unlikely to increase significantly.

d. Translated into political activity, this suggests a continuing un-

easy equilibrium between extreme nationalist elements, advocating the

complete elimination of foreign influence, and the traditional ruling

class, which attempts to reconcile Iran’s nationalist aims with the need

to maintain some degree of economic and political stability.

e. This continuing state of equilibrium will prevent economic “col-

lapse” and political disintegration. It will also, however, seriously in-

hibit, if not completely block, social and economic improvements and

will perpetuate Iran’s isolated position in the cold war.

f. The only developments, short of war, that are likely to alter this

situation are:

1. the establishment of an authoritarian regime, which now ap-

pears unlikely; and

2. a great increase in the strength, education, and political sophisti-

cation of the urban middle class, which will probably not occur for

many years.

John H. Leavitt

84.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

239. 1. Emissary Qavam, in whom I have confidence, came to see

Qavam’s first problem was financial. Qavam would like settle oil

problem as soon as possible but he must move with decorum and cau-

tion in order not (rpt not) to outrage sensibilities of country. In mean-

time there are heavy back payments due in governmental salaries and

new pay day falls on July 20. Qavam hopes that US will find some way

to help tide government over financially until he has had opportunity

settle oil problem and otherwise get Iran’s house in financial order.

2. I asked emissary if Qavam thought of possibility obtaining tem-

porary loan from Bank Melli through issuance of limited amount of

notes against currency coverage. Emissary said matter was being given

consideration but consent of Majlis must first be obtained and it would

be impolitic for Qavam’s first approach to Majlis to be request for low-

ering of currency coverage. In any event at least month would elapse

before necessary legislation could be passed and notes made available

to government.

3. I told emissary I would be glad discuss matter with Qavam in

our talk tomorrow but Qavam should know in advance that I in no (rpt

no) position to make commitments about financial aid. This aid in-

volved number factors, some rather complicated. I asked if Qavam was

making similar approach to Brit. Emissary replied he thought probably

Qavam would send message some kind to Brit. Emb today but it would

not (rpt not) be possible to begin serious discussion re oil with Brit.

until machinery had been set up and certain amount time consuming

preparations made.

4. My informant told me that he was with Qavam last night at time

news received that Majlis had taken vote in his favor. He said within

ten minutes after results of Majlis vote had been received, Gen. Kupal,

Chief Police, called on Qavam and expressed his joy that Majlis had de-

cided in his favor and stated his desire to do everything possible to in-

sure that change in government would lead to no (rpt no) disorders.

Few minutes later Mil Governor of Tehran appeared on similar mis-

sion. While these two officers were still with Qavam, Ala Min. Court

telephoned on behalf of Shah, informing Qavam that decree naming

Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 9: a.m.

March 1952–February 1953

him Prime Minister would be issued and that in meantime Qavam

should at once assume responsibilities of Prime Minister. Qavam

turned from telephone to officers and told them that he expected them

to maintain complete law and order in Tehran. They were to act with

restraint. Nevertheless, they should make it clear that no (rpt no) dis-

turbances of any kind would be tolerated. Simultaneously, Qavam

gave orders that radio should inform public of his nomination as Prime

Minister and of his determination that law and order should be main-

tained in Tehran and throughout country. According to my informant,

certain manifestations which were being planned by various groups in

Tehran were hurriedly abandoned. Tanks were sent to quarters of city

where trouble might be expected. Both Chief Police and Mil. Gov. as-

sured Qavam that they were confident that with his backing they could

maintain order in Tehran with no (rpt no) difficulty.

5. According to my informant, he had long private talk with

Qavam early this morning during which Qavam discussed foreign pol-

icies and indicated, as he had on previous occasions, that Iran’s destiny

lay with Western world and that it was his intention cooperate closely

with West powers and gradually bring Iran into full and unequivocal

alignment with West.

6. According my informant, Qavam by no (rpt no) means jubilant

at his appointment. Instead, he feels great weight of responsibilities

and is looking particularly to US for cooperation and understanding

during trying period which is ahead.

morning and spent over an hour in conversation with latter. Upon his

return he told informant that he thought Shah really had begun to trust

him and intended work with him loyally.

8. My informant stated that Cabinet probably not (rpt not) be se-

lected until July 19 or 20. Qavam has decided to retain Portfolio FA

temporarily for self. It also likely, according to informant, that Ala will

go as Amb Wash and Sen-Ti will be Min. Court. These matters, of

course, must be coordinated with Shah.

9. After leaving Embassy, informant repeated our conversation to

Qavam who sent him back to me with message to effect that receipt fi-

nancial aid was of utmost urgency; that he really should have it today

(rpt today) or tomorrow. It would be misinterpreted if he would ask

Brit. for such aid before opening oil negotiations and therefore US was

only hope. He asked if US really interested in saving Iran it move with

unprecedented speed.

Henderson

85.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

242. 1. I sincerely hope that Dept can move in matter of financial

aid as Qavam suggested “with unprecedented speed” (Embtel 239,

July 18).

2. I had tentative chat with Middleton immed fol first visit of emis-

sary from Qavam referred to in reftel and told Middleton of Qavam’s

expressed hope that US wld be able at once to advance sufficient finan-

cial aid enable his govt meet payrolls and other urgent financial needs.

We arranged for meeting this afternoon of reps two Embs to work out

joint recommendations to Wash and London. Middleton said that it

was his personal tentative opinion that in view peculiarities of situation

it wld be helpful if US cld immed extend aid sufficient to tide Iran over

financial crisis of ensuing weeks. In so stating he not (rpt not) under-

taking speak for Emb or for his govt. Middleton referred to conversa-

tions in London in which he had expressed some doubt re advisability

US Govt extending financial assistance immed to govt replacing that of

Mosadeq. He said that at that time he had had in mind some weak

govt—not (rpt not) strong govt of kind which Qavam was forming.

Qavam’s govt cld afford take positive stand and need not (rpt not)

worry about endeavors on part various groups to misinterpret Amer-

ican financial assistance. Middleton and I both were of opinion that it

wld be advantageous to West if US cld make Qavam feel at outset that

West was friendly. We also agreed that if US financial assistance was

extended it shld be made clear to Iran and to rest of world that Brit fully

approved such extension. Care shld be taken that impression not (rpt

not) be created that difference of opinion re financial assistance existed

between UK and US and assistance shld be accorded in such way as to

build up good will for UK as well as for US.

3. More mature views of two Embs will, I hope, go forward to

London and Wash this evening after conference this afternoon. In

meantime I hope Dept can already be laying basis for quick action. Our

joint tel this evening will probably contain estimate of amount which

shld be given at this time.

4. One question which will be raised is whether financial aid shld

be grant or loan and we hope Dept can be giving this question thot.

Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 10: a.m.

March 1952–February 1953

This Emb inclined to favor grant at this juncture and feel confident

Qavam wld not (rpt not) hesitate ask for grant if he shld believe any

possibility grant wld be accorded.

Henderson

86.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the United Kingdom

431. Emb requested raise immed with Brit at highest feasible level

Brit concurrence in recommendations both Middleton and Henderson

that US extend immed finan assistance to Qavam gov.

Suggest if Brit show reluctance you pt [point] out this question has

been raised with them on several occasions at high level and that US

convinced failure to act immed may cause us to lose best chance yet for

settlement oil controversy and reversal deterioration situation in Iran.

While we naturally wish to be guided in our action by Brit views, Dept

believes we shld lose no time in extending support which Qavam

clearly needs if he is to remain in power and work out agreement with

Brit. (FYI final action on our part may require clearance and action here

at highest level.)

Brit may be informed our tentative thinking is to give or lend

Qavam at once small amt along lines suggested Tehran’s 248 as interim

stopgap measure without rpt without promise any more will be forth-

coming. Aid wld clearly be tied to oil controversy and he wld be told it

being extended to help him in interim period required for him to ar-

Secret; Priority; NIACT. Repeated Priority and NIACT to Tehran. Drafted by Ferguson

and approved by Byroade.

range negots for settlement with UK in accordance his announced

intention.

87.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,

Central Intelligence Agency

Staff Memorandum No. 256

Washington, July 18, 1952.

SUBJECT

OIR Comments on Staff Memorandum No. 247

1. The memorandum below is by [name not declassified] of OIR and

deals with John Leavitt’s Staff Memo No. 247 dated 1 July on the Na-

tional Front Movement in Iran.

2. [name not declassified] and Leavitt have since discussed the matter

at some length. Leavitt believes that if [name not declassified] had written

the memo after the discussion, the rebuttal might not have been cast in

such extreme terms. John is prepared to rebut [name not declassified]

memo at any time. I concur with John, however, that this argument

could go on forever and that it might as well be suspended until it can

be focused on a concrete problem such as revision of NIE–46. I also

concur in John’s view that both he and [name not declassified] are stating

their points of view in rather exaggerated terms and that the truth

probably lies in some as yet undefined middle ground.

3. The memo below is therefore being circulated for your informa-

tion with the recommendation that the matter be allowed to lie fallow

news on Mossadeq’s resignation may make a revision of NIE–46 a

Staff Memorandum—1952, Substantive. Secret; Security Information.

March 1952–February 1953

more immediate problem than a vacation-minded Board and Staff

would prefer.

[name not declassified]

Attachment

Washington, undated.

OIR MEMO

The oversimplification and condensation of OIR’s observations on

the significance of the National Front movement in Section 2 is hardly a

fair presentation in that it is so worded as to present an extreme posi-

tion, ending with the statement that we “have assumed that a political

and social revolution has in fact already taken place.” We do believe

that such a revolution is in progress and that, no matter how desirable a

return to the good old days might be, such an event is most improbable.

As the following comments attempt to show, we are not convinced by

the arguments in Sections 3–5 that our position is untenable.

One of the major weaknesses of the CIA analysis is the assumption

that the National Front group and the “old guard” (traditional ruling

aristocracy) are separate and distinct. The statement is made in Section

4 that “with the exception of Mosadeq himself, none of the leaders of

the National Front has been a member of the traditionally ruling aris-

tocracy and few of them had previously held important government

posts.” To mention only a few of the representatives of the traditional

governing group who have collaborated closely with the National

Front, one might pick Saleh, Amini, Haerizadesh, Busheri, Ram, Malek

Madani, Bayat, or Khosro Qashqai. It is true, as pointed out in Section 5,

that the leadership need not necessarily come from the “middle class,”

but the revolutionary effects can arise just as well from a liberal aris-

tocrat. It does not seem to be entirely irrelevant to refer in this connec-

tion to Roosevelt and the New Deal. The traditional governing groups

have been split up by the National Front, not only over the question of

the exclusion of the British, but over internal problems such as electoral

reform, more effective taxation, and social justice. It is true, as pointed

out in Section 7, that the urban middle class is not homogeneous, but

neither are the traditional governing groups (the vested interests).

It is inaccurate to say, as in Section 6, that the National Front’s

“sole aim has been to nationalize the oil industry and thereby eliminate

British influence.” Mosadeq, Saleh, Fatami, and Makki, to name just a

few, have preached the need for social and economic reforms to

equalize the tax burden and raise the general standard of living. Fur-

thermore, the socialistic Iran Party, of which Saleh is the head and

whose membership includes many foreign-educated, middle-aged Ira-

nians, has clearly defined social, political, and economic aims. Nor is it

accurate to say, as in Section 7, that “the National Front’s ideas con-

cerning basic reforms and economic development are even less devel-

oped than those of past governments, and the desire of its leaders for

political power as an end in itself is even more apparent.” The gov-

ernments of the time were notable for their cooperation with either the

Millspaugh Mission or the OCI, whereas National Front officials have

apparently been cooperating effectively with Point IV officials. Qavam

was, if anything, more tenacious than Mosadeq in seeking “political

power as an end in itself.”

Contrary to the conclusion in Section 8, the prestige of the Shah in

the eyes of the Court and the more conservative of the “old guard” has

been weakened during the 14 months of National Front domination.

Whatever influence he has, has certainly not been used either to

strengthen the Throne through autocratic action, as his mother and

Princess Ashraf would like, or to restore the “old guard” to power, as

the more conservative of the vested interests would like.

As pointed out in Section 9, the vested interests continue to hold a

controlling position in the Senate and Majlis, but, as has been noted

above, the vested interests are neither united nor homogeneous and, in

practice, are likely to continue to contribute to instability by dividing

their support, some of it going to the National Front. It also, however,

appears currently to be the fact that the National Front group has

enough votes in the Majlis to block legislation. If what is meant by de-

scribing the “old guard” as “more realistic” with respect to the oil con-

troversy, is that they will accept significant British participation within

Iran, there is no evidence that they have the courage or capability of

achieving that at this time.

In commenting on the conclusions, I would like to refer to the use

throughout the analysis of the expressions “foreign influence” and

“anti-foreign” policies. We have tried to make a distinction between

foreign influence which is welcome, such as Point IV aid, and foreign

interference such as the Iranians oppose and almost universally believe

has been characteristic of British activities in Iran. The anti-foreign atti-

tudes of the National Front have actually been directed primarily

against the British and only secondarily against the Russians, who have

been regarded as presenting the lesser threat to Iranian independence

at the present time.

The inference in Section 10–a that the development of “clearly de-

fined social, political, and economic aims” must precede major changes

in Iran’s social and political structure overlooks the fact that improvisa-

tion is a primary characteristic of national life in Iran and that changes

88.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

263. 1. During my talks this morning with Qavam our conversation

limited for most part to urgent need of Iran for financial aid. Never-

theless other matters were touched upon which might be of interest.

Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 8: a.m.

2. Qavam remarked that during last two years, as result of policies

of preceding govt, number of persons had been able to become

members of Majlis who had no (rpt no) qualifications for parliamentary

work and who depended upon methods other than those of parliamen-

tary character in endeavoring to obtain their pol objectives. Some of the

deps hiding behind their parliamentary immunities were endeavoring

to break down law and order in country. Unless they shld desist from

their illegal activities, he might find it necessary to dissolve parliament.

What wld I think of such action his part?

3. I said that if because of unparliamentary tactics on part certain

members it shld become impossible for Majlis to continue to function it

seemed to me that govt wld be justified in dissolving Majlis through

constitutional means. I did not (rpt not) believe that in trying situation

which Iran was facing, world cld expect govt of Iran to tolerate situa-

tion in which it was paralyzed. I was not (rpt not) sufficiently well ac-

quainted with background and customs give advice but thought

Qavam shld move so far as possible along constitutional channels.

4. Qavam said that he hoped that people in US wld not (rpt not) be

shocked if he wld be compelled temporarily to resort to certain strong

measures. There wld be charges probably that he was acting in an un-

democratic manner. Nevertheless there were times when in order to

save democracy govts might find themselves compelled to take strong

actions against violators of peace who while ostensibly struggling for

“democracy” were in fact trying to destroy democratic institutions. I re-

plied that I was sure Qavam wld maintain his reputation, combining

his firmness with restraint.

5. I asked Qavam if govt was encountering any difficulties in

various parts of country to maintain law and order. I referred particu-

larly to Abadan where there were large groups of organized workmen

who might be mobilized for purpose of creating disorder. He main-

tained that generally throughout country peaceful conditions prevailed

altho here and there, there had been demonstrations which had been

suppressed. Realizing dangers existing in Abadan, govt upon as-

suming power had immed taken steps which he thought wld be suc-

cessful in preventing serious disturbances.

Henderson

89.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

265. 1. I opened conv with Qavam this morning by congratulating

him on his appt, stating that I was sure that he was accepting it for pa-

triotic reasons since he must be aware heavy responsibilities which he

was incurring. His name was familiar to American Govt and American

people as Iran statesman who had always supported coop between our

respective countries and I sure I speaking for them when I wished him

success in accomplishment difficult tasks awaiting him. He replied he

had accepted new post reluctantly. He had been Primin so many times

that position had no (rpt no) attractions for him. He had accepted in

hope he might be able render some services to Iran even in old age. He

had always considered US as disinterested friend of Iran. In his

younger days under Qajar dynasty when Iran was in difficult position,

he had appealed to US for aid and US had saved country by arranging

for loan of $2 million. On occasions too numerous to list US had proved

to be true friend to Iran. He therefore was encouraged again to ask for

US aid. He need not (rpt not) describe finan situation of country. No

(rpt no) public funds available. Past due and current govt wages and

salaries as well as other urgent bills against govt must be paid at once.

He hoped within few months restore Iran’s credit and solvency but

country must have immed foreign finan assistance if it was not (rpt not)

to move into chaos. US was only country to which he cld turn. He had

sent msg to me yesterday re Iran’s urgent needs and he understood that

I had already telegraphed Wash. He hoped that his request for help

was being recd with sympathy and that he wld have favorable answer

in immed future.

2. I told Qavam I quite sure US Govt fairly well informed Iran’s

finan situation and that his request for help wld be recd by US Govt

with understanding and sympathy. I had no (rpt no) idea, however,

whether US Govt wld be in position to extend such assistance urgently,

particularly now that Congress was adjourned. First question to which

US Govt must find answer was whether it had funds available without

Congressional legis to use for aid this kind. Second question was

whether it wld be possible in case such funds were available to extend

transmitted subsequent to telegrams 263 and 264, but is a fuller report on Henderson’s

initial meeting with Prime Minister Qavam.

finan aid to Iran in circumstances which wld be acceptable to public

opinion of three countries: US, Iran and UK.

3. I said US not (rpt not) accustomed to extending finan or budg-

etary aid except in emergencies. On several occasions Mosadeq had

asked for Amer finan aid and it had not (rpt not) been given him. Amer

Govt and public had been of opinion that kind of emergency which wld

justify budgetary aid did not exist when request from Mosadeq was

recd. There was widespread belief in US that if Mosadeq had taken

what US Govt and public considered to be reasonable attitude resolu-

tion oil problem Iran wld have been able overcome its budgetary diffi-

culties without finan help from US. It was clear that Amer public

opinion was against giving finan aid to Iran in circumstances which

wld make it appear that such aid was in fact subsidizing what it consid-

ered to be unreasonable attitude of Iran Govt. It seemed to me person-

ally that situation at present was somewhat different. It was my under-

standing that present govt was anxious solve oil prob on basis which

wld be fair and reasonable to all concerned and which at same time wld

safeguard Iran’s rights and promote welfare Iran people. Present Iran

Govt moreover was in urgent need finan help during period which

must elapse before oil problem cld be solved and Iran’s oil resources

cld begin again produce badly needed revenues. Yesterday, therefore, I

had recommended to US Govt it consider request from Qavam in

somewhat different light from requests heretofore recd. I told Qavam

that such recommendations as I had made had been for aid of limited

character. I had recommended limited aid because I did not (rpt not)

believe that Amer or Brit public opinion wld look with favor upon ex-

tension at this moment of financial aid to Iran in amts greater than

might be needed to tide country over period longer than perhaps two

months. I had, therefore, urged that US Govt give favorable consider-

ation to extending finan aid to Iran sufficient to enable govt to function

until, say, Sept 20, by which time it wld be possible reasses situation in

light achievements govt and progress made in solution oil prob. It had

seemed to me that by Sept 20 if Iran Govt pursued energetic measures

its finan house might be in sufficiently good order, and its progress res-

olution oil prob might be sufficiently satisfactory to effect restoration

Iran’s solvency to such extent it wld be able satisfy its future finan

needs thru existing internal and domestic channels.

4. I particularly stressed that if finan credit was to be extended attn

must be particularly paid to Amer public opinion. US Govt had no (rpt

no) desire interfere in selection members Cabinet. Primin must realize

however that US public opinion wld be more favorable if Cabinet

members wld so far as possible be men whose integrity and ability wld

March 1952–February 1953

be unquestioned. Furthermore, domestic program of govt wld also in-

fluence US opinion. It wld be helpful, for instance, if US public opinion

be convinced that Iran Govt was really serious in its intention to effect

certain finan and econ reform which every intelligent Iran knew was

badly needed. Furthermore, it important that US public really believe

that Iran Govt was sincere in its desire to settle oil prob on reasonable

and fair basis. I was quite aware that govt cld not (rpt not) prove sin-

cerity its intentions prior to US decision re granting finan aid to Iran.

Nevertheless, what might happen in next few days was important and

even after aid was extended it was still more important that Iran Govt

follow policies which wld not (rpt not) embarrass US Govt in face US

public opinion. Similar sensibilities UK Govt and UK public opinion

must not (rpt not) be overlooked. It wld be harmful to US, to Iran and to

free world in gen if US and UK shld have serious divergencies re Iran. It

was in interest all three countries that there shld be cooperation among

them on basis mutual confidence. I hoped new govt wld find it possible

to convince Brit Govt and public opinion that it really desired Brit friend-

ship. Neither shld Iran public opinion be overlooked. Any finan aid

which US might be able extend to Iran must be given in such circum-

stances as not (rpt not) to arouse suspicions among Iran people that

Iran Govt was in any way sacrificing their interest in order obtain

needed funds. Also, every effort shld be made not (rpt not) to give color

to charges certain to be made that US was aiding or subsidizing some

particular Iran Govt rather than country of Iran. I was sure Qavam him-

self understood that any finan aid which US might give to Iran at this

time was not (rpt not) being given to help him personally or to aid his

particular govt. It was being extended for purpose of enabling Iran

Governmental apparatus to carry on and for Iran to continue to exist as

independent state.

5. I told Primin I hoped he was not (rpt not) disappointed at limita-

tions which I had placed on my recommendations. Also, I wanted

again to make it clear that I had no (rpt no) idea whether my govt wld

find itself in position to act favorably on my recommendations. I was

talking with him with extreme frankness because I believed our rela-

tions in future wld be more satisfactory if we were frank and specific

and did not (rpt not) waste time in mere generalities.

6. Primin said he was appreciative my frankness, he fully agreed in

that it was important that any aid which US might be able extend Iran

shld be arranged in such way as to be acceptable to public opinion of

US, UK and Iran, and he was anxious to cooperate. He was confident

that if we cld give enough aid to permit govt function over period next

two months, accomplishments his govt during that period wld more

than satisfy American public opinion that its money had been well in-

vested. He did not (rpt not) ask whether by end Sept his govt wld be

90.

Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the

Department of State

358. In continued absence Eden and Strang, I saw Makins and

Their tentative reactions, which are being sent to Eden in country

and to which they hope have his reaction later today, are as fols: FonOff

agrees in principle it wld be desirable extend finan assistance Qavam

and that US shld furnish it. They feel strongly, however, that amt of aid

shld be minimum necessary to enable Qavam meet his immed finan

difficulties. They feel it is desirable that aid be tied to oil settlement, but

stress that it shld be connected only in genl way and not (rpt not) with

Iran acceptance any specific proposals.

I said I did not (rpt not) think there was any difference between us

on either of foregoing points. Dept had stressed in its instrs to me that

only question at issue is extending small amt of aid as interim stop-gap

measure without promise any more will be forthcoming. Re tying aid

to oil settlement, I said this wld be done only in genl way by making it

cret; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to Tehran. Received at 1: p.m.

91.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

276. 1. Natl Front Deputies have been pursuing unparliamentary

tactics in order prevent functioning of Majlis. Some of them including

Kashani who has made appeal to Armed Forces not (rpt not) obey

Qavam’s orders and Ghanatabodi who has publicly threatened person-

ally to kill Qavam if given opportunity, are also endeavoring promote

disorder and even full-scale revolution. In Tehran members of Iran

Party, one of most important components of Natl Front, has joined

forces with Tudeh and new coalition is extremely active, particularly

among youth. They are denouncing not only Qavam but Shah himself.

2. In view these rapid developments, Qavam insists he must have

free hand to act quickly and decisively. He sent msg to me this morning

that yesterday afternoon during audience with Shah, he had asked

latter for authority in his discretion to dismiss Majlis at moment’s no-

tice in case it shld become clear that Majlis unable function because of

obstructive tactics of opposition Deputies some whom were hiding be-

Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 10: a.m.

hind parliamentary immunities while endeavoring disrupt public

order. He told Shah that in any event he might find it necessary arrest

Kashani in view latter’s open incitement to rebellion. Shah had hesi-

tated and had said he must examine constitutional aspects problem.

Qavam had thereupon informed Shah that unless he cld be given free

hand in this emergency by Shah, he wld be compelled to submit his res-

ignation. He asked Shah to think matter over and give him decision

earliest possible moment. Late yesterday evening Qavam was in-

formed by some of his advisers that Shah was still hesitating and that

during course day, Ala, Min Court, had had three hour conversation

with Kashani. Qavam infuriated at news that Court was carrying on

conversation with Kashani after latter had engaged in treasonable acts,

immed sent his resignation to Shah orally through Ala, Court official

who happened to be visiting Qavam at time.

3. According to emissary who brought me above info, Qavam had

recd no (rpt not) reaction from Shah re his resignation and was sitting

idly at his residence maintaining he no (rpt no) longer PriMin.

4. Upon receipt this info, I called immed on Ala to obtain his ver-

sion. Ala astonished at news that Qavam had resigned and maintained

there must be some misunderstanding. He had just talked over tele-

phone with Shah who told him that yesterday afternoon Qavam had

asked Shah for authority to arrest Kashani and that he (Shah) was hesi-

tating whether or not (rpt not) to give authority for act which might be

unconstitutional. Ala told me he had informed Shah that subversive

movements were being encouraged by failure of govt to act decisively

and that Shah shld not (rpt not) allow quibbles re constitution prevent

Qavam from taking steps necessary to forestall general conflagration.

In my presence Ala called in his Deputy Human to inquire whether

latter had heard that Qavam had submitted resignation. Human also

expressed astonishment at news which I had brought and said there

must be some misunderstanding. Unsuccessful steps were made get in

touch with Ala. Ala went at once to discuss matter with Shah and to en-

deavor persuade latter to agree to dissolution of Parliament or to some

other measure which might give Qavam adequate powers to preserve

law and order.

5. Ala also told me that he had not (rpt not) seen Kashani since

early morning July 18. Ala seemed to believe that some intriguers had

been trying to cause difficulties between Shah and Qavam. Ala said

that he wld like to call on Qavam and come to understanding with him

if he cld do so without being compelled to pass through rows of

“courtiers” usually to be found in Qavam’s residence. He wld appre-

ciate it if I wld send message to Qavam and let Qavam know what he

had told me. I sent this message immediately on return to Emb and un-

92.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

308. 1. Nine o’clock this morn emissary from Qavam called to in-

form me he had good news. Qavam had recd msg last night that Shah

wld like see him early this morn and Qavam had understood from msg

that Shah finally prepared give him necessary powers. Emissary said

he understood Qavam already on way Palace. At 11 o’clock this emis-

sary telephoned that apparently there had been some mistake. After

waiting several hours for expected call from Palace Qavam had become

discouraged and had again relapsed into state of complete passivity.

Since center Tehran was at time engaged in what amounted to civil

war, it seemed to me fantastic that PriMin shld be sitting passively at

his home as result some kind misunderstanding with court. I therefore

told Ala by telephone what I had heard. Ala said Shah had decided not

(rpt not) to talk to Qavam this morn but to one of Qavam’s lieutenants;

that Shah had told this lieutenant that he cld not (rpt not) just now (rpt

now) grant powers Qavam desired; that Shah’s attitude was being ex-

plained to Qavam and it was his understanding that Qavam wld accept

Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 12: p.m.

Shah’s decision on temporary basis. I told Ala that sit Tehran was very

bad and asked what Shah intended do. Ala replied Shah hesitated take

steps which might lead to shedding more blood and Shah was trying at

moment decide what best do in circumstances.

Ala had told him that perhaps “all of us” had underestimated strength

Mosadeq, that Mosadeq seemed have following tremendous popular

appeal and that public sentiment was clearly opposed to Qavam. Shah

therefore was being forced to consider whether or not (rpt not) he shld

not (rpt not) request Qavam’s resignation and appoint successor; he

might perhaps even turn again to Mosadeq. Middleton expressed

opinion to Ala that return of Mosadeq wld almost certainly mean elimi-

nation of Shah in not (rpt not) distant future. Ala agreed to existence of

this danger. Ala indicated it not (rpt not) easy decide on who successor

to Qavam be. Mansur was one possibility. Middleton told Ala that no

(rpt no) PriMin cld succeed unless Shah wld give him in this difficult

sit powers necessary preserve law and order. Ala asked Middleton

whether in case govt shld come into power which desired settle oil

problem on reasonable basis UK wld be willing cooperate in matter of

finan aid. Middleton said that was question which might well be dis-

cussed with both Brits and Amers. He thought it might be good idea for

Shah to see Amer Amb and himself jointly in order discuss this impor-

tant matter. Ala said he was afraid that joint visit of Middleton and my-

self on Shah might be misconstrued at this juncture. Middleton re-

newed request which had been pending for some time that he be recd

by Shah.

3. While Middleton was still in my office I succeeded in getting Ala

again on telephone. I told him that according my info thousands rioters

were milling thru the city streets, shouting “death to Brit and Amer im-

perialists, down with Shah”. I did not (rpt not) believe that I, as Amer

Amb, must point out that if these crowds were permitted to continue

carry on demonstrations this kind passions wld be aroused which

might result in death or injury to Amer citizens. I had been considering

possibilities asking for taking decisive action before situation entirely

out control. I was not (rpt not) making formal request see Shah at this

moment since if I called on him just now my visit might be misinter-

preted. Nevertheless, I might consider it necessary see him later in day

unless situation wld improve. Ala said strong measures were being

taken by security forces to put down rioting. Some soldiers and police

had already lost their lives. I said I realized that police and army were

struggling against rioters but, unfortunately, those who were stirring

up passions and violence were being permitted continue their incita-

tion. Ala said he regretted truth of what I said. He had discussed matter

with me on preceding evening and I knew how he felt. I said that I was

93.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Qavam thru one of Qavam’s lieutenants shortly before noon sug-

gesting that Qavam pursue following course; (a) set up cabinet at once;

(b) obtain finan aid from US; and (c) endeavor to administer country

with firmness on constitutional basis. Shah promised that if it shld be-

come clear that new Cabinet cld not (rpt not) function in present sit-

uation and if members new Cabinet wld join in recommending that

NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 12: p.m.

Majlis be dissolved he wld give such recommendation sympathetic

consideration.

2. According to my informant Qavam was disturbed at this msg.

He told his advisers he cld not (rpt not) believe that Shah was serious.

Shah must know that unless he cld give convincing evidence that he

had power and ability maintain order and to govern country he cld ob-

tain no (rpt no) finan assistance from US or elsewhere. Furthermore

it was mockery to talk about any Cabinet attempting to function in

present conditions. Qavam, therefore insisted that he immediately

submit his formal resignation. His advisers, however, begged him for

good of Iran not (rpt not) be precipitous. They suggested that he ask for

immediate audience with Shah in order explain situation. Qavam fi-

nally yielded and asked for audience. It was not (rpt not) until 2 o’clock

that reply was received from Shah that he wld receive Qavam at 5. In

meantime Qavam had learned that Shah was having protracted confer-

ences with reps of opposition. When it became clear to Qavam that his

visit to Shah was being postponed while HIM was having discussions

with those who shared responsibility for stirring up revolt against govt

he again insisted on submitting resignation. His advisers however,

begged him to wait until they cld make appeal to me.

2. Emissary of Qavam asked me if I wld not (rpt not) be willing to

try to see Shah before Shah received Qavam in order to impress on

Shah seriousness of situation and to persuade him before too late to

give Qavam necessary powers. I replied that I had gone just as far as I

properly cld to impress upon Shah seriousness of ME situation and to

stress necessity for decisive action. I deemed it useless and unwise in-

tervene at this juncture. Emissary of Qavam said that if Qavam was

told no (rpt no) help coming from me he wld not (rpt not) call on Shah

but wld instead send his resignation. I suggested that emissary urge

Qavam not (rpt not) to resign until latter had seen Shah once more.

3. I am beginning to believe that Shah has never been really

anxious for Qavam to succeed; that he has preferred Qavam to fail if

success meant that Qavam shld have any considerable powers; and

that for some time he has been secretly negotiating with Natl Front

leaders with idea of agreeing upon successor to Qavam who wld be ac-

ceptable to them. Unless some unexpected development occurs during

next two hours strong possibility Qavam will resign. Shah might how-

ever, try to keep him on temporarily until he can complete arrange-

ments for a successor. I am afraid that Shah’s hesitations and his sur-

reptitious dealings with various opposing groups simultaneously are

undermining his own prestige and may place country in great danger.

My refusal to go to Shah at this moment is not (rpt not) based so much

my desire not (rpt not) to intervene in Iranian internal affairs as upon

my conviction that my visit wld serve no (rpt no) useful purpose; that I

March 1952–February 1953

wld find Shah evasive and vague and not (rpt not) responsive to ap-

peals either to logic or patriotism.

Henderson

94.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, July 21, 1952.

316. After weighing developments in Iran and public reaction

thereto during past four days it seems clear that Qavam resignation

and triumph Natl Front due to two factors: 1) refusal of Shah, because

of innate distrust, to grant powers to Qavam sufficient to maintain

order and 2) resultant Govt impotency seized upon by Natl Front orga-

nization to play on popular fear that return Qavam meant also return

foreign domination Iran.

Admittedly prestige Mosadeq and Kashani had materially de-

clined by time Mosadeq resignation. However, as we have stated in

past, successor regime to Mosadeq which wld not clearly have Natl

95.

Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the

Department of State

382. Weekend developments Iran discussed at length with FonOff

today. FonOff’s reports, while less full than ours, follow same gen lines.

Fol points of interest:

1. As wld be expected, FonOff concerned at renewed indications

Shah’s indecision and lack of courage which Middleton attributes to his

fear of retaliation against throne in event National Front returns power.

2. Middleton expresses view Qavam may fall unless US and UK in-

tervene with Shah in effort persuade him back Qavam more strongly.

Working levels have drafted instructions to Middleton which have not

(rpt not) yet been finally approved, authorizing him in consultation

Henderson discuss problem with Shah if that course appears desirable.

FonOff suggests line Middleton might take is to play on Shah’s fear by

pointing out way to protect himself against NFs retaliation is to sup-

port strongly those who want keep it out of power. Middleton wld also

be authorized try remove one of Shah’s fears re Qavam by assuring him

cret; Security Information. Repeated to Tehran. Received at 6: p.m.

March 1952–February 1953

categorically there is nothing between Brit and Qavam which is not (rpt

not) known to Shah.

3. Middleton concerned re alarmist BBC broadcasts to area which

play up unrest. He maintains sitn not (rpt not) nearly so bad as broad-

casts indicate and that such reports can only have effect of weakening

Qavam govt in eyes listeners in provinces. He consequently asks Fon-

Off try persuade BBC play reports down for present. BBC has indicated

willingness comply best its ability.

4. In addition instructions to Middleton re drawing Qavam out on

same time to inform Qavam HMG wld be willing find suitable oppor-

tunity in Parl to make complimentary statement if Qavam thought it

wld be helpful. Statement wld probably be tied to indications Qavam’s

desire settle oil controversy.

5. FonOff concerned re effect on present delicate sitn in Iran of to-

morrow’s Hague Court decision and anticipates it will provide oppor-

tunity for further demonstrations no (rpt no) matter which way court

decides.

Holmes

96.

Memorandum for the Record by Secretary of State Acheson

Washington, July 21, 1952.

Meeting with the President

1. The Iranian Situation

I described to the President the crisis which has developed in Iran

over the weekend, in which the vacillation of the Shah, his refusal to

give Qavam authority to dissolve the Majlis and restore order has led to

various attempts by Qavam to resign to the spreading of disorder in

Tehran, the joining of forces by the National Front and the Tudeh

Party—in short the general disintegration of authority in Iran.

I said that Ambassador Henderson had been doing everything that

was possible. He and the British Ambassador had joined in recom-

mending that we offer financial assistance to Qavam. We have a plan

ready to lay before the President and may do so later in the day, de-

pending upon whether the latest information says that there is a gov-

ernment to which we can extend help.

March 1952–February 1953

97.

Position Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Near Eastern, South

Asian, and African Affairs

Washington, July 22, 1952.

SUBJECT

The Iranian Situation

The Problem:

To determine the policy to be followed by the United States fol-

lowing the recent events in Iran.

Background:

During the course of the last two months the political position of

Prime Minister Mosadeq of Iran gradually declined as a result of the

growing financial crisis arising out of the protracted loss of oil rev-

enues. It became clear to Prime Minister Mosadeq recently, following

his reappointment upon the convening of the Parliament, that drastic

financial measures would have to be taken if Iran were to avoid bank-

ruptcy. Having been unable to sell Iran’s oil or to obtain budgetary aid

from the United States, he had no remedy but to seek internal pallia-

tives such as relaxing the rigid note cover requirements, expanding the

currency issue and enforcing tax collections. Apparently knowing that

each separate measure would mean a bitter Parliamentary fight, he re-

quested sweeping economic powers for a period of six months to, he

said, enable him to balance the budget without any oil revenues.

It became clear rather rapidly that the Prime Minister did not have

the political support in the Parliament necessary to obtain these powers

and the enabling legislation faced almost certain defeat. While the mo-

tives behind his subsequent actions are conjectural to some extent, it

seems probable that he then decided to manufacture an issue totally

separate from the economic powers question which could place the re-

sponsibility for his fall on the Shah rather than on his own policies. He

accordingly went to the Shah on July 17 to present his new cabinet. In

his cabinet list he reserved for himself the Portfolio of Minister of War

which would have given him control over Iran’s armed forces, tradi-

tionally a prerogative of the Shah. As was to be expected, the Shah cate-

Security Information. Drafted by Ferguson. The paper is attached to a covering memo-

randum, July 22, from Byroade, through Matthews, to Acheson. It reads: “There is at-

tached for your information, in view of the urgency of the situation, an NEA draft of a

new position paper on Iran. This paper has not been cleared with the appropriate Bu-

reaus of the Department but is being transmitted to you so that you may see without

delay the direction our thinking is taking.”

gorically refused Mosadeq’s request. Mosadeq thereupon resigned im-

mediately and hoped that the Majlis would, when asked for a vote of

inclination, again vote for him since the issue was now one between the

Prime Minister and the Shah rather than the Prime Minister and the

Parliament. The Parliament, however, with 33 pro-Mosadeq deputies

abstaining, gave its vote of inclination to former Prime Minister Ahmad

Qavam who was accordingly appointed by the Shah.

Qavam during the first day of his brief tenure of office proceeded

vigorously and with commendable courage. There were a few dis-

orders and the Prime Minister announced that the orders of the gov-

ernment must be rigorously followed. He also announced that he

intended reaching an oil agreement with the British. With this an-

nouncement the nationalist forces of Prime Minister Mosadeq, agitated

by the fanatical religious leader, Kashani, who appealed to the Army

not to obey orders, and other National Front leaders enjoying Parlia-

mentary immunity, began a campaign of violence against Qavam. If

Qavam had been able to receive authority from the Shah at once to pro-

ceed against all disturbing elements, there were indications that he

probably could have coped with the situation.

Qavam requested the Shah to dissolve the Parliament and give

him full authority to arrest whomever he felt necessary to assure the

maintenance of law and order. At this point the Shah began to hesitate.

Long afraid of Qavam’s designs against the dynasty, the Shah was un-

questionably afraid to give him sweeping powers. He also probably

feared nationalist violence against himself personally should he permit

Qavam to proceed in a ruthless manner against all nationalist elements.

Whatever his motives, he did not give Qavam the required authority

and the latter was unable to maintain order. Widescale rioting broke

out in which a considerable number of people were killed and injured

and which at points reached the proportions of a civil war. Qavam, as

early as July 19, submitted his resignation to the Shah since he did not

have in his opinion sufficient powers to cope with the situation. The

Shah refused to accept the resignation but Qavam, assuming the atti-

tude that he had resigned, remained at his house and did nothing.

On July 21, despite every effort on the part of moderate Iranian ele-

ments to persuade the Shah to act and despite the advice of the Amer-

ican Ambassador and the British Charge´, the Shah refused to give

Qavam the powers he sought. Qavam accordingly again submitted his

resignation and this time it was accepted. Qavam had no other course

in the final analysis since he had learned that the Shah not only would

not give him the requested powers but was intriguing with nationalist

elements at the very moment Qavam was asking for these powers.

March 1952–February 1953

With the resignation of Qavam, the rioting mobs turned into victo-

rious celebrants and it became entirely clear that mob violence had tri-

umphed over law and order. It was learned that the Shah intended as

soon as Qavam resigned to appoint a Prime Minister somewhere be-

tween the two camps, one acceptable to both nationalist and moderate

elements. However, even if he so intended, before he had a chance to

do so the Parliament reconvened and by an overwhelming vote gave its

inclination once again to Dr. Mosadeq. The Shah immediately signed

the royal decree appointing Mosadeq Prime Minister.

Discussion:

While no predictions can of course be made as to the course that

Mosadeq will now follow, several factors should be mentioned:

1. No attempt was made to conceal Communist association with

the nationalist rioters. The shouts and slogans of the demonstrators

were anti-Western and closely resembled the usual Communist jargon.

2. Mosadeq is clearly in a stronger position now than at any time

since the nationalization of Iran’s oil in April 1951. The Hague Court

decision that it does not have jurisdiction in the oil controversy, coin-

ciding with Mosadeq’s return to power, will further strengthen his

position.

3. The Shah has been discredited.

4. The opposition to Mosadeq can be expected, for some time at

least, to remain thoroughly intimidated and afraid to assert itself.

5. There is no immediate prospect for a settlement of the oil contro-

versy with the British and in the absence of such settlement there

would appear to be little hope of the early resumption of substantial oil

revenues.

6. Dr. Mosadeq can unquestionably get the economic powers he

had previously requested and it can therefore be expected that Iran will

be able to ease its financial crisis probably until early next year.

The mere association of the Communists with the nationalists in

the rioting should not necessarily be interpreted to mean that Mosadeq

will follow a more lenient attitude towards the Communists than he

has in the past and, indeed, there were indications during the riots that

the responsible nationalist leaders were alarmed at the entry of the

Communists into the picture. It is not believed, therefore, that Mosadeq

can be accused at the present moment of softness towards alliance with

communism. The course of events during the last few days in Iran

demonstrated fairly clearly the force of nationalist feeling in Iran. While

it is admittedly true that the mobs were deliberately stirred up by such

unscrupulous persons as Kashani and that there was Communist par-

ticipation, there can be no question but that deep national feeling was

aroused by the appointment of Qavam and his announced intention of

dealing with the British. In view of this, it is unlikely that any Iranian

leaders can for a long time to come make any substantial deviation

from the Mosadeq policies.

The position of the United States in the wake of these develop-

ments is not easy to determine. It is possible that everthing may revert

to the status quo ante and that we may be able to continue to deal with

Mosadeq about as we did previously. It is possible, however, that the

depth of anti-foreign feeling that has been stirred up is so great that he

will find himself obliged to take further anti-Western measures. A fa-

vorite slogan of the rioters of the past few days was that the American

military advisers to Iran must be expelled. Should Dr. Mosadeq find

himself obliged as a sop to nationalist feeling to remove the American

Military Missions from the picture, the United States might be forced to

change its policies in Iran. There are a number of ways in which he

could proceed against our Military Missions which would call for vary-

ing reactions on our part. If Dr. Mosadeq should simply approach our

Ambassador and say that the presence of the two Missions on contract

to the Iranian Government (Armish and Genmish) was no longer polit-

ically possible and that he would like to terminate their contracts

quietly and by mutual agreement, the United States might be able to

live with such an arrangement. Under these circumstances our military

aid would continue and the Military Assistance Advisory Group

(MAAG) would remain in Iran.

On the other hand should Dr. Mosadeq make a dramatic gesture

and announce that he was “kicking the Americans out” and termi-

nating military aid, it is difficult to see how the United States under the

Mutual Security concept could continue any aid to Iran. Should this

occur it might be necessary either at the time or at the end of the fiscal

year to terminate our present Point Four Program. It is sincerely hoped

that this can be avoided since what might be interpreted as complete

abandonment of Iran could have most unfortunate repercussions in

that country.

Consideration of our aid programs raises the whole question of

our general approach to the Iranian problem. During the course of the

past few years, the United States has on a number of occasions at very

high levels made public statements regarding its concern for the con-

tinued independence and territorial integrity of Iran. In the case of its

March 1952–February 1953

military aid and Point Four Programs, it put great pressure on the Mo-

sadeq Government to accept them, thus giving an appearance of great

concern to many Iranians. In connection with these aid programs it has

been necessary to send a greatly increased number of American offi-

cials to Iran. We have repeatedly shown our concern by open interven-

tion in the oil controversy, and in general our line vis-a`-vis the Iranians

has been one that tended to give the impression that the United States

would in the final analysis do anything necessary to save Iran from the

Communist menace. While it is of course the United States objective in

Iran to prevent the loss of that country to the free world, we should not

overplay our hand. Should the Iranians remain convinced that, no

matter how irresponsible they may be, the United States is always there

to save them, we cannot expect any improvement in our position in the

long run and, while it is not advocated that the United States adopt a

policy of hostility or even coolness towards the Government of Dr. Mo-

sadeq, it is believed that whenever possible we should design our pol-

icies with a view to convince the Iranians that they and they alone are

responsible for the future of their country.

As regards the oil controversy, as indicated above there would

seem to be no possibility at the moment for any settlement with the

British. The Iranians unquestionably will try to sell their oil wherever

they can and may be expected to sell small quantities here and there. It

is not believed that they will be able to sell enough substantially to im-

prove their financial position or to permit full-scale operation of the

Abadan refinery even should they be able to engage sufficient foreign

technicians for this purpose. The Department has not received any re-

action to date from the British as to the recent happenings in Iran but it

can be anticipated that there will be no change in the basic British

policy of doing no business with Dr. Mosadeq unless he substantially

reverses his well-known policies. The British unquestionably are

greatly disappointed over what has happened and may be expected to

be very bitter against the Shah. The British have maintained ever since

the original accession of Dr. Mosadeq that he could be replaced by a

Prime Minister such as Qavam and that the latter could maintain him-

self in power relatively easily. This thesis will probably have to be

abandoned. It is believed essential therefore that the United States im-

mediately discuss the matter further with the British.

Recommendations:

1. That the United States attitude towards the Mosadeq Govern-

ment be correct but not unduly friendly lest the impression be re-

created that he enjoys American support.

2. That if Dr. Mosadeq requests the termination of the two Military

Missions quietly and by mutual agreement, that this be done while con-

tinuing military and Point Four aid.

98.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, July 24, 1952.

377. Not for discussion with officials any other govt.

1. It is still too early to make sober assessment of situation here, to

make estimate which wld be of any real value of effects which events of

March 1952–February 1953

last week may have upon future of Iran, or to make firm recommenda-

tions re policies which US shld pursue re Iran in light of recent

developments.

2. Altho situation is depressing we do not believe we shld throw

up our hands while Iranians rush by in mad and suicidal career like so

many million lemmings. Our tentative views are that there shld be

prompt and radical changes in policies of both Brit and ourselves. We

do not believe even most sensitive and suspicious Britishers can say

after events of last seven days that US has not supported up to hilt their

policies re Iran. They can not charge that failure of these policies was

due to lack US cooperation. They might say that plans miscarried be-

cause Shah failed them. If Shah shld be given chance to speak he might

insist in his own defense that he cld go no further than he had gone in

face of Iranian public opinion particularly when he had no idea what

kind of terms Brit had in mind for oil settlement. In any event in fore-

seeable future Shah is likely to be negligible political factor in Iran.

3. Following resignation Qavam, Natl Front deps for at least two

days acted as revolutionary committee in control of all governmental

institutions including armed forces. Members of this informal com-

mittee told military and police whom to arrest; it exerted considerable

authority over Natl Front gangs. What control Mosadeq in future will

be able exert over these Natl Front leaders who have tasted fruits of

power is not yet certain. We are also not in position as yet to judge ex-

tent to which Tudeh has been and will in future be able to ensnare and

corrupt Natl Frontists at various levels. We cannot just now speak with

any confidence re future armed forces. Our tentative understanding is

that morale of certain groups of officers and certain units has been shat-

tered but that armed forces as whole are not at present in state of de-

moralization. Altho Natl Front heretofore has in general been anti-

army certain elements in Front are taking attitude that since army of

future is to be “natl army” instead of “Shah’s private army” it is in in-

terest of country to reorganize it into modern effective force. We have

as yet little reliable information re developments in provinces. In some

of larger cities there appear to have been demonstrations resulting in

violence and bloodshed. We know of no area which at present is not

under control of central govt.

4. During most frenzied hours of rioting Americans were almost as

great hate target as Qavam, Brit and Shah. Incitations against US and

Americans were primarily work of Tudeh altho certain Natl Front

leaders, bitter at what they consider to be our policy of supporting Brit

and refusing to give financial aid to Iran, undoubtedly gave certain

amount encouragement to anti-Americanism. Natural suspicions of

Iranians re foreigners, perhaps justified by centuries of experience, con-

tributed to cause them to believe various malicious rumors propagated

against Americans. Among slogans which assisted were “American

tanks and guns are killing Iranians”. Apparently more sober leaders of

Natl Front are beginning to realize that creation anti-American senti-

ment will not be helpful to their Govt and are attempting to muffle at-

tacks on US.

5. We do not as yet know what Mosadeq’s attitude towards US will

be now that Natl Front has complete power. He is not likely to be en-

tirely free agent since he must take into consideration views of Natl

Front leaders. I have not as yet called on him and I do not consider it

wise to do so, unless requested by him, until after his Govt has recd

vote of confidence from Majlis and Senate. He has told me on several

occasions he will never again ask US for financial aid. I doubt therefore

that he will make such request during our first interview. My doubt is

strengthened by fact that with full financial and economic power which

will now be accorded him, he shld be able print enough bank notes to

finance Govt for months to come. He may however ask if after decision

Hague Court US Govt will continue to work with Brit in order prevent

Iran from exporting oil or whether US Govt will take attitude it will not

object to purchase and transport of Iranian oil by American nationals.

He may even suggest that if US is really interested in maintenance Ira-

nian independence it shld help Iran to find markets for its oil.

6. If Mosadeq’s manner shld be sufficiently friendly to permit me

to talk with him frankly as I have on a number of occasions in past I

might try to convince him that since Natl Front has crushed all opposi-

tion and has unchallenged control of country, and since decision Intnatl

Court has removed certain legal obstacles, he can now afford to ap-

proach oil problem in more conciliatory manner. I might point out if I

find him in tractable mood that if Iran is to make real progress inter-

nally under his Govt it shld take attitude which will help to remove

suspicions and misunderstandings which are adversely affecting close

cooperation between Iranians and peoples who are their natural

friends. I hope that such approach will have more effect than some of

my previous efforts at persuasion.

Henderson

99.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the United Kingdom

and 138 have been considered here together with texts of two Brit msgs

referred to by Henderson which give further details of Mosadeq pro-

posals. Request you inform FonOff our views are as fols:

As a result of the events of the last week, it appears to us that Mo-

sadeq is clearly in a stronger position vis-a`-vis the Shah, the Majlis and

the public now than at any time since the nationalization of Iran oil in

Apr 1951. The Hague Court decision coinciding with Mosadeq’s return

to power will further strengthen his public position. His position with

respect to more radical elements within the National Front, including

Kashani, and with the Tudeh may, however, be weaker than before.

It appears that our worst fears as to the weakness of the Shah have

been confirmed, that the Shah has been discredited and that it is highly

unlikely that any other constructive polit elements will attempt to exer-

cise power in Iran after what has happened to Qavam and that if they

did, it is highly unlikely that they cld succeed. We therefore believe that

if Mosadeq were to lose power, there is far greater risk that he wld be

succeeded by a group further to the Left than by a more constructive

group.

Under these circumstances, it appears to us that there are three

possible courses of development which we can look forward to in Iran:

cret; Security Information; NIACT. Drafted by Byroade, cleared in draft by Acheson and

Nitze, and approved by Byroade. Repeated to Tehran. Telegram 585 is also printed in For-

shown him the texts of two telegrams he intended to send to London describing his latest

conversations with Mosadeq. Mosadeq had suggested that in return for economic and fi-

nancial aid, he would accept proposals for an arbitration of the compensation issue. Hen-

derson emphasized to Middleton his view that the British Government should not reject

this overture of Mosadeq’s without first consulting with the U.S. Government. He

pointed out that Mosadeq’s proposal “represents what might well be the last chance

under current conditions in Iran for Brit salvage settlement of oil problem which wld

offer prospect compensation and use AIOC as distribution agency for such Iran oil as

Embassy staff to refrain from any suggestion that U.S. might take an active role in medi-

ating the oil dispute, particularly as Mosadeq had approached British representatives

100.

Editorial Note

derson reported on his first meeting with Prime Minister Mosadeq

since the latter’s return to power on July 22. Describing the conversa-

tion as “both exhausting and depressing,” Henderson endeavored to

explain to Mosadeq the nature of the Embassy’s relationship with

Qavam during the previous weeks. Henderson denied the charge the

United States had intervened illegitimately in Iran’s internal affairs.

Mosadeq nevertheless concluded from Henderson’s account that the

United States had pressured Qavam to accept British conditions for a

solution to the oil dispute, that the United States had shown a “more

friendly attitude to Qavam than it had Mosadeq,” and that the United

States “had given encouragement to Qavam by showing friendliness to

him.” Henderson questioned all three conclusions. Mosadeq then en-

101.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Byroade) to

Secretary of State Acheson

Washington, July 29, 1952.

I suggest you read the attached three British messages from Mid-

dleton in Tehran. The first one gives an excellent analysis of the situa-

tion and Middleton’s conclusions prior to withdrawal by Mosadeq of

his arbitration offer. The second message describes how that offer was

withdrawn, and the third message gives some indication of thinking of

both Henderson and Middleton as to the present situation.

I have agreed with the British that we would send messages from

London and Washington today requesting a joint analysis of the new

situation by Middleton and Henderson and their recommendations as

to the course of action to be followed immediately by the US and UK,

including recommendations as to possible alternatives to Mosadeq, method of

bringing such a government into power, and the type of encouragement and

support that would be necessary in such circumstances.

cret; Security Information. Drafted by Byroade. A note indicates Acheson saw this

memorandum.

Front extremists may not give Mosadeq another opportunity.” (National Archives, RG

We are considering, in some cases in conjuction with CIA, every

possible alternative on our part to save Iran. This includes the probable

position of the British and ourselves with the local tribes, which could

be a big factor in any coup d’e´tat type of action. Another thing still to

consider, and in this probably the British would not agree with us, is

whether the US and UK should take the initiative with Mosadeq in of-

fering him a much simplified settlement of the oil issue in return for our

immediate assistance.

I am leaving this afternoon for a much overdue appointment with

the Doctor (nothing serious). John Jernegan will clear such a cable with

Matthews, and if Doc thinks necessary with you. I have informed the

British that I will call them if such a cable meets with the approval here

in the Department.

102.

Minutes of Director of Central Intelligence Smith’s Meeting

Washington, July 29, 1952.

PRESENT

General Smith, Messrs. Dulles, Wisner, Becker, Hedden, Col. White, Mr. Long

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Iran.]

[Mr. Dulles:] c. Raised the problem of developments in Iran. He

cited a memorandum prepared by Mr. Kermit Roosevelt on our efforts

to operate in the Qashqai region of Southern Iran, and noted that we

were encountering difficulties in getting under way in this area. The

Director mentioned the cable from Amb. Henderson which reported

recent conversations with Mossadeq and expressed the view that the

Communist threat was considerably enhanced by Mossadeq’s present

attitude and by the likelihood of a dramatic anti-western move and that

the disturbed mental condition of Mossadeq makes the situation virtu-

ally unpredictable. Reference was also made to a detailed situation

analysis by our station in Iran. The Director expressed the belief that,

March 1952–February 1953

failing an attempt to get money from the West, Mossadeq would have

no difficulty in getting what he sought from Russia. He stressed the im-

portance of US-British collaboration on Iran as the key to our handling

of the situation there. Mr. Dulles reported that the NSC paper on Iran is

awaiting a State Department contribution and undertook to discuss de-

velopments in Iran with Undersecretary Bruce at luncheon today.

103.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

Iran

255. Brit Emb reps called this morning to discuss complicated and

104.

Minutes of Director of Central Intelligence Smith’s Meeting

Washington, July 30, 1952.

PRESENT

General Smith, Messrs. Dulles, Wisner, Becker, Hedden, Col. White, Mr. Long

[Omitted here is discussion of matters unrelated to Iran.]

[Mr. Dulles:] c. Referred to a memorandum prepared by DD/I on

the British attitude on the Iran situation, noting that our intelligence

people feel that the British attitude is a bit too defeatist and that in fact

there is some nationalism left in the National Front. Mr. Becker ob-

served that in his view Mossadeq, far from being unbalanced, is “crazy

like a fox”. The Director noted that Mossadeq and the National Front

are the only anti-Communist forces left in Iran. In his view, given the

lack of a strong military figure around whom a coup might be engi-

neered, the only real chance for forestalling Communist moves lay in a

change in dynasty, something which might be brought about by letting

the stronger tribal leaders have a whack at the royal power.

[Omitted here is discussion of matters unrelated to Iran.]

March 1952–February 1953

105.

Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Greek,

Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Richards) to the Assistant

Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African

Affairs (Byroade)

Washington, July 30, 1952.

Suggestions Regarding Certain CIA Actions Concerning Iran

During a conversation between Mr. Kermit Roosevelt, [name not

declassified], Mr. Jernegan and officers of GTI, certain suggestions were

made regarding aspects of CIA action to prepare for possible develop-

ments in Iran.

1. In case of chaos or civil war in Iran, the United States might de-

sire to support armed action by “friendly” tribal, army or government

elements. To prepare for such possible action CIA will need to stockpile

weapons and ammunition near but not in Iran. In view of the ominous

course of events in Iran it seems desirable that such stockpiling be com-

menced urgently and a policy decision on this matter is desired.

2. [2½ lines not declassified] It would probably be useful for CIA to

respond favorably to this offer but policy authorization from the State

Department must be obtained.

curity Information. Drafted by Stutesman.

106.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation

Washington, July 31, 1952.

SUBJECT

Iran

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Acheson

President Truman

I called the President at 10: this morning on the subject of Iran. I

told him that I consider the situation to be very critical there and in an

effort to save the situation I wished to take up with the British the possi-

bility of proceeding immediately upon a plan that involved three basic

points. I stated to the President that these points were as follows:

1. The US would make immediately available to Iran $10,000,000 in

grant assistance.

2. The British would agree to purchase the oil presently stored in

Iran at a suitable discount.

3. Mossadeq should agree that an international arbitration com-

mission should be established to consider the question of compensa-

tion to the British.

I explained to the President that we had recently, in an effort to

save the Qavam Government, considered with the various Depart-

ments the question of providing 26,000,000 in dollar assistance to Iran

and recalled that I had mentioned this to him at the time. We had not

proceeded upon this because Qavam fell before action could be taken. I

indicated to the President that I had not had the time to clear with other

interested agencies the question of the US now making available

$10,000,000 and wished to know his views before I discussed the matter

with the British.

The President approved proceeding with such discussions on the

basis that the US Government would furnish this amount of assistance.

Secret: Security Information. Drafted by Byroade. Printed with redactions in Foreign Rela-

March 1952–February 1953

107.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Middleton. Recommendations requested in (A) will be subject separate

telegram.

Regarding (B), we were both of opinion that at present it did not

(rpt not) seem likely any alternatives to Mosadeq could be brought into

power except perhaps by military coup d’e´tat; that we knew of no

(rpt no) outstanding military leaders with ability who had strength,

standing or intelligence necessary for assuring success of coup d’e´tat,

and for governing Iran in case such coup d’e´tat shld be successful; that

army officers who seemed to be best fitted for leadership in effecting

coup d’e´tat were General Zahedi and General Hedjazi; that these two

Generals differed to extent in their political views since Zahedi sym-

pathized with moderates of National Front whereas Hedjazi would

probably be primarily interested in setting up strong government

which would strengthen hand of Shah and exterminate Communists

(US impression of Zahedi is that he has rather weak character—British

impression seems somewhat more favorable).

Regarding (C) coup d’e´tat, to be successful, would have to be car-

ried out and executed entirely by Iranian military in name of Shah

without knowledge of Shah since Shah would probably not (rpt not)

108.

Memorandum From the Assistant to the Director of Central

Intelligence (Long) to the Deputy Director of Central

Intelligence (Dulles)

Washington, July 31, 1952.

109.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, July 31, 1952.

SUBJECT

State Guidance on Emergency Operations in Iran

1. Mr. Joyce called Messrs. [name not declassified] and [name not de-

classified] to his office this morning and subsequently took them to Mr.

Jernegan’s office, together with Mr. Krentz, to report on a high-level

meeting held last evening in the Department. This meeting was at-

tended by the Secretary of State, the Under Secretary, Messrs. Bohlen,

Byroade, Jernegan and Joyce. The meeting decided that:

a. It is the policy of the Department of State to maintain the present

government in Iran so long as this government has the authority to

govern, or until it appears certain that the government will be taken

over by the Communists.

b. CIA should stockpile arms and other mate´riel as near Iran as fea-

sible for possible use by friendly elements in the event of deterioration

or collapse of the non-Communist central government. CIA will report

to State the proposed site or sites for stockpiling and receive concur-

rence therein.

c. CIA should be authorized to plan [less than 1 line not declassified]

for unconventional activities in the event of the deterioration or col-

lapse of the non-Communist central government. The thought here was

to make plans and external preparations to work with and through the

principal tribes, notably the Qashquai and the Bakhtiari, and any other

friendly elements which might be available. In response to CIA’s in-

quiry, the [less than 1 line not declassified] planning should relate only to

the possible emergency and not to current unilateral Cold War opera-

tions. It is important to note that Mr. Jernegan made it clear that State is

not at this time authorizing the actual implementation of unconven-

tional operations but merely the planning and preparation therefor.

Such plans and preparation are for the present to be conducted exter-

nally and are not to include any formal participation by the tribes. Our

informal contacts with tribal elements will continue as in the past but

without increased emphasis at this time.

2. Mr. Joyce said that he would like us to assume the responsibility

for coordinating with the Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of

Iran 1951–1953. Top Secret; Security Information.

Staff the guidance given to us by the Department of State, reporting any

comment in turn to the State Department.

3. Mr. Joyce also said that we should keep the Department of State

informed of the progress of our planning.

4. Mr. Jernegan suggested that it would be a good idea for CIA

also to have available an unspecified quantity of gold sovereigns at

some convenient nearby location, for possible use among the tribes if

needed.

[name not declassified]

Acting Chief, Division of the Near East and Africa

2 [text not declassified] accordingly met with Generals Magruder and Balmer later

that day (July 31). Generals Magruder and Balmer read this memorandum and agreed

that discussions [text not declassified] on “a program of unconventional activities for pos-

sible implementation in Iran” lay within the parameters of the CIA’s charter. On the sub-

ject of the procurement of arms for use by tribes in Iran, General Balmer indicated that the

JCS had directed the Department of the Army to provide the CIA “appropriate assist-

ance.” (Memorandum for the record by [name not declassified]; ibid., DDO–IMS Files, Job

110.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to the Director of the Policy

Planning Staff (Joyce)

112.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, August 3, 1952.

(1) Natl Front

As result Natl Front victory thru return Mosadeq to power, past

opponents of Front, such as landowners, Royal Court, moderate clergy

and moderate intellectuals, currently unable to resist any policies coali-

tion may propose. Prestige leaders such as Mosadeq and Kashani

higher than ever before. Kashani and extremist faction he represents

will probably have greater influence in future on Front policy. On basis

unquestioned control of Majlis, Govt can secure needed emergency fin

and econ powers which will permit it to find funds needed by state

admin for number mos to come.

Natl Front succeeded in overcoming Qavam because among

reasons: A) Qavam had no organization with which to oppose on

streets well-organized and disciplined groups of Tudeh and Natl Front,

which were terrorizing city, except police and Army, and Shah wld not

per-mit these law enforcement agencies to go all out to maintain order.

March 1952–February 1953

B) Qavam had no agitators to harangue population and, except for use

limited facilities Radio Tehran, had no means of spreading propaganda

favorable to his cause. Opponents in control of street terrorized any

newspaper or person who might be suspected of favoring him. Natl

Front had public leaders like Kashani, who used press, mosques, Par-

liament bldg, and loud speakers to agitate against Govt. C) Natl Front

leaders had rec’d assurances from Shah he wld not permit law enforce-

ment agencies to be used against them; they had well-organized plans

for stirring up population; they were confident of their position,

whereas Qavam, unaware of secret pledges made by Shah, was alterna-

tively passively awaiting Shah’s authorization or trying to persuade

Shah to permit law enforcement agencies to clear streets, restore order,

and arrest those inciting to violence. D) Natl Front, thru its various agi-

tation channels, reinforced by Tudeh, was able to convince most of

public in Tehran that Qavam was agent of Western imperialism.

Notwithstanding dramatic manner in which it regained power

and its seeming solidarity, Natl Front by no means monolithic. Varied

political views and personal ambitions of its leaders bode trouble for its

future. Mosadeq himself is neurotic and periodically unstable. His de-

cisions are not accepted passively by other leaders. Frequently, in order

maintain unity he is obliged against his own wishes or judgment to

yield to pressures other leaders’ coalition, particularly Kashani.

Kashani not fully satisfied with his present already powerful position

and is clearly trying undermine influence other rival leaders and make

himself complete master of Natl Front and Iran. In his efforts

strengthen his own organization he accepts in it Communist activists,

confident he can handle them. It looks as tho he intends eventually ef-

fect replacement of Mosadeq, whom he finds too popular and at same

time stubborn, with more pliable, less appealing PriMin such as Dep

PriMin Kazemi. Maki, altho personally popular, has no organization of

street fighters except possibly in Abadan. Bagai has effective group

street fighters within his Workers Party but lacks intelligence and pop-

ular appeal. Iran Party is Tudeh infiltrated. Some its most influential

mbrs favorable toward and cooperating with Tudeh. In case circum-

stances shld make it appear momentarily advantageous to them, right

and left extremists of Front wld probably not hesitate to force Front

again into coalition with Tudeh. Front is faced by same econ deteriora-

tion of country with which it attempted to deal during first term of of-

fice. Now that it in effective control of country, Front may dare present

more clear internal program but will encounter great difficulties in

maintaining unity in carrying out any constructive reforms because of

varying objectives its leaders. Furthermore, it cannot succeed in im-

proving economic and social conditions country without external

moral and material support.

(2) The Shah

For immediate future Shah virtual prisoner of Natl Front. His

public prestige seriously lowered as result indecisiveness he displayed

during recent turbulent period. Control armed forces, which have been

source his authority, being transferred to Natl Front thru Mosadeq as

Min Natl Defense. Altho for time Front may need Shah as symbol, it not

impossible that as extremists gain further control Front he will be dis-

carded. Shah does still have certain symbolic standing with public

thruout country and Army. For this reason elimination of Shah must be

one of Tudeh’s most immediate objectives.

(3) The Armed Forces

Discipline and morale lower echelons armed forces thruout

country not known but not believed greatly impaired. Recent events

created uncertainties in higher levels, which do not know what Mo-

sadeq, who has never been friendly to Army, will do. There still consid-

erable sentiment among general officers that only Shah can prevent

Army from becoming prey to politicians. Altho possibility mil coup

may not be completely dismissed, it not likely. No mil leaders in sight

possessing necessary organizational ability, intelligence and strength.

Coup by Army and later accretion public support might require tacit

assent of Shah, who wld probably take fright at very idea of coup. Both

Natl Front and Tudeh are concerned about Army as source potential

trouble to them. Mosadeq taking steps place his adherents in key posi-

tions, such as Chief of Staff, Chief of Gendarme´rie, and Chief of Police.

He intends on grounds economy reduce Army in size, eliminate many

genl officers and select for key positions younger men who will look to

Natl Front for support. In order prevent Army from resisting these

changes Natl Front endeavoring break down its unity by creating sus-

picion and friction between senior and junior officers. Tudeh, which

naturally desires weak Army, is also trying weaken Army’s unity and

agitating for its reduction.

(4) Tudeh

Tudeh has fully exploited recent events. Since many of its imme-

diate internal aims parallel generally those of Front, Tudeh will con-

tinue strong efforts to acquire some working arrangement with Front

and to infiltrate latter on broader scale than in past. Present offers better

opportunity than previously for Tudeh infiltration state administration

and armed forces. Party believed fully prepared exploit Natl Front fu-

ture difficulties, hesitancies and future dissensions.

Tudeh activists, with their superior training, were important factor

during recent street demonstrations against Qavam. It is not believed,

however, Tudeh was prepared at that time to make bid for power. It

wld appear Tudeh preferred strengthen itself, weaken authority secu-

rity forces, and further penetrate natl movement before openly chal-

March 1952–February 1953

lenging Natl Front. Tudeh probably wld be reluctant try take over until

it convinced that risks wld be small. It will not desire take action which

might lead to destruction of party structure which has been created

with great difficulty. However, if it shld appear there is cessation of in-

ternal deterioration or that economic and social situation of country is

beginning to improve, Tudeh may, without further delay, try seize

power even tho it incurs risks in so doing. Tudeh of course acting under

instructions Moscow which undoubtedly takes world as well as Iranian

situation into consideration when issuing orders.

(5) Possible developments provided no changes in US and UK policies re

Iran

Most Natl Front leaders are coming to opinion US is supporting

basic UK policies re Iran. US judge’s vote for Brit position at Hague

Court and willingness US to deal with Qavam have strengthened this

view. As Front encounters increased difficulties in carrying out its econ

and social policies there will be increased tendencies to blame West,

particularly US, for all of Iran’s ills. Tudeh will of course do its utmost

to exploit anti-Western prejudices and disappointment of Iranians at

failure US to render financial or massive econ aid. Mosadeq may at any

time request withdrawal of US mil missions. As resentment against US

increases there may be progressive harassment of Pt 4 activities. If mil

missions depart Tudeh will probably turn more attention to Pt 4. There

will be tendency to take measures against US institutions and natls sim-

ilar to those already taken against Brits. As agitation against West in-

creases Iranians with Western background and sympathies will be

compelled to hide their real feelings or be gradually eliminated from

public life. During immediate future natl extremists will preach neu-

trality in cold war and support efforts form third force bloc of states

Middle East. Nationalists may realize that they are leading Iran into

Communist camp in time to shift their policies and rally country

against Tudeh infiltration and Soviet pressures. It is more likely, how-

ever, this realization would come too late.

(6) Possible developments provided there certain changes in US and UK

policies re Iran

It is possible that certain changes in policies on part US and UK

might result in reversal of trend of events in Iran. Such changes might

include (a) decision on part UK to come oil settlement on basis which

wld be acceptable not only to Iran Govt but to Iranian people; (b) deci-

sion on part US to extend fin aid to Iran to tide it over present crisis and

also to accord significant aid for economic development. It may be

however that such shifts in policies will not be successful in saving

Iran. Antagonism toward West tinged with jealousy is so deep among

articulate natl and religious extremists that most conciliatory and

friendly gestures on part West may not be able to prevent Iran from

proceeding along its suicidal course. Furthermore, even if, as result of

future developments, including shifts in policies of UK and US, Mo-

sadeq shld personally become convinced that energies shld be concen-

trated on saving country from internatl communism rather than on at-

tacks upon West, there no guarantee that he might not at any time

become incapacitated by illness or assassination. Elimination Mosadeq

likely result in struggle for power among various elements of Front

which wld give Tudeh chance further to strengthen self at Front’s

expense.

(7) Copy of above has been given to Brit Emb which in general

agreement altho Middleton says there may be certain minor differences

of emphasis.

Henderson

113.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, August 11, 1952.

614. No distribution personal for Byroade NEA and Richards GTI.

1. It will be recalled that shortly after collapse Qavam Govt

Kashani sent message to me alleging that he had proof that Brit and

Shah had agreed to bring Qavam into power and that American Govt

had subsequently approved plan and that I sent message to Kashani

denying that US was involved in any way in accession of Qavam to

power. Kashani sent back reply that despite my statements he knew

that Brit and American Embassies and Shah had conspired to make

Qavam PriMin. In discussing this matter with Ala I told latter that if

Mosadeq and other members of Govt shld choose to believe Kashani

rather than myself I saw no alternative other than for me to tell my

114.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

636. Joint Emb, CAS and Service Atts estimate recent Tudeh activ-

ities fols:

After disturbances attendant on Qavam Premiership, Tudeh at-

tempted capitalize on and inflate its role in events and strove unsuc-

cessfully consolidate informal working arrangement reached with NF

during crisis. Once Mosadeq returned to power Front leaders repudi-

ated tacit understanding and minimized Tudeh role in demonstrations.

Altho Tudeh not (rpt not) able form open partnership with NF, it

emerged from crisis with only NF remaining as effective organized

Security Information. Received at 1: p.m.

polit opponent. Tudeh gains included: (1) Increase in popular prestige;

(2) Seriously weakening opposition forces such as conservative “old

guard,” Shah and Army; (3) Partial success in diverting popular emo-

tions against US.

Tudeh also being aided by dissensions which have developed in

NF leadership. It believed thru influence Iran party on Mosadeq that

PM made fol cabinet appointments: (1) Abdol Ali Lotfi as Min Justice.

He prominent leader “Society For Combatting Illiteracy” and “Society

For Combatting Imperialists”, both Tudeh–Front orgs. (2) Mehdiwazar,

Min Health. His brother deserted Iran Army to join Pishevari and now

(rpt now) in USSR. Azar brought to Min 3 men incl under secy who

served under Tudeh leader Keshavarz in Qavam’s 1946 cabinet.

(3) Farman-Farmayan, acting Min Health, who noted for strong leftist

tendencies. Composition Cabinet increased Mosadeq’s estrangement

from Kashani, Maki and Baqai which in turn may induce him depend

further on Iran party. Certain leaders this party not (rpt not) adverse to

collaboration with Tudeh. Hence such development likely facilitate

Tudeh penetration govt.

Chief Staff Air Force Gen Guilanshah informed Air Att fol re conv

with Mosadeq Aug 9. Guilanshah inquire whether he should continue

his anti-Tudeh campaign within Air Force. Mosadeq replied he did not

(rpt not) wish anti-Tudeh measures intensified or slowed down since

wished avoid any indication his govt leaning toward either West

powers or USSR. Guilanshah believes order will in effect curtail action

against Tudeh elements in Air Force.

Cons Meshed and Tabriz report Tudeh attempted small mtgs Aug

5 on occasion Constitution Day which easily suppressed by security

forces. Press states Tudeh-sponsored mtgs held various towns Caspian

Sea region on same occasion. Summarizing Tudeh sitn Meshed Cons

reports: “Altho there evidence increasing effort by Tudeh to build ef-

fective org this area, party still relatively weak and forced operate

under cover”. Support stems from small nbr industrial workers, med-

ical college students and left-wing faction in govt depts, principally

Min Education.

Henderson

115.

Memorandum From the Director of the U.S. Technical

Cooperation Administration Mission in Iran (Warne) to the

Ambassador to Iran (Henderson)

Tehran, August 12, 1952.

My visit with Seyed Abdol Ayatollah Kashani

At his request brought to me by one of his sons and after dis-

cussing the matter with you, I went to a home in Shimron at 11 a.m. on

August 11 to meet Ayatollah Kashani. Present at most of the conference

also was Mr. Shams Ghanat-Abadi, a mullah, reported son-in-law, and

close follower of Kashani, who is a deputy from Shahrod, and two sons

of Kashani, one a mullah named Khashanizahed Kashani, and the other

named Mostafa Kashani.

After waiting some 30 minutes while Kashani completed a confer-

ence with mullahs in another room, I was joined by Ayatollah Kashani.

He appeared most interested in our conference; to the point indeed of

keeping me there past 1 o’clock, which is his lunch time, through lun-

cheon, and until his siesta period at 2 p.m. The conference, of course,

was slower than those we might hold where only one language is

spoken because of the necessity of translating carefully everything that

was said. I was accompanied by Mr. Ardeshir Zahedi, of Point 4, who

acted as interpreter for the conference.

At the outset, I congratulated Kashani on his election as President

of the Majlis. I said this was a great honor but also a great responsibility

in these times. He replied that he considered it as a very small matter

since long before he had been spiritual leader of most of the Middle

East. I said I recognized the responsibilities he had carried as spiritual

leader of millions but I did not think one could over-emphasize the im-

portance of being President of the Majlis in Iran at a time when Iran

held such a fateful position in the world. He then said that his position

as spiritual leader gave him great power as the events of last month had

clearly shown. He said he would give his life for his country and was

motivated only by its best interests. He said when Great Britain and the

United States brought in Qavam as Prime Minister his displeasure was

based on the fact that it was not in the interests of Iran and his displeas-

ure was reflected in the demonstrations that overthrew Qavam. He

said some people thought the communists had joined him but he as-

sured me that he was even more against the communists.

Kashani said long ago he was visited by a Mr. Dooher who asked

his help in bringing Razmara to power. He said he told Mr. Dooher the

United States would be making a mistake to bring Razmara forward

and this had proved to be so. He said that 20 days before Qavam came

in he had evidence of Anglo-American joint action to that end and that

such action had been a mistake, too.

At this point I said it was not true that the United States had as-

sisted in bringing Qavam into power and that I could assure him that

the United States did not interfere in the internal affairs of Iran. I said

we had no advance information of Qavam’s coming to power. I said,

however, if he wanted to discuss political and diplomatic questions

they should be brought up with you, the United States Ambassador,

and these were not my field of responsibility.

When this was translated to Kashani, he dropped the subject (a

little to my surprise) and political matters were not again discussed.

The conference turned completely to a discussion of the Point 4 pro-

gram and plans for the economic development of Iran. Several things

stand out as very pointed impressions of this conference. These are:

(1) Ayatollah Kashani, though elderly, is vigorous and alert.

(2) Ayatollah Kashani seems to be isolated. He is surrounded by

his own relatives and a few mullahs, and almost no one else seems to be

on intimate terms with him.

(3) Ayatollah Kashani has sublime faith in his religious leadership.

He believes that this gives him extraordinary power of leadership in

Iran. I believe that he has no doubt that he could rally the people for or

against almost any other institution or influence.

(4) Ayatollah Kashani and his intimate followers have little con-

ception of what goes on outside relatively narrow circles. They know

little of the Western world or of the Eastern world outside their

homeland.

(5) Ayatollah Kashani does not seem to be an unfriendly person or

lacking in warmth and seems to have an underlying compassion for the

poor peoples of Iran.

As we talked, Ayatollah Kashani said he hoped that Point 4, the

programs of which I had carefully explained to him from A to Z, would

do something “Really substantial” for Iran. He thought a big dam in the

river near Isfahan and a dam on the Karun would be good ideas and

would meet his specifications. He asked me how much I thought such

dams would cost. I told him I could give him only the barest horseback

opinion but through familiarity with the work of the Bureau of Recla-

mation of the United States, in which I had served for many years, and

as a result of a fairly good reconnaissance of the Karun River made ear-

lier this year, I thought 200 to 250 million dollars would be required to

March 1952–February 1953

develop a satisfactory project on the Karun involving storage of water,

generation of electric power, irrigation by pumps and by direct diver-

sion, and the possibility of navigation on the lower river and through

large canals to Bandarshapur. He appeared amazed and said he

thought 100 dams could be built for 200 million dollars. I said one could

not generalize about the cost for dams but that good engineering work

had to precede the design and construction of any such project to pro-

vide sound estimates. I said I knew costs in the United States, however,

and big dams cost big money anywhere.

Ayatollah Kashani again urged me to advocate “substantial work”

by the United States in Iran and suggested that I should go to the

United States immediately to present the case for such works. I told

him that I was in agreement as to the need for projects to develop and

utilize resources of Iran and that I had given a great deal of thought to

such projects. I said that Point 4 had directed a part of its work into

those areas and that I thought we might be able to bring forward spe-

cific designs and specifications of projects that could be adopted by the

International Bank or Export-Import Bank or some other agency that

might provide the necessary capital. I said it seemed to me that Iran

would need a stable flow of foreign exchange before such works could

be prosecuted which indicated the need for a settlement of the oil issue

and a resumption of oil sales.

I said that Point 4 would be very happy to work with the Iranian

Government agencies in attempting to prepare substantial programs

for internal improvements in Iran though I doubted that the present

program would be able to finance the large capital requirements of any

such improvements. I asked whether he or Mr. Ghanat-Abadi had sug-

gestions as to programs that might be taken up. I said that I thought re-

sponsible leaders of the government ought to assist in the development

of plans. No other suggestion than the two dams mentioned above

were made. Instead I was asked for some suggestions.

I mentioned the discovery of oil at Qum and the possibility of de-

veloping a project for low cost kerosene as a substitute fuel in the rural

areas. This seemed to interest and excite them. They said if I could not

go to the United States to present the requirements of Iran for substan-

tial development they hoped I would write. I said I had been reporting

the needs of the country and would try to continue to do so.

Throughout the conference reference to communist activities and

the threat of communism were made by Mr. Kashani and Mr. Ghanat-

Abadi. They always spoke of the communist activities as something

deleterious to the country and antagonistic to their positions.

At one point Ayatollah Kashani said the misery of the people alone

could turn them away from their faith and to communism. He said he

did not fear his ability to rally the people to patriotic action unless the

people became more desperately hungry when he feared they would

turn to communism. The notes of my interpreter at this point contain

“Mr. Kashani added that communism was the worst enemy of Iran and

that to stop communism the present deplorable condition of the people

should be improved. A hungry person will not go after moral values

and religion.”

At another point Mr. Kashani referred to his dislike of the British

and his equal dislike of the Russians. He said he would like to see the

friendship between Iran and the United States strengthened in order

that Iran might be better able to resist communism.

I said that our program was not “anti-communistic” but was a con-

structive program to help Iran help herself. I said I did not wake up

each morning thinking, “How can I fight communism?” but I woke up

each morning thinking, “How can I assist in fighting the diseases,

hunger, and poverty that plague the people of Iran?” I said that if this

was an attack on the roots of communism then communism was a dis-

eased plant and ought to be rooted out.

Kashani said he was devoted to the welfare of the people, and he

thought substantial programs of improvement were needed because

the people were sick and hungry.

One time when Mr. Kashani mentioned substantial programs he

said something that deprecated a bit the Point 4 deep water well pro-

gram. Mr. Ghanat-Abadi interrupted him and said “do not under esti-

mate the well program. Do not say anything against it. I need a Point 4

well at Shahrod or I may not be reelected.”

Unlike many Iranians, Kashani had no pet or personal projects to

put forward. The only time he mentioned a specific project for our con-

sideration was in connection with a discussion of the plight of some of

the poor people south of Tehran. He said some of these people, perhaps

communist-led, had been squatting on land belonging to the gov-

ernment or others. He said he thought it would be appropriate for Point

4 to consider putting in a couple of wells to serve these people since

they were needy and their lot was indeed hard. He thought that might

keep them from desperate actions.

Near the close of the conference, Mr. Kashani said he appreciated

the efforts of Point 4 to assist Iran but he wanted me to inform my coun-

trymen of the conditions and needs of this country. He expressed his

hope for the success of this American mission “Inshallah”—God

willing.

Before the conference closed, Mr. Ghanat-Abadi asked permission

to take up a matter or two with me. He said that some people had come

to him and attacked Point 4 on the grounds that we did all our trucking

business with Levant Express which was run by Armenians. He said

that he did not mean that we should avoid Armenians because of reli-

116.

Memorandum of Conversation Between Max Thornburg and

the Director of the Psychological Strategy Board (Allen)

Washington, August 20, 1952.

By appointment I met Ray Allen and two of his staff, later joined

Ray opened with several questions concerning the Persian oil situ-

ation: did I think that it could be settled soon? mustn’t it be, in order to

avoid a collapse of the country? etc.

I answered these questions briefly, according to my opinions, but

parried details on the ground that the oil question could not be settled

until there were a government in Persia that wanted to settle it, and that

until there were such a government to make effective use of the rev-

enues it wouldn’t matter in any case. As for collapsing, the Persian

economy had been flat on the ground for 500 years and there was

nothing to collapse. I doubted that the Persians had a word in their lan-

guage for “collapse”, any more than they have for “development”

(which they don’t have, in our sense).

Other questions were asked about the Communists in various

Middle East countries, and my ideas as to what might be expected

when Ibn Saud dies, when Mossedegh gets out, when Noury Pasha re-

tires, etc.

After about a half hour of such discussion I asked Ray if I might

outline my own approach to the Middle East situation and indicate

what I considered to be the key problems so we could focus our atten-

tion upon them. This, I felt, would bring all these other questions into a

proper relationship. Ray said go ahead.

We can understand all these problems better if we approach them

from the general toward the particular. This guards against seeking a

remedy for some particular case within its own apparent circum-

stances, when in fact its causes lie elsewhere.

The unrest in the ME is part of the unrest among backward peoples

all over the world, but modified in the ME by its own history, religion

etc. Similarly in any ME country we find the general causes at work,

but modified by local circumstances. Thus if we describe the ME situa-

tion we find that we have gone a long way toward describing the con-

ditions in any one country, and have only to adjust it for a few local

factors to understand the particular case. On the other hand, if we begin

with the analysis of a particular case we can’t always distinguish be-

tween aspects which are peculiar to it and those which are deeper and

more general.

I then outlined the pattern of my own reasoning about the ME and

the special cases presented by the several countries. (This is described

in detail in other memos and will not be repeated here except in bare

outline.)

The problem can be entered at any one of several points, but since

it has finally to be intergrated in any case, let’s start with the “people”

and carry it along from there.

General movement among backward peoples to awaken and rebel

against (1) foreign domination, (2) corruption of own governments,

(3) misery of their own way of living.

March 1952–February 1953

This rebellion is essentially a reaction, hence psychological, emo-

tional and unreasoning.

This mass condition places a powerful instrument i.e. mass power

of hundreds of millions of people, say 100 million in the ME, 18 million

in Persia, etc. in the hands of rabble rousing leaders, either Communist

or other extremists, which they can subvert or overthrow governments,

block betterment programs, assassinate leaders, drive out foreigners,

etc.

As long as this psychological climate remains hostile to us and to

our (or other) constructive efforts, our aid programs which are based

upon the assumption that behaviour is determined by reason, will con-

tinue to fail.

Our first objective, therefore, must be to change this psychological

climate, as far as possible—and as quickly as possible—replacing dis-

trust with confidence, hostility with friendliness, despair with hope,

and unreason with reason.

Such an objective requires criteria quite different from those

governing a program based upon logically reasoned economic

considerations.

Our new criteria, belonging to the psychological objective, will

show that many of the things we have been doing are quite useless in

this first stage and belong to some later objective when its time comes.

The program of action indicated by the psychological objective

consists of two parts: (1) a widespread program of small works which

are tangible and visible to a very large part of the population (village,

tribal and urban) and which show them that a turn for the better has

come into their lives; and (2), a well designed program of propaganda

that will (a) publicize and explain the works program, (b) relate it to

their own government’s new attitude toward their welfare and to U.S.

and British intentions to help them, and (c) counter adverse propa-

ganda originating in various sources that are opposed to what we are

trying to do.

As to time schedule, this first objective should be reached not later

than the end of 1953, i.e. the predominating sentiment throughout the

Middle East should by that time be favorable for proceeding toward

other and longer range objectives. Emphasis must of course be placed

upon the most critical areas, such as Persia and Egypt, ahead of the rest.

The types of material works must be small and intimately associ-

ated with daily conditions of living (eg DDT, typhoid control, insecti-

cides, dirt roads, simple schools, rural clinics, visiting nurses, famine or

other distress relief, etc) combined with visible changes in local gov-

ernment activities to indicate new interest in popular welfare, such as

local councils, tax relief, formation of local cooperatives etc.

Generally speaking each village (or other social group) need get

only one of the foregoing evidences to begin with, but through the

propaganda program and by the normal spread of news (rapid in these

countries) must know that other villages (groups) are getting other

kinds of benefits which, in due course, will come to it also.

The requirement that this program be widespread throughout the

country (and region), touching a majority of the villages or other

groups during 1953 (there are about 40,000 villages in Persia alone),

discloses at once that the program must be executed through institu-

tions which are capable of reaching vast numbers of people. (i.e. this is

not to be confused with a Near East Foundation, Rockefeller Founda-

tion type of endeavour, nor is it “demonstration” projects, which be-

long to a later stage, that are required for this first objective.)

Examples of such institutions are Ministries of Health, Agricul-

ture, Public Works, etc; Government Development Plan organizations,

Agricultural (or other) Development Banks, cooperatives, and regional

development banks and other agencies such as might be provided

under United Nations auspices.

However, for such institutions to be effective in carrying these first

tangible evidences of changed conditions to a vast number of people

within a short time, it is imperative that the governments of the coun-

tries want such a program to succeed. It is obvious that unless they do,

we have little chance of bringing about such changes.

Nevertheless, there is little evidence that any Middle East gov-

ernment, with the sole exception of Turkey (since its 1950 elections),

has any real desire or intention of this kind.

Thus we are faced with a choice between continuing to use inade-

quate and non-determining measures which are nothing more than a

sop (though an expensive one) to world public opinion, while actually

watching the Middle East deteriorate until it slides into the Communist

orbit or until we can turn the job over to our soldiers, or, on the other

hand, taking such steps as are necessary to encourage and support such

changes in these governments as are required by our own sense of na-

tional and world security.

The question of establishing a “democratic” form of government

has no place here. What is necessary is that each of these countries have

a stable government dedicated to the welfare of its people and capable

of responsible behaviour in relation to other governments of the world.

Conditions among these countries vary widely, and so must the types

of government.

If our choice is to exercise a positive influence upon the evolution

of responsible governments within these countries, we must revise our

(alleged) historical policy of “non-intervention” in the political affairs

of others. (This actually requires only that we stop trying to fool our-

March 1952–February 1953

selves about that legendary “principle”, which we always drag out

when we want something to hide behind.)

Generally speaking, and certainly in all important cases, there is a

responsible segment of the governing class in each of these countries

that wants the same things that we do. From time to time these respon-

sible and progressive groups actually take the leadership, though

perhaps only for a short time. Our statesmanship should be capable of

placing and supporting them in permanent tenure.

Coming from the general to the particular, everything said up to

this point applies to Persia, equally with the others.

In Persia, which is the most critical case facing us now, the unrea-

soning reaction of the “masses” against past oppressions and misery

has been whipped up by (a) Mossedegh’s Nationalists, (b) Kashani’s re-

ligious fanatics, and (c) Tudeh Party Communists—each leader with a

different ultimate objective in mind—to a state of virtual anarchy.

Both the Right (Kashani) and the Left (Tudeh) “support” Mos-

sedegh only in his chest beating and rabble rousing antics.

Mossedegh himself is powerless to convert the prevailing condi-

tion from one ruled by unreason to one ruled by reason. Hence the fu-

tility of Averell’s New York business man approach to the oil contro-

versy, even assuming Mossedegh’s personal approval.

The most promising figure around whom a responsible gov-

ernment can be built in Persia today is the Shah himself. He has at least

the potential advantages of traditional position (powerful in that

country), loyalty of the army (if he calls for it), broad constitutional

powers, and the desire on his own part for the kinds of reforms which

we believe are needed in his country. He lacks personal strength and

resolution, which, fortunately, is the one deficiency which we can help

make up.

Twice we have refused to support the Shah, once with Razmara

(despite the Shah’s urgent appeal to Washington) and once with

Qavam. We will have one more chance, presumably, when Mossedegh

goes, if we can make up our minds in time and reach the necessary un-

derstandings with the British (essential) and with the Shah.

If we do this, we can then begin the program outlined earlier in this

discussion, toward our psychological objective.

Then, also, we may be able to save the rest of the Middle East from

going the same route as Persia. We are doing nothing to stop it now.

117.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans (Wisner)

to Director of Central Intelligence Smith

Washington, August 20, 1952.

SUBJECT

Plan for Arming Iranian Tribal Groups

1. Pursuant to your instructions of two weeks ago, the attached

plan for arming Iranian tribal groups has been developed by the Near

East Division with the assistance of other appropriate elements of the

Agency. This is an emergency plan which is for implementation only in

case of the collapse or Communist take-over of the Iranian central gov-

ernment. However, in order to be in a position to carry the plan into

effect certain additional physical preparations, over and above those al-

ready taken, will be necessary. Because of the critical situation pres-

ently prevailing in Iran we are continuing with these preparations, in-

cluding procurement of weapons and ammunition and the forward

stockpiling of additional quantities thereof, but I should nevertheless

appreciate receiving your guidance as to whether you desire to have

this plan submitted to either the Project Review Committee or the Psy-

chological Strategy Board. Certain basic features of the plan have al-

ready been extensively coordinated with the Departments of State and

Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, but in view of the size and amount

of effort and facilities involved in this program, it has occurred to me

that you may wish to have a further review of the plan by one or both of

the bodies indicated.

2. You will recall that, at the suggestion of the State Department

and with the concurrence of the Department of Defense and the Joint

Chiefs of Staff, we approached the British Service with a proposal that a

joint plan should be developed. The only reply which we have received

as yet is to the effect that the Foreign Office considers that it is “prema-

ture” for the British Service to engage in any joint planning effort with

us. We are still uncertain as to the underlying significance of this

position of the British Foreign Office, but the fact remains that we are

presently unable to coordinate our planning with any plans which

the British Service may have in being or in contemplation for this

eventuality.

Frank G. Wisner

March 1952–February 1953

Attachment

August 8, 1952.

PLAN FOR ARMING IRANIAN TRIBAL GROUPS

I. General

A. Purpose

To store arms and allied mate´riel at an overseas base as close as

feasible to Iran for possible use by anti-Communist elements in

southern Iran in the event of the deterioration or collapse of the

non-Communist central government.

B. Period Covered by the Plan

August 1952–June 1953

C. Area of Responsibility

Geographic area of Near East-Africa

D. Policy

2. Conversation between DCI and Mr. Frank Pace, Secretary, De-

3. Memorandum for the Record by DCNEA/O, Subject: “State

4. Further oral instructions by DD/P to DCNEA/O on 31 July

1952.

5. Memorandum for the Record by DCNEA/O, Subject: “Meeting

with General Balmer and General Magruder on Emergency Operations

6. Iran Country Plan—Part II, Cold War, Annex D, Guerrilla War-

fare Program, particularly the objective, which is to “Develop guerrilla

tended users without concurrence of the Department of State.

E. Factors Bearing on the Situation

1. In the event of civil war between Communist and non-

Communist groups for control of the central government, it is believed

that certain tribal groups in southern Iran would prove the most effec-

tive opponents of a Communist regime.

2. Since the major tribal group, the Qashqai, have been closely as-

sociated with American agencies for several years and are strongly mo-

tivated against Communism, they are assessed by this Agency as

America’s strongest potential weapon against possible communist sei-

zure of all Iran.

3. In event of a successful Tudeh (Communist) Party coup against

the central government, there appears little prospect of any effective

armed intervention other than in the southern tribal areas.

4. The Qashqai, as the strongest and best armed tribal group,

would be expected to lead such opposition in an attempt to hold the

southern part of the country against the Communists and to prevent all

Iran from falling behind the Iron Curtain.

“Country Plan for Iran” is undated, but in its final form probably dates from late De-

cember 1951. Drafted in the Office of Policy Coordination in the Directorate of Plans, a

Country Plan aimed to describe OPC objectives and activities within a given country. The

introductory remarks of “Operational Annex D” established the need for the United

States Government to prepare for the contingency in which Communists might take con-

trol of the Iranian Government. It assumed that “in the event of general war, resistance to

communist occupation of Iran will be conducted by the Qashqais and perhaps other

tribes which are strongly antipathetic to communism and the Russians.” Therefore, the

United States, through OPC, must provide enough assistance to the Qashqais to enable

them to “sustain an effective guerrilla warfare campaign.” It behooved the United States

to provide such assistance since it was rapidly becoming the only Western country ca-

March 1952–February 1953

F. Summary of the Situation

1. The July 1952 political upheavals in Iran have produced extreme

internal instability and some strengthening of the Tudeh position.

2. The Tudeh Party is the most closely organized political group in

Iran and stands to profit most by the present chaotic situation.

3. As a result of the July riots, the position of the Shah and the mo-

rale of the Army have been considerably weakened. The National Front

under Prime Minister Mossadegh, because of its acceptance of Tudeh

support in the riots, is now plagued by a series of splits in its leadership

which provides the Tudeh with opportunities to infiltrate certain fac-

tions and increase its influence in government affairs.

4. The people in the north, confused by the temporary cooperation

of National Front and Tudeh elements and with little voice in their gov-

ernment, could be expected to do little in the way of preventing a polit-

ical upheaval.

5. Currently CIA capabilities in Iran are insufficient to prevent a

Tudeh coup should such be attempted. Following such an event, how-

ever, a foothold might be gained in Iran through support of selected

tribes. The Qashqai are the only such group which we are considering

supporting at the present time. Their organization, orientation, leader-

ship [less than 1 line not declassified] make their selection obvious. Also,

they have indicated in the past that they would be receptive to our sup-

port, and have claimed that they could bring other tribal groups into an

armed alliance against a Communist central government.

II. Mission

To make preparations for combating, by paramilitary methods, the

efforts of Communist elements to seize control in Iran.

[Omitted here are 25 pages of operational details of the plan.]

at which time he approved this plan. He gave certain oral instructions with regard to the

arms to be acquired. The program is now being implemented by the NE Division.”

118.

Memorandum Prepared by Max Thornburg

August 22, 1952.

What would we have to do?

Make up our own minds, promptly, concerning three things:

(1) Our own readiness to back the Shah in establishing a “respon-

sible” government, by which we would mean, among other things, one

loyal to the Shah, dedicated to necessary reforms within the country,

willing to collaborate with us in such aids as we offer (economic, tech-

nical, military training, etc.), disposed to accept a reasonable settlement

of the oil dispute (when the time comes), and opposed to Communism.

(2) The kind of a proposition we are prepared to make to the

British: i.e. what we have decided to do on our own whether they come

along or not; what we would like to have them do; what position we

would take concerning the oil settlement if the British join us in the pro-

gram—and if they do not.

(3) The kind of a proposition we are prepared to make to the Shah:

i.e. what we think he should do; what kind of support he could expect

from us, and from the British insofar as we act as “guarantors” for

them; the principles upon which the oil dispute must be settled when

the time comes.

Having reached decisions in principle concerning these points in-

sofar as it is possible to do so at this early stage, and assuming that our

decision is to go ahead, the staff selected to detail and carry out the next

phase must include one or two who know the Shah personally and

command his confidence. Presumably the British contact would be be-

tween very high officials. Depending upon the nature of the British par-

ticipation, they might add their own representative to contact the Shah.

From here on, we must work back from what the Shah would have

to do, and what opposition might be expected.

March 1952–February 1953

What would the Shah have to do?

The Shah’s basic program probably still remains what was out-

lined in our Embassy’s dispatch of 21 June, 1952, which outlined his

situation and intentions as of that date, based upon personal discus-

sions between members of the Embassy (and myself) and both the Shah

and General Razmara (immediately before he became Prime Minister).

The significant change since then is that Mossedegh is now Prime

Minister, which introduces an unpredictable factor at the outset of any

operation which depends upon his actions.

This has more to do with the timing of the Shah’s action than with

the program itself, since the essence of the plan is that the Shah take

control from the outset and thereafter determine the course of events,

regardless of who is his Prime Minister.

The Shah must be ready to act instantly when circumstances favor

the proposed action. He can be expected to have his own ideas on this,

and perhaps will know best because of his own knowledge of the top

military officers and other key men upon whom he must rely.

It might be expected, however, that such situations as the fol-

lowing would provide the circumstances most favorable for him:

(a) Mossedegh’s retirement as Prime Minister, for any reason; i.e.

death, illness, resignation, deposition.

(b) Severe rioting or other outbreak of violence which would fur-

nish ostensible justification for declaring martial law.

(c) Refusal, with conspicuous demonstrations, of any group to

comply with an official and legitimate decree or proclamation, again as

an ostensible justification for declaring martial law.

(d) Possibly, although this must depend upon conditions which we

cannot be sure of and which the Shah himself might best appraise,

Mossedegh’s own decision or willingness to collaborate with the Shah

Prime Minister Razmara’s reform program. Richards, Counselor of Embassy, com-

mented favorably and wrote that “the achievement of stability in Iran with restoration

faith in Government would be in US interests and is essential if our military and eco-

Razmara program “was idealistic and was proved to be utterly impracticable. There has

even been suspicion that Razmara, who could play the game of intrigue as well as Thorn-

burg or better, deliberately allowed this Utopian plan to be created in order to impress

the Americans that he was a good man to support.” In connection with Thornburg’s pro-

posals of August 1952, Richards commented that “his reliance on the Shah as the ‘key’ to

the situation seems to me ill-informed and unrealistic. The Shah’s inability or unwill-

ingness to act forcefully during the July 21 riots provides to our mind a good example of

his weakness which would probably appear again in any similar situation.” (Ibid.,

to save himself and whatever he stands for, from Kashani and the

Tudeh forces.

In any event the decision as to whether Mossedegh would remain

as Prime Minister or be replaced, must depend upon his importance as

a leader at the time of the Shah’s action, and upon his own readiness to

support the Shah’s program. It is readily conceivable that Mossedegh

might accept such a course as a way out with honor, perhaps remaining

as Prime Minister only long enough to insure that his own personal fol-

lowers will support the Shah, initially at least.

In the event that Mossedegh neither disappears as Prime Minister

nor can be relied upon with certainty to collaborate with the Shah,

when other circumstances furnish a favorable opportunity for the Shah

to take over, he and his principal lieutenants would have to be re-

garded as in the same category with other “leaders” whose actions

threaten the national security.

For the Shah’s success the first requirement is that he have his own

resolution to succeed fortified by our assurances, and preferably those

of the British, that we will approve and defend the propriety and neces-

sity of his actions before world opinion, and that we are prepared to as-

sist his new government economically and technically in carrying out

agreed upon reforms.

These assurances on our part should be supplemented, in private

and realistic conversations, with any helpful advice that we can give

both as to the initial conduct of his program and as to the probable con-

sequences if he should fail to establish responsible rule within his

country.

Our part would be limited to our private contact with the Shah

prior to the establishment of his government, and normal channels

thereafter.

The steps which the Shah might and probably would have to take

within the first twenty four hours of his program are as follows:

(1) Declare martial law, subject to his orders. (This would include

use not only of the army but also the National Police and the Gendar-

me´rie, which are in effect part of the country’s armed forces.)

(2) Arrest and hold in safe confinement a certain list of group

leaders and others of subversive influence, subject to trial in appro-

priate courts.

(3) Dissolve the Majlis and exercise his right to rule by Royal De-

cree pending the installation of a new Majlis, in due course, elected

under new (decreed) election laws.

(4) Forbid and prevent subversive mass meetings.

(5) Close subversive newspapers and arrest their editors.

(6) Appoint Ministers to essential cabinet posts.

March 1952–February 1953

(7) Decree certain high priority reform laws (e.g. relating to the ju-

diciary, taxes, public elections, etc.)

(8) Arrest for orderly trial a considerable number of government

officials or ex-officials who have been conspicuous for misappropria-

tion of public funds, and against whom there is substantial ground for

indictment.

(9) Make known through all available propaganda channels that it

is his intention to exercise his constitutional powers and Royal preroga-

tives to establish responsible government within the country, aimed at

the security and well being of the people.

Immediately following these initial acts by the Shah must come

our own public statement, from the President or Secretary of State, in

the effect that the Shah’s democratic views and sincere interest in the

welfare of his people have long been known, and that after a consider-

able period of admirable restraint while allowing the politicians and

government officials an opportunity—which they had failed to take—

to meet the recurring crises threatening the country, he had at last exer-

cised his constitutional powers and his responsibilities as Sovereign in

a manner that earns the commendation of all freedom loving peoples.

. . . or equivalent).

A corresponding statement by the British would be desirable.

The Shah and his new Government must then actively undertake

the program discussed elsewhere, aimed at changing the psychological

climate from despair and hostility to hope and confidence, in prepara-

tion for the material economic reforms in which we would aid.

The first few months would be devoted to extensive organizational

work in administrative, and executive agencies, and to the prosecution

of the program aimed at our first “psycological” objective. Substantial

progress must be made toward this objective before we can shift from

“psychologic” to “economic” criteria to guide our efforts (or those of

the Shah).

Until emotional hysteria has subsided to a point where it no longer

determines national behaviour, and no longer provides subversive in-

terests with a powerful instrument in opposition to orderly gov-

ernment (and to our own aid efforts), it will be futile to attempt a rea-

sonable settlement of the oil dispute and unwise to endanger the

broader program by raising the issue.

If the British are prepared to accept the program outlined here (or a

generally equivalent one) they may be prepared also to extend financial

assistance as necessary to carry the Shah’s program along to a point

which makes an oil settlement possible, provided of course that this in-

tention on the Shah’s part (and our own) from the beginning.

Whether the British contribute financially or not, we would have to

help the Shah restore a reasonable measure of financial stability within

his country, pending the resumption of oil revenues.

Since the intention, by all concerned, to resurrect the oil industry

on some reasonable basis is taken as a premise in this argument, it

should be possible to make certain moves in that direction in part solu-

tion to financial problems, as soon as it becomes evident (or probable)

that the Shah’s program will succeed. Thus sales of crude oil might be

started, perhaps under the trusteeship of the World Bank, even be-

fore—and without prejudice to—subsequent negotiations aimed at set-

tlement of the major dispute. This would be practicable only if the

British agreed, in which case the major oil companies would be almost

certain to comply with any reasonable requests made upon them by

our or the British governments. Their cooperation would greatly facili-

tate such an operation.

It is probable that the resumption of oil dispute negotiations on a

rational basis will subject the popular temper to its severest test, hence

this should not be done until there is a basis for assurance that the pop-

ulation is psychologically prepared. Even then a step by step solution

may be necessary.

Broadly, the following “principles” might have a part in deter-

mining the ultimate oil settlement: (1) Substitution of private for HMG

ownership in Company operations within Persia; (2) Recognition of le-

gality of nationalization with compensation; (3) Offset compensation

due Company by rentals due Government under an operating contract

between them which provides for operation by Company and pre-

serves its equities, arranging division of profile and other terms con-

formably with recent oil agreements elsewhere; (4) Create new Com-

pany corporation to operate within Persia under foregoing contract, to

separate old Company from new picture. This might mean separate

new corporations for producing and for refining, to provide for dif-

ferent degrees of Persian control.

March 1952–February 1953

119.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans (Wisner)

to the Chief of the Near East and Africa Division, Directorate

of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)

120.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

classified]. Eval: F–3. Dissem: [less than 1 line not declassified].

1. During latter part August source was told separately by [1½ lines

not declassified] that Kashani definitely planning Mossadegh overthrow.

These [less than 1 line not declassified] individuals who currently cooper-

ating with Kashani are themselves involved in plan.

2. Timing of plan not known by source although it believed to be

scheduled shortly after Kashani’s return to Iran. Immediately prior

Kashani’s departure for Mecca he sent word to PriMin via Deputy

Majlis President Razavi warning PriMin to expect his opposition, if

something were not done to alleviate situation Iran.

3. Kashani is relying heavily on his Majlis support to cause Mos-

sadegh overthrow. It source opinion Kashani will also have Tudeh

street support.

4. For Wash only: [less than 1 line not declassified].

declassified]

B. [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]

Political Activities—Iran. Secret; Security Information; Routine.

121.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Byroade) to

Secretary of State Acheson

Washington, September 10, 1952.

SUBJECT

Recommended Change in United States Policy Towards Iran

The Problem

To determine the policy to be followed by the United States in the

light of recent developments in the Iranian situation.

Background

On August 30, 1952 there was formally delivered to Dr. Mosadeq a

joint message from President Truman and Prime Minister Churchill

containing proposals for action by all three governments to bring about

an “early and equitable solution” of the oil dispute (Enclosure No. 1).

These proposals were based upon British and American reappraisals of

the situation in Iran and represented certain basic changes in British

and American attitudes towards solving the oil dispute which is the

prime factor for instability in Iran.

British policy had previously been based on assumptions that eco-

nomic and political pressures on Iran, following the nationalization of

the AIOC concession, would bring to power a conservative gov-

ernment which would then reverse the policies of Dr. Mosadeq. After

nearly a year and a half of waiting, the first of these assumptions was

proved to be correct. The Mosadeq government fell and the conserva-

tive Ahmad Qavam was appointed Prime Minister. The second as-

sumption, however, proved to be less sound. Qavam’s first and only

public declaration expressed hostility to previous nationalist policies in

Information. Drafted by Stutesman and sent through Matthews. Printed from an unini-

tialed copy.

Iran and assured the world that the oil dispute would soon be ended on

reasonable terms. There was an immediate public reaction to this an-

nouncement which approximated a revolt in Tehran. The Shah’s inde-

cisiveness and communist agitators contributed measurably to the vio-

lent outbreak of July 21 against Qavam but reflective reports from the

Embassy ascribe to nationalist, predominantly middle-class, organiza-

tions the main force in the anti-Qavam demonstrations. The utter

failure of the Qavam government has been taken as evidence that no

Iranian politician can hope in present circumstances successfully to

moderate extreme nationalist demands. Apparently the British Gov-

ernment, observing the rise and fall of the Qavam government, realized

that its policy should no longer be based upon the expectation that a

“more reasonable” government would arise to settle the oil dispute.

American policy toward Iran was also reviewed following the res-

toration of Dr. Mosadeq and his nationalist colleagues to unquestioned

dominance in Iranian affairs. It had been generally assumed that Dr.

Mosadeq would welcome settlement of the oil dispute if certain legiti-

mate Iranian national aspirations were taken into consideration. The

United States had maintained, since nationalization of the British oil

concession in Iran, a position as moderator, constantly seeking to bring

both disputants forward to some middle ground. After the events of

July 21, it was recognized that the Iranians could not realistically be ex-

pected to move far forward from their rigid adherence to the terms of

the Iranian nationalization law. The U.S. Government, therefore, felt it

advisable to join the British who were willing to make substantial con-

cessions in the dispute to present proposals which appeared to meet

the outstanding objections of the other side.

On July 31, an Aide-Me´moire3 was handed by the Secretary of

State to the British Ambassador suggesting that the United States Gov-

ernment would be willing to join in a joint approach to settle the oil dis-

pute along the following lines:

1. The United States will make an immediate grant of $10 million

to the Iranian Government.

2. The AIOC or some other agency designated by the British Gov-

ernment will purchase from Iran all of the oil products presently held

in storage by the NIOC at commercial Persian Gulf prices less an ap-

propriate discount.

3. On the basis of the proposal discussed between Dr. Mosadeq

and the British Charge´ in Tehran on July 25, it would be agreed that an

arbitral commission consisting of three persons should be set up imme-

diately to consider the question of compensation. Neither the American

March 1952–February 1953

grant of $10 million nor the start of British oil purchases would be held

up pending the commencement of the arbitral procedure.

4. Negotiations looking toward a more permanent arrangement

for the distribution of Iranian oil should be undertaken promptly.

Before a British reply could be received to this Aide-Me´moire an-

other element was injected into the situation by the publication of an

Iranian Government Note to the British Government, dated August 7.

In this provocatively phrased document the Iranians demanded imme-

diate payment of certain funds which they claimed were owed them by

the British Government and the AIOC and declared a readiness “to

enter into discussions with the representatives of the former AIOC . . .

to look into the legitimate claims of the company within the nationali-

zation law and also to look into the claims of the Iranian Government.”

The note added that if direct discussions were not satisfactory to the

AIOC, the company could “present its case in the competent Iranian

courts.”

The British reaction to our Aide-Me´moire was, at first, not very en-

couraging and revealed a continuing unwillingness to face what we

considered to be the realities of the Iranian situation. A message from

the Secretary to Mr. Eden on August 12 reviewed in some detail the

United States understanding of the Iranian situation, emphasizing the

necessity for meeting the psychological and political issues of the

dispute.

On August 20 a message was received by the President directly

from Prime Minister Churchill, then acting as Foreign Secretary in the

temporary absence of Mr. Eden. Mr. Churchill proposed that a joint

message from him and President Truman be sent to Prime Minister

Mosadeq suggesting that “If you Musaddiq will do (A), (B), and (C), we

two will do (X), (Y), and (Z).” The subsequent conditions for settlement

which the British Government put forward were carefully studied and

were found to meet generally the United States view that Dr. Mosadeq

might find it possible to accept a simple but rather vague basis for ne-

gotiations to settle the oil dispute. In their essence, the proposals pro-

vided for international arbitration of all claims and counter-claims and

required the AIOC to open discussions on a purely commercial basis

for the purchase and marketing of Iranian oil. Furthermore, immediate

sums were to be made available to the Iranian Government to cover its

budgetary expenses for the interim period until Iranian oil began to

flow again to world markets. It was believed that the three funda-

mental Iranian demands were met (a) through the imposition of no

conditions for the return of foreign technicians to Iran or foreign man-

agement, of the oil industry, (b) by the recognition of the fact of nation-

alization, and (c) providing that AIOC should not be the sole purchaser

of Iranian oil.

The reaction of the Iranian Government has not yet been finally

and officially determined. Prime Minister Mosadeq in his private con-

versation with United States Ambassador Henderson and British

Charge´ d’Affaires Middleton declared the proposals flatly unaccept-

able. During the week which followed delivery of this message, Dr.

Mosadeq became more moderate in his view of these proposals. It is be-

lieved that the public clarification of certain aspects of the proposals by

the Secretary and Mr. Harriman helped to create growing feeling

among Iranian leaders that the proposals should be given more careful

consideration. In face of this weight of opinion, Dr. Mosadeq issued a

press statement (Attachment No. 2) which attempted again to cloud

the issues in the dispute and placed him in his usual position so that he

could assert his sponsorship of almost any resolution which Parliament

passes in response to the joint US–UK proposals.

In attempting to understand the reasons for Dr. Mosadeq’s imme-

diate emotional revulsion when presented with the joint message it is

useful to keep the following points in mind:

1. Dr. Mosadeq has long enjoyed the advantages of confidential

bedroom diplomacy. During his Premiership he has on numerous occa-

sions privately given vague assurance of a willingness to settle the oil

dispute on reasonable terms but, when confronted with British will-

ingness to attempt to meet his demands as understood, he has either

flatly denied his previous assurances or has asserted that he could

make no commitment without Parliamentary approval. Publication of

the joint US–UK proposals forced Dr. Mosadeq into the open. In re-

jecting the proposals he must publicly describe his reasons and his true

position.

2. Dr. Mosadeq and most Iranians believe that the United States

and the United Kingdom are at odds in Iran and that Americans have

even encouraged, secretly of course, Dr. Mosadeq’s policies of driving

out the British from Iran. There are numerous indications that Dr. Mo-

sadeq has long had the belief that whether he settles the oil dispute

with the British or not, the United States Government, for strategic con-

siderations, will break with the British rather than allow Iran to fall into

communist hands. The fact that President Truman joined with Prime

Minister Churchill in public support of the proposals of August 30

must have disabused Dr. Mosadeq of his belief that the US and UK

were on the point of splitting on the Iranian issue.

March 1952–February 1953

3. Dr. Mosadeq has continually declared to the world that the only

factor preventing an early settlement of the oil dispute was British in-

sistence on forcing Iran to accept a British oil concession in contraven-

tion of Iran’s legitimate national rights. By keeping secret most of the

previous negotiations to achieve settlement of the oil dispute, Dr. Mo-

sadeq has been able to maintain a position in Iran and before much of

world opinion that he is a sort of George Washington fighting in the

cause of independence to keep the British imperialists out of Iran. The

proposals of August 30 clearly contain nothing which would reflect on

Iran’s independence or limit its freedom of action. The oil dispute,

therefore, has been removed from the fanciful realm of a “war of inde-

pendence” to the status of a commercial squabble. It has now become

publicly apparent that Iranian bargaining for the maximum benefit to

be gained from nationalization of the oil industry has been a major ele-

ment in preventing settlement of the oil dispute.

4. The search for “middle ground” in the oil controversy was based

on an assumption that both sides ultimately would welcome settlement

of the dispute on equitable terms. There is now real doubt whether Dr.

Mosadeq has any real intention of settling this dispute with the British.

The political advantages to be derived from the anti-British emotions

inflamed by the dispute and Mosadeq’s personal satisfaction of

thwarting the British may keep him from ever settling on any terms

with the AIOC.

Attachment

Paper Prepared in the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian

Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African

Affairs

Washington, undated.

General Situation

Iranian Nationalist Leadership

Although Nationalist leaders are in power in Iran and there is no

sound basis for expectation that an anti-nationalist government could

survive, there is evidence that the leaders in the National Front are in-

creasingly at odds. The major struggle which seems to be developing is

between Dr. Mosadeq and Mullah Kashani. Ambassador Henderson

has reported his observation of Prime Minister Mosadeq’s dismay

when he heard that Kashani had been elected President of the Majlis. In

the Parliamentary debates concerning continuation of martial law after

the July 21 riots, there was a definite split in nationalist ranks as the

newly created pro-Kashani national movement faction of approxi-

mately thirty deputies directly opposed the smaller group of National

Front politicians. There are rumors that Mullah Kashani, on his way to

Mecca, recently sent a message to Dr. Mosadeq that he expected to as-

sume control of the situation upon his return to Tehran unless Dr. Mo-

sadeq had successfully improved conditions. In the past few days Am-

bassador Henderson has been informed by high Iranian sources of

intrigues to replace Mosadeq with another leader who has not been

described but obviously will depend upon the support of Mullah

Kashani.

A combination of Mullah Kashani’s personal prestige, his forceful

organization of street rioters, anti-Mosadeq conservatives, and nation-

alist politicians such as Khosro Qashqai could wield very important in-

fluence in Iranian affairs. These groups would lead to dangers of de-

moralizing the Army and joining with the communists. Almost

certainly a government dependent upon these elements would be even

more unreasonable and difficult to deal with than Dr. Mosadeq.

Iranian Communist Organization

The communist organization in Iran is not strong in numbers but it

has shown ability to take advantage of widening opportunities for agi-

tation. Over the past few years the communists have concentrated on

developing a disciplined nucleus of leaders with a comparatively nu-

merous screen of front organizations. Agitators are known to be circu-

lating among the peasants and there are believed to be communist cells

in every Iranian industry and most dangerously among the unem-

ployed oil workers in Abadan. The Embassy has reported that the com-

munist organization will probably not attempt to stage a violent out-

break against the nationalist government but will, on the contrary, look

for opportunities to infiltrate and pervert the nationalist movement.

However, if public confidence in the nationalist government weakens

and if the armed forces become demoralized, it is entirely possible that

the communists may consider it advisable to attempt direct action to

gain control of the central government. Observers differ as to the time

when the communists may win dominant influence in Iranian affairs

but all agree that if the economic and social conditions of Iran worsen

hopelessly, a communist coup must eventually be expected.

Questionable British Military Responsibilities for Iran

United States policy toward Iran has been influenced by an under-

standing that the United Kingdom is responsible for the initiative in

military support of Iran in the event of communist subversion or ag-

March 1952–February 1953

gression. This understanding was based on United States inability to

extend its military responsibilities at the present time and upon the ex-

tensive influence which the British had in Iran before nationalization of

the oil industry. The first of these considerations should now be subject

to review because British influence in Iran has been so completely de-

stroyed that it is now very doubtful whether any legitimate Iranian

Government would or even could request British assistance in the

event of a communist seizure of power. Even such pro-western figures

as the Shah have lately been so reduced in power and prestige that they

cannot be expected to act independently of nationalist sentiments even

in the face of a communist coup. Anti-British feeling has, in fact,

reached such a point that many Iranian leaders are sincere in believing

as Nasser Khan Qashqai said to Department of State officials on Sep-

tember 4, “We would prefer the Russians to the British”.

Social Unrest

The ancient social structure of Iran is cracking visibly. Nationalist

propaganda has reached into the most isolated communities inflaming

anti-foreign sentiments and encouraging hopes for social and economic

benefits. In the early days of the oil nationalization struggle, Dr. Mo-

sadeq and his supporters geared their demagoguery to the thesis that

British imperialists were responsible for the misery of most Iranians

and expulsion of the British from the oil concession would bring imme-

diate benefits. Disillusionment with this propaganda was one of the im-

portant factors in the weakening of Dr. Mosadeq’s position during the

first half of 1952. The Prime Minister recognized this popular disaffec-

tion immediately upon his return to power on July 21 and announced a

program of vast social reform, particularly on the problem of land

tenure. While these propaganda influences were in operation, eco-

nomic factors also created feelings of dissatisfaction. Even the primitive

agricultural economy of the majority of Iranians has been affected to

some extent by the effects of the oil dispute. Although the impact of the

loss of oil revenues on Iran’s economy has been comparatively less se-

rious than the effect of such a loss on a more industrial economy, never-

theless there is a sense of hopelessness and frustration in Iran today

which rises directly from the deteriorating economic situation.

Loosening of political and military control of the provinces has re-

sulted from political developments in Tehran and the nationalist at-

tempts to decrease the Army’s prestige and power. The figure of the

Shah which was significant in keeping some concept of central gov-

ernment before all Iranians has been somewhat diminished by recent

events and the spread of anti-monarchial sentiments. United States rep-

resentatives in Iran report increasing social unrest in every area

observed.

Iran’s Military Potential

While reportedly Iran’s military forces are not demoralized and

are still being paid, there is little doubt that the Army’s old political

influence has been greatly diminished. The Shah, who still reportedly

holds the loyalty of the majority of Army officers, has become a sha-

dowy and generally uninfluential figure in the background of political

affairs. Scrutiny of Army ranks gives little reason to hope that a strong

military leader will arise like Naguib Bey in Egypt. However, the Army

is still a potent force for maintaining internal security in Iran and so far

the Mosadeq Government has not taken measures which would de-

stroy the Army’s effectiveness to meet internal situations.

Amid rumors and counter-rumors of British intrigue, the tribes in

Iran continue generally in the old pattern of life and retain about the

same political significance. In their local areas they are regaining some

of their old dominance as the Army’s influence wanes. However, ex-

cept for the Qashqais and to a lesser extent the Bakhtiaris, the tribes

wield only slight political influence on the central government. As yet

no tribal leader has appeared who could be depended upon to main-

tain stability throughout the nation in a situation of chaos.

Economic Situation

Before Iran can achieve any measure of political stability, its

economy must be restored to some measure of health. The loss of oil in-

come can be replaced either by resumed sales of oil abroad or by for-

eign budgetary aid. Such a dole would obviously make political black-

mail and commercial unrealism pay. It would not salve the constant

irritation of the oil dispute nor win friends for the United States in a

country where generosity is regarded with great suspicion. This would

be particularly true if any strings were attached to such a dole either to

control disbursements of the funds or to bring the Iranians to a settle-

ment of the oil dispute. It is far more sound to base a healthy Iranian

economy on sales of Iran’s petroleum resources. Enclosure No. 3 is a

considered review of Iran’s economic situation.

The so-called “blockade” of Iranian oil sales has been largely the

product of (a) commercial concern regarding the price, specifications,

and guaranteed flow of Iranian oil, (b) AIOC legal claims to ownership

of oil products presently stored in Abadan, (c) major oil companies’ co-

operation in refusal to take advantage of the AIOC’s misfortunes,

(d) United States Government discouragement of private American

companies who have shown an interest in purchasing Iranian oil or as-

sisting in operation of the Iranian oil industry. Since the decision of the

ICJ that it had no competence over a dispute between the Iranian sover-

eign government and a private foreign oil company on Iranian terri-

tory, the AIOC legal claim against Iranian oil products is in consider-

March 1952–February 1953

able question and according to informal Department legal opinion

might well not stand up in the courts. Although major oil companies

have made no effort to purchase Iranian oil, interest has been shown by

numerous independents of varying reputation and nationality and by

the Argentine and Brazilian Governments. [1 page missing in original]

British Embassies in Tehran both report that they see little hope of a

“more reasonable” successor to Mosadeq in the foreseeable future.

The communist organization in Iran is growing stronger. Commu-

nist agitation among the unemployed oil workers and communist in-

citement of peasant dissatisfaction against landlords furnish explosive

opportunities for sudden outbreaks of violence. Recent government

land reform decrees have given hope of increased prosperity to masses

of Iranian peasants but Iranian inefficiency and resistance by landlords

will probably prevent for some time any actual effect of this reform

upon the peasants’ prosperity. Although factors for social revolution

are rapidly developing in Iran, the Embassy has reported that the com-

munist organization will probably not attempt an open revolt at this

time but rather will seek to take advantage of a deteriorating situation

by developing their association with left-wing nationalists and by grad-

ually capturing the leadership of the nationalist movement.

These are political factors but their development is based in the

current situation primarily on economic factors. Iran’s deteriorating

economic situation is a problem which must be met before any stability

or any direction of social evolution can be found. Observers differ as to

the time when the communists might take control of the Iranian Gov-

ernment but all agree that if the economic situation continues to deteri-

orate hopelessly, a communist coup must eventually be expected.

The leaders in the National Front are increasingly at odds. Mullah

Kashani’s ascendency to power has undoubtedly fed his known ambi-

tions to be sole authority in Iran. His position in Parliament is such that

he could lead a strong Parliamentary group against Dr. Mosadeq or

any other target he chose. His street organization has been one of the

most important elements in recent nationalist successes. His alliance

with the communist organization during the anti-Qavam riots has ap-

parently not been lasting but Kashani’s over

8 has led him to

declare on various occasions that he could “swallow up” the commu-

nists in any alliance. He has joined hands with the Qashqais in de-

stroying the old clique of top army officers. Upon his return from

Mecca, Kashani can exert a very forceful influence in Iranian affairs in

any direction he desires.

While reportedly Iran’s military forces are not demoralized and

are still being paid, there is little doubt that the Army’s old political in-

fluence has been destroyed. The Shah is now a shadowy and uninfluen-

tial figure very much in the background. Scrutiny of military ranks

gives little reason to hope for a strong military leader like Naguib Bay

in Egypt. Amid rumors and counter-rumors of unrest and British in-

trigue, the tribes in Iran continue generally in the same position as be-

fore. They are strong in their local areas but except possibly for the

Qashqais they wield comparatively little political influence in Tehran.

Certainly no tribal leader has appeared who could be depended upon

to maintain stability throughout the nation in a situation of chaos.

According to information from top officials in the Bank Melli, in-

flation of the note issue is about to begin. Economic analysis has been

that pessimism regarding failure to end the oil dispute and consterna-

tion at the expanded note issue will mean increased financial diffi-

culties to Iran’s economy.

Conclusions:

1. Whether political developments in Iran break up the National

Front or in some way change the individuals in positions of power, na-

tionalist policies as previously enunciated will be maintained. It is even

likely that any successor to Dr. Mosadeq would be a more extreme na-

tionalist than he is and would possibly be more difficult for the West to

support against communist agitation.

2. It is expected that the Iranian Parliament will support the gen-

eral line of response which Dr. Mosadeq has made publicly to the joint

US–UK proposals. It is unlikely although the possibility cannot be dis-

counted that the British will be willing or even able to come much far-

ther forward from the position taken in the proposals delivered to Dr.

Mosadeq on August 30. Such a development would bring about an al-

most complete deadlock in the oil dispute with a large gap still existing

between the British and the Iranian positions. In this eventuality it will

be hardly useful for the United States to continue to press both sides to

come to a mutually satisfactory agreement in the oil dispute, particu-

larly since the United States publicly gave up its position as moderator

when it joined with the British in the joint message of August 30.

3. Before Iran can achieve any measure of political stability, its

economy must be restored to some measure of health by receipt of oil

income. There is of course an alternative of providing Iran with a

March 1952–February 1953

United States Government dole of monthly budgetary aid. Such a dole

would obviously make political blackmail and commercial stubborn-

ness pay well and would not salve the constant irritation of the oil dis-

pute nor would such a dole be likely to win friends for the United States

in Iran since generosity of this nature is regarded with great suspicion

in the Middle East, particularly if any attempt is made to control dis-

bursements of these funds. National income must be increased in Iran

but it should be based upon exploitation of Iran’s own natural

resources.

4. United States policy toward Iran has been influenced by an un-

derstanding that the United Kingdom is responsible for the initiative in

military support of Iran in the event of communist subversion or ag-

gression. This understanding is very questionable in the present situa-

tion. The extensive British organization10 in Iran which was based pri-

marily upon British commercial installations and interests has been

totally destroyed. Public antagonism to the British has been so in-

flamed over the past two years by nationalist propaganda that it is very

doubtful whether any legitimate Iranian Government could request

British assistance in the event of a communist seizure of power. Even

such previously independent pro-western figures as the Shah have

been so reduced in power and prestige that they should not be ex-

pected to act independently of nationalist sentiments even in the face of

a communist coup. Anti-British feeling has, in fact, reached such a

point that many Iranian leaders believe themselves to be sincere in

saying, as Nasser Khan Qashqai said in Washington on September 4,

“We would prefer the Russians to the British”. Other developments in

the Middle East have also strongly affected the British military position

in that area so that it is doubtful that British military intervention in

Iran could be effective even if an Iranian Government were to request

British support.

5. The so-called “blockade” of Iranian oil sales has been based

upon the legal claim of the AIOC to ownership of the oil products pres-

ently stored in Abadan. Legal opinion in the Department of State infor-

mally holds that the decision of the ICJ that it had no jurisdiction over

the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute was based upon a decision that the dis-

pute was not between two nations but between the Iranian sovereign

and a private company on Iranian territory. It is held that a court, de-

ciding upon the AIOC’s claim to ownership of oil lifted by any tanker

from Iran, would be required to discuss the validity of the 1933 oil con-

cession and Iran’s sovereign right to abrogate a contract with a private

company. It is entirely possible, therefore, that many courts would re-

ject the British claim should a tanker be willing to take the legal risk of

lifting Iranian oil.

6. The question of compensation due the AIOC is far from settled.

The gap between the joint US–UK proposals and Dr. Mosadeq’s unoffi-

cial counter-proposals is very wide. It is the conclusion of NEA political

observers that Dr. Mosadeq will not come forward from his position

enunciated on September 7 unless he is so instructed definitely by Par-

liament. It may even be that he does not wish to settle the oil dispute

with the British except on terms of absolute capitulation by the British

to his extreme terms. Therefore, if the British hope to gain any compen-

sation or desire to remain in the market for Iranian oil they will have

capitulated. It is quite true that they have a legal position to maintain,

but there would seem to be little satisfaction in maintaining a legal po-

sition at the expense of losing Iran or at least Iranian oil.

7. It is pertinent here to make an estimate as to the danger and im-

minence of a communist rise to power in Iran. The communist organi-

zation is growing stronger and its natural opponents are growing

weaker. The Shah, who above all else has been anti-communist has lost

most of his political influence. The Army is to some extent demoralized

and was thoroughly cowed in the July 21 riots, at least in Tehran. The

old line senior officers in the Army have recently been purged by Dr.

Mosadeq and it is not yet apparent what type of officers will appear in

senior positions, whether political appointees under Kashani–Qashqai

influence or officers of military quality and forceful character definitely

anti-communist or at least essentially nationalist in motivation. Social

unrest is increasing as are economic difficulties in Iran. Opportunities

for successful action by the communist organization are widening and

if the nationalist leadership splits into antagonistic factions or if the

communists can establish some form of popular front, with leftist na-

tionalists, Iran may have passed a point of no return in its relations with

the communist world. In the estimation of NEA officers, the commu-

nists will probably move slowly, consolidating newly acquired posi-

tions as they move forward. In all likelihood they would prefer to infil-

trate and pervert the nationalist movement rather than risk a head-on

collision. Time, therefore, plays into communist hands so long as the

economic situation continues to deteriorate without oil revenue and so

long as there is continued political instability in Iran. Therefore it is a

conclusion of NEA observers that so long as Mosadeq does not dispair

of selling his oil to the West in some way and so long as he can squeeze

money out of the National Bank, currency inflation and from recently

imposed taxes to pay his civil servants and armed forces, neither he nor

his nationalist colleagues will deliberately bring the communists into

an alliance. Based upon these psychological, political and financial as-

sumptions, it can be estimated that a nationalist government will nei-

March 1952–February 1953

ther bring in the communists nor fall victim to a communist revolt be-

fore next March as a very general date.

8. The above conclusion does not allow us to sit idly by for the next

few months. On the contrary now that the deadlock of the oil dispute

has been publicly exposed and the previous United States policy as

moderator has been abandoned, it is time to develop a new policy for

action to meet the Iranian situation.

Recommendations:

It is recommended that the British Government be informed that

the United States Government considers the oil dispute to have reached

a deadlock which can only be broken if the British set aside or

somehow make an arrangement with the Iranians to settle claims for

compensation and initiate arrangements to buy Iranian oil. It should be

pointed out that strategic considerations which must include reap-

praisal of military responsibilities in the Persian Gulf area have brought

the United States Government to the belief that consideration of main-

taining Iran independent from the communist world must override

legal considerations in the oil dispute. It should be pointed out that the

“blockade” which has been maintained by major oil companies in def-

erence to the AIOC’s legal claim to Iranian oil is breaking and that the

United States Government considers it necessary for the strategic con-

siderations described above to assist and encourage sales of Iranian oil

setting aside the British legal claim.

2. It is recommended that the Department of State consult with of-

ficers of important American oil companies to explore any possibilities

of American or other companies buying Iranian oil if the British are un-

able or unwilling to meet Iranian demands. It has been reported by the

Director of PED that even if the major oil companies do not purchase

Iranian oil and assuming that British claim to Iranian oil has been set

aside or is disregarded by the purchasers, Iran could sell between

100,000 and 150,000 barrels of oil per day. Such sales would probably

be made to Argentina, China (Formosa), Belgium, Spain, Italy and Yu-

goslavia who are not bound by any permanent tie-ups with the interna-

tional oil industry. The market would have to be built up gradually

over a period of time and the Iranians would probably not be able to

sell a maximum 150,000 barrels per day immediately. Some sales

would probably also be made to the International Cooperative Petro-

leum Association which supplies oil to a number of European coun-

tries. Finally, industries such as City Service and brokers with un-

known backing such as Denver, Consolidated have indicated definite

interest in purchasing Iranian oil.

It would also seem that the market for Iranian oil probably could

be expanded. Brazil has already expressed an interest in purchasing

Iranian crude for its refineries and tankers presently being constructed.

These would be owned by private Brazilian interests and by the Bra-

zilian Government. In regard to availability of tankers, the Depart-

ment’s experts have concluded that there are sufficient independent

tankers available to move 100,000 to 150,000 barrels per day of Iranian

oil.

3. It is recommended that the United States Ambassador in Tehran

be instructed to inform Dr. Mosadeq that the United States Govern-

ment is not in the oil business but that it stands ready if requested to en-

courage private U.S. firms to assist Iran to produce and sell its oil. He

should be authorized to state that the United States, if requested, will

explore with major and independent oil companies various means of

buying and marketing Iranian oil in substantial quantities. He should

state that independent American technicians will be encouraged to as-

sist in the production and refining of Iranian oil although the U.S. Gov-

ernment will not contract for them. In this connection it is noted that

Drilexo has already been asked by the Iranian Government to handle

the drilling and pipe-line operations for the NIOC and a reputable

American engineering consultant has been asked to assist in the man-

agement of the oil industry.

4. It is recommended that simultaneously or immediately after

Ambassador Henderson’s de´marche, the United States should publish

a statement of its attitude toward the Iranian situation, briefly re-

viewing in general terms the numerous U.S. efforts to bring the parties

in the oil dispute together and declaring that it seems impossible at the

moment to go farther in this role of moderator. Ambassador Hen-

derson’s instructions should be publicized with the statement that the

United States Government hopes that Iran will utilize its natural re-

sources by making commercial arrangements with oil companies, as-

suming that the products of the Iranian oil industry would be available

for purchase on reasonable terms by the AIOC as well as others in such

a path as to minimize the disruption of normal commercial flows in the

international oil trade. The statement could contain a declaration that

this United States action does not imply judgment on the merits of

British claims in the oil dispute and reference could be made to the pro-

vision in the Iranian nationalization law which sets aside a percentage

of oil revenue on the assumption that an eventual settlement of British

and Iranian claims arising out of the oil dispute will be reached through

amicable negotiation.

5. It is recommended that the U.S. go slowly in the situation re-

garding the question of budgetary aid to the Mosadeq Government. Dr.

Mosadeq’s relations with the free world have been characterized by an

assumption that strategic dangers implied in the loss of Iran to the free

world can be used to cloud any issue of a primarily commercial nature.

122.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Iran Branch, Near East

and Africa Division (Leavitt) to the Chief of the Near East

and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)

Washington, September 22, 1952.

SUBJECT

Program to Support the Shah

1. The Objective: The establishment by the Shah of an Iranian Gov-

ernment willing and able to: (a) undertake necessary reforms; (b) effec-

tively oppose Communism and extreme nationalism; (c) collaborate

with the U.S. in such aids as we offer; and (d) accept a reasonable settle-

ment of the oil controversy.

2. The Thornburg Program: Mr. Thornburg has recommended an

early, direct approach to the Shah for the purpose of inducing him to

lead and carry out what in effect would be a military coup. The Shah

would be assured by the U.S. and U.K. of full moral support, sufficient

material assistance to tide Iran over until the oil issue was amicably set-

tled, and detailed advice with respect to: (a) the implementation of the

coup; (b) the formation of a new Government; (c) the carrying out of

necessary reforms; and (d) the settlement of the oil controversy.

3. From what we know of the Shah’s character, and particularly in

view of his attitude during the July crisis, it seems to me extremely un-

likely that he would seriously consider leading a military coup, no

matter what inducements in the way of economic and military aid were

held out to him. It also seems very probable that, if attempted in the

present political situation, such a coup would arouse such bitter oppo-

sition that the new Shah-appointed Government would have to employ

extreme dictatorial methods in order to continue to survive. Even in the

unlikely event that the Shah could be induced to adopt strong-arm

methods initially, I find it difficult to believe that he would be willing to

continue to sanction such methods indefinitely.

4. A further weakness in Thornburg’s program, it seems to me, is

the role assigned to the U.S. and the U.K. Official U.S., and particularly

U.K., support of the Shah’s new Government would lay the Shah open

to charges of being a Western puppet, and would greatly increase

rather than reduce opposition to him. Detailed U.S. and/or U.K. advice

to the Shah or members of the new Government would have the same

effect and could not safely be done, except on an extremely secure co-

vert basis, until some time after the new Government had come to

power.

5. Basic Assumptions: In attempting to devise a course of action to

achieve the objective stated in paragraph 1, I think we must plan on the

basis of the following assumptions:

(a) The Shah must necessarily play a key role in the establishment

of a new Government.

(b) The Shah will consent to play a key role only on condition that

more or less constitutional means are adopted and that he is convinced

the contemplated action will have wide popular support.

(c) The course of action must have the support of significant ele-

ments in the National Front and among conservative political groups.

(d) The course of action must have the whole-hearted support of

the Army, which, because of the Shah’s characteristic indecision, may

have to assume the responsibility of initiating the action which will

overthrow the old and bring in the new Government.

Recommended Action:

6. Initial Approach to the Shah:

(a) Send Ambassador Allen to Iran in the near future3 under cover

of a Middle East Inspection tour to induce the Shah to undertake a care-

March 1952–February 1953

fully planned program to increase his popularity and prestige. The

Shah would be told that it is our hope that by increasing his influence

he will be able, by constitutional means, to offset the dangerous influ-

ence of such extremists as Kashani and thereby not only increase the

Government’s stability but also strengthen the Pahlevi dynasty.

(b) The program to increase the Shah’s popularity and prestige

should be conducted in such a way as to convince the Iranian public

that the Shah is as strongly motivated with respect to reform, oil nation-

alization, and the elimination of British influence as any Iranian polit-

ical leader. The objective would be to condition the Iranian public in

such a way that in the event of a crisis the public would be as willing to

accept the leadership of the Shah as to accept the leadership of Mos-

sadeq, Kashani, or any other leader.

(c) The program would require the following action by the Shah:

(1) A greatly increased number of public appearances and public

statements.

(2) Unreserved identification with nationalist aims.

(3) Widely publicized visits to the oil areas, factories, villages, ex-

perimental farms, tribal groups, etc.

(4) Determined action to obtain cooperation from other members

of royal family in the program and to curb all activity by them im-

pairing the prestige of the dynasty.

(5) While fully supporting Mossadeq (at least initially), deter-

mined efforts to cultivate conservative religious, and moderate polit-

ical, leaders and to strengthen his ties with the Army.

(6) Insofar as possible, avoidance of actions which would give rise

to charges of political meddling. However, he should not be intimi-

dated by such charges into abandoning any of the above-listed main

features of the program.

7. Covert Support for the Shah’s Program:

(a) The foregoing program conducted by the Shah should be sup-

plemented by a covert CIA program. Every effort should be made [1½

lines not declassified] to increase the Shah’s popularity and prestige and

to reduce the influence of such leaders as Kashani, Makki, and Mos-

sadeq. Part of this program will have to be carefully timed since it

would be dangerous to reduce influence of Mossadeq before making

fairly certain that the Shah’s program was proving successful.

(b) [2 lines not declassified]

8. Official U.S. Policy:

(a) Unless there were real prospects of an oil settlement, every ef-

fort should be made on the official level to de-emphasize the oil issue

and thus remove the international spot-light from Mossadeq. It is sug-

gested, for instance, that the U.S. and U.K. insist that any further oil dis-

cussions be held in London or Washington rather than in Teheran. At

the same time it might be advisable for Ambassador Henderson to at-

tempt to see more of the Shah and less of Mossadeq, although here

again (as in paragraph 7(a) timing would be all-important. Moreover,

nothing should be done by U.S. officials, after Allen’s visit, to suggest

that the U.S. is in any way responsible for the Shah’s actions.

(b) The U.K. should be induced by all possible means to remain as

inconspicuous as possible. At the same time an attempt should be

made to draw up with the British proposals for an oil settlement which

the Shah would be likely to approve.

9. Covert Contact with Army: The Teheran Field Station should es-

tablish contact with influential Army leaders. The initial purpose of this

operation would be to develop a network within the Army dedicated to

maintaining the loyalty of the Army to the Shah. [3 lines not declassified]

10. Intermediate Approach to the Shah:

(a) This approach should be made only after the earlier phases of

the program had developed according to plan.

(b) The Shah should be secretly informed what the U.S. and U.K.

would be prepared to do in the event a “responsible” Government

came to power. He should be informed of the “reasonable” oil settle-

ment already agreed to by the U.S. and U.K., but that the proposals

would be communicated only to a “responsible” Government.

(c) He should be informed that in the event a “responsible” Gov-

ernment came to power, it would be provided with emergency aid

until an oil settlement could be negotiated.

11. Decisive Action to Establish New Government:

(a) The Shah should be urged to use constitutional prerogative to

establish a new Government.

(b) If under suitable circumstances the Shah fails to act, military

leaders should be induced to carry out a coup in the Shah’s name, even

if they do not have his authority for such action.

(c) As soon as the situation is under control, the Army should turn

back to the Shah the responsibility of forming a new Government and

directing its policies.

(d) The U.S. and U.K. should scrupulously avoid giving any indi-

cation that: (1) they had anything to do with the coup; or (2) they con-

sidered the coup a development favoring their interests.

(e) After some weeks a U.S.–Iran loan of substantial proportion

should be negotiated and the first installment paid. While the Shah

would understand that further installments would be contingent on a

satisfactory solution of the oil issue, there should be no public indica-

tion that the loan and the oil controversy were in any way connected.

March 1952–February 1953

(f) An oil settlement should be negotiated secretly and imple-

mented only after reform and development programs (as outlined by

Mr. Thornburg) were well under way.

John H. Leavitt

123.

Memorandum for the Record by Donald Wilber of the Iran

Branch, Near East and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans,

Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, September 23, 1952.

1. Let me get the negative comments out of the way first. As

follows, they are so numerous and important as to cast serious doubt

on the practicality of the program:

a. Shah’s reaction to proposals that he be built up and that he even-

tually take some decisive steps.

The Shah’s record for indecision, then deciding to take a positive

stand and at the last minute failing to go thru with it, has a stronger im-

pact to observers in the field than those here. I believe the field feels

that he cannot be counted on in any positive way. If headquarters

agrees with this position then the program is out before it is started.

b. Assumption that eventually Iran and the U.K. will reach an

agreement on the oil issue.

Your program requires this assumption and I wonder if this is cor-

rect. Will there ever be a negotiated solution? Will not Iran simply

make an arrangement with Jones or others and not really care whether

any solution is reached?

c. Assumption that the Army may be used in support of the Shah’s

efforts or in an actual coup.

Certainly up to a few months ago there were highly placed ele-

ments in the Army who would support the Shah and—given the op-

portunity—oppose extreme nationalism. These were largely generals

who had been the mainstay of the Army under Razmara and who had

been removed from their positions after his murder. However, al-

though we seem to lack the facts, it is most probable that the current

Mossadeq purge of the Army will get rid of all of them. And in addi-

tion, the known pro-British officers. This being the case, who will be left

to contact or influence?

2. Positive approach.

I don’t believe the program to support the Shah will work. What

then do we do?

124.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, September 28, 1952.

1309. 1. Rumors unconfirmed but nevertheless disquieting since

some of them appear fairly circumstantial continue to circulate re

growing cooperation between Kashani and Tudeh. Yesterday after-

noon we were informed by one source that 90 minutes previously long

negotiation between Kashani–Tudeh had come successful conclusion.

Tudeh promised give Kashani full support (perhaps including mone-

tary). Kashani would within near future endeavor by parliamentary

methods to become Primin. In such capacity he would expel US mili-

tary advisers, close US Consulates, and curtail activities of other Amer-

icans at least in North Iran. He would also endeavor organize anti-

western front in Moslem world along lines of “anti-imperialist leagues”

of bygone days in which many prominent Asian leaders, including

Nehru, had participated. This source not thoroughly tested and its info

may be incorrect. Nevertheless in view Kashani’s recent activities and

statements we cannot dismiss this story entirely. We are therefore

seeking confirmation.

2. Arab Minister told me last night that several days ago Kashani in

presence visiting religious leader from Minister’s country had strongly

defended Tudeh as loyal Moslem organization; Kashani had main-

tained he would not be happy until he had rid Iran and other ME

Moslem countries of westerners who had been interfering too long in

Moslem affairs; and that he had assurances that if necessary he could

obtain aid of thirty million Moslems in Soviet Union to help him in this

work.

3. Pak Amb who is ardent Shiah continues postpone leaving Iran

for his new post at Ankara. He is showing tendencies to become pro-

gressively fanatical in support of Kashani. Two evenings ago in conver-

sation with Yugoslav Min and myself he maintained Tudeh was com-

posed Moslems; therefore could never be under communist control; US

and UK responsible for present situation Iran and had only themselves

to blame if Kashani would find it necessary look north for support.

When I raised question re US responsibility he said US had not made

sufficient efforts to change attitude UK. He insisted his Govt fully sup-

ported his views re partial responsibility US for situation here and, be-

coming more excited, he said he prepared issue public statement at

once to that effect. He expressed pleasure Zafrullah had welcomed in-

vitation Kashani to ME Moslem Conference and said all Moslems must

stand together during this trying period.

4. My impression is that Arab diplomats here in general have no

admiration for Kashani but fear that in their various countries there

might be anti-western or leftist Moslem groups who will support and

attend his projected conference despite attitude their respective govts.

Dept please rpt Moscow.

Henderson

125.

Monthly Report Prepared in the Office of Policy

Coordination, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence

Agency

Washington, September 1952.

[Omitted here is part of the report unrelated to Iran.]

IRAN

The possibility of the rise to power by the politically ambitious

Kashani increased during September. Kashani returned from Mecca

and began to organize various anti-Mossadeq political, military and re-

ligious factions. [4 lines not declassified] Efforts to induce Kashani to take

a strong anti-Soviet stand have failed, although Moslem clerics in Is-

5, Office of Policy Coordination (OPC) History. Top Secret.

126.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Political Action

Division, Directorate of Plans ([name not declassified]) to the

Acting Chief of the Political and Psychological Warfare

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

([name not declassified])

Washington, October 1, 1952.

SUBJECT

Attached Program to Support the Shah, from NE–4

1. If the briefing on Thornburg in our last meeting with NEA was

inadequate, [name not declassified] will forward a brief biography at

your request. As you will see from the attachments to the main paper,

Thornburg is full of ideas if occasionally vague as to their implementa-

tion and not always aware of area problems.

2. As for the program, I find it basically sound but “sensitive” and,

with due regard for proper operational security, most difficult to phase.

3. The appearance of George Allen on a general Middle Eastern

tour is bound to draw Soviet fire from the onset which, however, ought

to dissipate to some extent by the time he gets to Iran. What Allen can

do with the willy-nilly Shah is the moot question.

4. Other problems that you undoubtedly will be interested in are:

a. The question of the British. It seems to me that we cannot take

unilateral action in Iran without, at least, their concurrence. It will cer-

tainly require considerable diplomacy in winning them over to this

plan.

b. [1 paragraph (3½ lines) not declassified]

c. Timing will be a vital problem once the program is translated

into a project.

5. Once you have reviewed this program, the obvious next step is

to get Byroade or Jernegan in State to study it.

[name not declassified]

classified] to Kermit Roosevelt that reads: “Kim—will appreciate your keeping me in-

formed of the progress of the proposal.”

March 1952–February 1953

Attachment

Memorandum From a Consultant to the Near East and Africa

Division ([name not declassified]) to the Chief of the Near

East and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)

October 9, 1952.

SUBJECT

Comments on Suggested NE–4 Program to Support the Shah

I agree with NE–4’s estimate of the Shah’s character, which is the

key to the success or failure of such a program. [2½ lines not declassified]

Accordingly, it would appear that a one-shot approach by Ambassador

Allen would have at best an ephemeral effect on the Shah’s morale and

determination. There seems to be some possibility, however, that

Allen’s appointment as chief of mission, with the opportunity of re-

newing his close and influential friendship with the Shah, might pro-

vide a continuing stimulus and incentive to the latter. The State Depart-

ment has in the past given some unenthusiastic thought to the

reassignment of Allen to Tehran, but NEA thought there were strong

disadvantages in returning an ambassador to a post which he had pre-

viously held. The implied disapproval of Amb. Henderson which such

an appointment would entail would probably also be a serious deter-

rent from the Department’s point of view.

In any event, at the present time and for the foreseeable future, it

seems doubtful in the extreme that any action by the Shah could go be-

yond the excellent suggestions on p. 3 (para. 6.c). Even the possibility of

these limited actions gives rise to some doubt, in view of the Prime

Minister’s attitude towards the Shah who, at least for a time, was virtu-

ally a prisoner who was discouraged from contacts with foreign chiefs

of mission. Nevertheless, there would certainly be advantages in

urging the Shah to undertake the tasks set forth in para. 6.c, both as a

means of diluting the influence of the other contenders for power and

as a means of gauging realistically the prospects for more positive ac-

tion by him at some future time.

[2 lines not declassified] In particular, however, our efforts should

be directed towards establishing contacts with Army elements, since

the Army’s capabilities for taking positive action are wholly unclear

and these require careful examination as a prerequisite to appraising

the real prospects of the program. Such examination would necessarily

be a time-consuming operation, but an essential one.

127.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

week September. Dissem: [less than 1 line not declassified].

1. It is being rumored Tehran that an agreement has been reached

between Kashani and Tudeh to bring in Kashani or Kashani puppet as

premier in place Mohammed Mossadegh possibly within next 30 days.

2. Mossadegh fully aware above but to date has taken no measure

to forestall.

3. Faced with threat Kashani Tudeh coalition, Baqai’s newspaper

Shahed has taken unequivocal stand support Mossadegh which repre-

sents reversal Baqai policy which in past several weeks has been closer

aligned with Kashani than with Mossadegh.

founded and is seriously concerned. However also believes other

Political Activities—Iran. Secret; Security Information.

commented that “Growing wave of rumors on replacement Mossadeq all link Kashani as

prime mover in ouster Mossadeq. While Zahedi most frequently cited as Kashani choice

for Prime Minister, Busheri, Kazemi and Baghai also mentioned. While Station not dis-

counting possibility military junta might ultimately make unconstitutional bid seize

power it still considered highly unlikely such an attempt would succeed.” It went on to

say: “(A) Shah would not cooperate, in fact would work prevent coup and (B) None of

present military leaders are considered to have courage to try or stature to rally enough

support. . . . Station believes Mossadeq may not be on the way out. Mossadeq is still the

most powerful political figure in Iran.” (Ibid.)

March 1952–February 1953

prominent political figures national front will follow Baqai lead and

that army and Shah are firmly committed to Mossadegh.

5. For Wash only: Source above [less than 1 line not declassified].

128.

Draft Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense

Washington, undated.

MODIFICATIONS OF NSC 107/2

PROPOSED BY THE SENIOR DEFENSE MEMBER

Paragraph 2 a.

In the first sentence strike the clause “primarily to the Shah as the

only present source of continuity of leadership”.

Paragraph 2 b.

Strike the present paragraph and substitute the following:

“Take the necessary measures to help Iran to start up her oil in-

dustry and to secure markets for her oil under arrangements which

provide for reasonable compensation to the British for the loss of their

oil properties. Such measures should include substantial, immediate,

economic assistance to Iran in the form of a loan secured by oil or

through the purchase of oil, on condition that the Iranian Government

provide satisfactory assurances that the amount of compensation to be

paid to the British for the properties which were nationalized would be

settled by international arbitration.”

Paragraph 4

Strike this paragraph and substitute the following:

“In the light of the importance of Middle Eastern oil, the present

dangerous situation in Iran, the failure of British policy and lack of

British capabilities in Iran, increasing United States influence in the

Middle East and increasing United States strength, the United States

should take action to prevent Iran from falling to communism, even if

this involves acting independently of the United Kingdom and the risk

of damaging our close relations with the United Kingdom. The United

States should be prepared, if necessary, to accept primary responsi-

bility for Iran, and for taking the initiative in the military support of

Iran in the event of communist aggression or attempted subversion.”

Paragraphs 5 and 5–a.

These paragraphs should be revised as follows:

“5. The United States should be prepared, wherever possible in

conjunction with the United Kingdom and other allies, to counter pos-

sible communist subversion in Iran, and in event of either attempted or

actual communist seizure of power in one or more of the provinces, or

in Teheran, to take, at the request of the legal Iranian Government, po-

litical, economic, and, if necessary, military action, including the dis-

patch of United States forces, to prevent such seizure. Plans and prepa-

rations should include:

“a. Correlation of plans, where appropriate, with the United

Kingdom and other allies.”

Paragraph 7–e

Strike this paragraph and substitute the following:

“e. Provide such military mate´riel and deploy such forces to the

general area as can appropriately be made available without jeopar-

dizing the security of the United States or areas of greater strategic im-

portance to the United States in the light of the recommendations of the

Joint Chiefs of Staff at the time.”

March 1952–February 1953

129.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans (Roosevelt) to the Deputy

Director for Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

(Becker)

Washington, October 6, 1952.

SUBJECT

Proposed Modifications of NSC 107/22

1. As you requested in our conversation on Friday, 3 October, I am

forwarding this comment on the proposed modifications.

2. Generally speaking we would strongly favor the changes sug-

gested by the Defense Department if the United States is actually in a

position to back the position it would take. We are inclined to be du-

bious, however, as to the effect locally of assignment of United States

token forces to the region. Such assignment might make the Soviet

Union even more reluctant to intervene openly in the Middle East, but I

believe similar reluctance could be instilled by other means, such as a

declaration that the United States feels that the continued independ-

ence of Iran is essential to its own security, and interference therewith

would be regarded as a causus belli. I am very much afraid that United

130.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Inspection and Review

Branch, Directorate of Plans ([name not declassified]) to the

Assistant Chief of Political and Psychological Warfare,

Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency ([name not

declassified])

Washington, October 7, 1952.

131.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans (Roosevelt) to the Deputy

Director for Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

(Becker)

Washington, October 9, 1952.

SUBJECT

1. The most notable aspect of this draft is the emphasis it places on

“special political measures”. It seems to me that we have taken the

place of the token forces contemplated in Defense’s proposal.

National Security Council 107 Series. Secret; Security Information. The memorandum

was sent through Wisner.

overthrow of the communist government.” (National Archives, RG 273, Records of the

National Security Council, Policy Papers, Box 210, NSC 136—US Pol re Iran)

March 1952–February 1953

2. This is very flattering but it seems to me that if the NSC proposes

to depend heavily upon our operations, they had better have a clear un-

derstanding of what our operational capabilities are. I would suggest,

therefore, the appointment of an ad hoc committee with representation

from State, Defense and this Agency to assess U.S. capabilities for ac-

tion in the face of eventualities contemplated in paragraphs 5 and 6 of

the draft paper. You might also wish to consider the desirability of

having a member of the DD/P staff accompany you in discussion of

this paper.

Kermit Roosevelt

132.

Special Estimate

SE–33

Washington, October 14, 1952.

PROSPECTS FOR SURVIVAL OF MOSSADEQ REGIME IN IRAN

Conclusions

1. On the basis of available evidence we believe that the Mossadeq

Government can survive at least for the next six months unless ill-

health or death removes Mossadeq from the Iranian political scene.

2. If Kashani should come to power, the most probable result

would be the progressive deterioration of Iran, possibly leading to the

eventual assumption of power by the Tudeh.

Estimate

The Oil Issue

3. An early settlement of the oil dispute with the UK is unlikely.

Political forces which Mossadeq himself encouraged in the past now re-

quire him to insist upon greater concessions than the British have given

SE–33 Prospects for Survival of Mossadeq Regime in Iran. Secret. The intelligence organi-

zations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff

participated with the Central Intelligence Agency in the preparation of this estimate. All

members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in this estimate on Octo-

ber 8.

any indication of finding acceptable. On the other hand, Mossadeq’s

prestige would be greatly enhanced if he succeeded in effecting the sale

of oil despite the British boycott.

The Economic Situation

4. The loss of oil revenues has not seriously damaged the Iranian

economy, primarily because of an excellent harvest, although there

have been some price increases, curtailment of urban business activ-

ities, and reduction of imports. However, the financial position of the

government has been seriously affected. Unless the government re-

stores revenues from the sale of oil, substantial budgetary cuts and/or

extensive internal borrowing and further currency expansion are

inevitable.

Factors of Political Power

5. a. Recent events have produced far-reaching changes in the tra-

ditional factors of political power in Iran. As a practical matter, the

Shah has almost completely lost his capability for independent action,

but is a useful tool for Mossadeq, should need arise. The formerly dom-

inant landowning class has also lost political initiative. The Armed

Forces, if given effective direction, are probably capable of coping with

any type of domestic disturbance presently foreseeable. We do not be-

lieve that their effectiveness has been materially reduced by Mos-

sadeq’s changes in the high command. Mossadeq’s popular prestige

makes him still the dominant political force in Iran.

b. A major threat to Mossadeq’s continued control over the hetero-

geneous National Front arises from the activities of Mullah Kashani,

ambitious Moslem leader. Kashani’s extreme intransigeance on the oil

issue and his uncompromising demands for the termination of all for-

eign interference in Iran severely limit Mossadeq’s freedom of action.

He has successfully separated many National Front politicians from

Mossadeq. Although Kashani has expressed optimism publicly with

respect to his ability to control Tudeh, he is basically opposed to their

aims, probably can weigh with shrewdness and accuracy the potential

value and danger to him of Tudeh support, and is not likely under

present conditions to seek their help.

c. While the Tudeh Party has become stronger in recent months, it

is almost certainly incapable by itself of overthrowing the government

by force or subversion at present. Although the Tudeh Party has an or-

ganization, has a significant degree of favorable public opinion, and

has the cooperation of the USSR, it still lacks a legal status and the

power in the Majlis and control of the key Cabinet positions which

would be necessary to take over the government by constitutional

means. The Tudeh Party will, however, probably support Kashani in

March 1952–February 1953

the belief that if Kashani were in power its opportunities for taking

over the country would be improved.

Likelihood of an Attempt to Overthrow Mossadeq

6. Since Mossadeq’s return to power in July 1952 there have been

continuous reports of plots to overthrow him. Kashani and Army of-

ficers are frequently mentioned as leaders, but the reports conflict on

matters of essential detail. It does not seem likely that Kashani will seek

to replace Mossadeq so long as no clear issues of disagreement arise be-

tween them, so long as his influence on Mossadeq remains strong, and

so long as Mossadeq is willing to assume responsibility. So far as a mili-

tary coup is concerned, we have no evidence to indicate that any group

of officers has the capability which the initiation of a successful coup

would require.

Probable Outcome of an Attempt to Overthrow Mossadeq

7. In the event that an attempt is made to overthrow Mossadeq, the

following means are available:

a. Violent Means:

i. Military Coup: A military coup against Mossadeq is not likely to

succeed because Mossadeq has had the opportunity to eliminate ele-

ments in the Army hostile to him, and none of the Army personnel re-

ported as currently being involved in plots against Mossadeq are be-

lieved to have the prestige or influence to obtain the necessary support

from the Army.

ii. Mob Violence: A contest in the streets between the forces sup-

porting Mossadeq and Kashani would be bitter and destructive. The

lineup of forces would depend in large part on the specific issues in-

volved at the time the rioting broke out. If there should be a break now

between Mossadeq and Kashani, we believe that Mossadeq could rally

greater forces than Kashani. The lineup would probably be as follows:

(a) Mossadeq: the bulk of the National Front rank and file in the

cities; Dr. Baghai’s Iranian Workers’ Party with their organized street-

fighting forces; the Somka (Fascist) Party, provided the Tudeh sup-

ported Kashani; the Pan Iranian Party; and the Army and part of the

Police Force, providing they were given specific and direct orders.

(b) Kashani: his followers in the National Front; the Bazaar mobs

and the bands organized by his son; the Fedayan terrorist organization

of Moslem extremists; the Tudeh and its various subsidiaries; and pos-

sibly some support from the tribes if the Army sided with Mossadeq.

iii. Assassination: Assassination of Mossadeq would probably re-

sult in the accession to power of Kashani. (Note: Kashani would prob-

ably also come to power if Mossadeq should retire or die a natural

death.)

b. Constitutional means: An attempt may be made to overthrow

Mossadeq after the Majlis reconvenes on 9 October. It appears unlikely

that Kashani could persuade the Majlis to vote to oust Mossadeq in

view of the absence of any issue which could serve as a basis for at-

tacking Mossadeq, the resources at Mossadeq’s disposal for controlling

the deliberations of the Majlis and Mossadeq’s record as champion of

nationalist aspirations. Moreover, Mossadeq in opposition would

possess much of the strength which enabled him to regain power in

July 1952, and his return to office would not be unlikely.

Consequences of the Assumption of Power by Kashani

8. If Kashani were to come to power, the consequences would de-

pend upon the circumstances of the take-over and upon the group or

groups supporting him at that time. Kashani might come to power by:

a. A vote of the Majlis unseating Mossadeq.

b. Assuming control over another National Front regime if Mos-

sadeq were removed from the political scene.

c. A deal with the Tudeh Party by which Tudeh was given repre-

sentation in the government.

d. A coalition with various disgruntled Army leaders and conser-

vative elements.

If Kashani should come to power, the probable net result in Iran

would be a situation worse for Western interests than the current one.

The regime would be more difficult than the present one to deal with

on the oil dispute and more resistant to all Western influence. The effec-

tiveness of the government and the security forces would decline, as

would the economic situation. There is no assurance that the regime

would not be overthrown by Mossadeq, by internal dissension, or by a

military coup, with trend changes we cannot presently predict. How-

ever, the probable ultimate consequence of a Kashani regime would be

the progressive general deterioration of Iran possibly leading to the

eventual assumption of power by the Tudeh.

133.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Byroade) to the

Deputy Under Secretary of State (Matthews)

Washington, October 15, 1952.

SUBJECT

Comments on the British Paper entitled “The Communist Danger in Persia”

Summary:

Although the British paper under reference appears generally fac-

tually correct and its basic conclusions are not unsound, there is a dis-

tinct impression in NEA that the paper does not come to grips with the

true nature of the Iranian problem nor are the solutions proposed

always realistic.

I. Analysis

1. Present Situation—Although this section is somewhat oversim-

plified, there is no point of fact or conclusion with which NEA does not

agree.

2. Possible Openings for the Tudeh—NEA has no reason to dispute

the facts presented or the conclusion, but suggests that the wording of

the penultimate paragraph should be clarified.

3. Persian Action to Forestall these Developments—It is NEA’s opinion

that this section suffers from oversimplification and can be confused

with section 4 as regards possible eventualities and possible courses of

action. In this connection, it would be useful to review the six contin-

rent revision.

II. Possible Courses of Action

4(a) There is real question whether “whatever course of action is

chosen, absolute Anglo-United States solidarity is essential”. If this is

taken to mean that prior consultation, general agreement and mutual

Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Stutesman and cleared by Jernegan. Copies were

sent to Joyce, Nitze, Bonbright, and Roosevelt. A handwritten note in the upper right-

hand corner of the memorandum reads: “Comments passed on to Mr. Jernegan,

known hand.

understanding between the United States and United Kingdom are es-

sential, NEA has no objection. However, if the sentence means that

there is no circumstance in which the United States or the United

Kingdom should carry out a course of action alone in Iran, there is

ground for much discussion. It is entirely possible that the Anglo-

Iranian dispute might reach such a phase of deadlock and animosity

that it would be in the interest of the free world for the United States to

remain capable of independent action vis-a`-vis Iran.

4(b) If there is no implication that an anti-nationalist dictator could

be successful, NEA has no objection to this statement. A “suitable

figure” in NEA’s opinion must be someone capable of identifying him-

self with nationalist issues and emotions although he might gradually

deflect the present course of nationalist fanaticism.

4(c) There is a tendency today utterly to disregard the Shah’s im-

portance in the Iranian political scene. As a matter of fact, although he

certainly does not exert any independent influence, he is of consider-

able usefulness to Dr. Mosadeq at this time as an ally. There is still re-

portedly considerable loyalty to the Shah in the armed forces, and,

throughout Iran, there remains the ancient identification of the Central

Government with the figure of the Great King. The Shah does not exert

independent influence on the course of events but he is and will con-

tinue to be an important pawn in any political maneuvers.

4(d) NEA concurs in the belief that a tribal revolt prior to the estab-

lishment of a Tudeh regime would only create further chaos and would

probably end only by serving communist interests in Iran.

4(e) It has been NEA’s understanding that a campaign of “covert

propaganda aimed at stiffening the government and increasing its anti-

Tudeh activities” has been in progress for some time. Certainly this

course of action should be continued.

4(f) The British paper appears to avoid a fundamental problem in

the Iranian situation which, in summary, is that any foreign financial

aid to Iran necessarily affects the course of the Anglo-Iranian oil dis-

pute. While the paper admits that Iran “will certainly eventually need

external help” it insists “it is essential that there should be complete

Anglo-United States solidarity”. If this “solidarity” supports a policy

which resists giving “external help”, there is a paradox which should

be pointed out in any discussions with the British. It is suggested that

the British be asked to explain exactly what they mean in Paragraph

There are possible courses of action which are not listed in the

British paper, because they could not develop from a position of ob-

vious and absolute Anglo-United States solidarity. Two such courses of

action are listed below:

March 1952–February 1953

A. Without requiring commitments from Mosadeq regarding a set-

tlement of the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute, the United States could sup-

port the Mosadeq Government with substantial financial aid and a pro-

gram of economic development.

B. The United States Government could take a position that Amer-

ican or other concerns should no longer be discouraged from assisting

in the operation of the Iranian oil industry or from purchasing Iranian

oil products. This could be based upon a decision that government ne-

gotiation has failed to break a deadlock in the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute

and free enterprise alone can bring commercial forces to bear upon

both parties to the dispute, eventually proving that it is in the interest of

both the Iranians and the British to make some arrangements whereby

Iranian oil is sold to a large oil company, preferably the Anglo-Iranian

Oil Company.

Another possible difficulty in maintaining solidarity could arise

out of the fact that there is a quantity of evidence that many British offi-

cials believe that Mosadeq is the worst possible Premier Iran could

have and that his ability to resist the Tudeh Party is nil. This is in com-

plete contrast to a United States view that the nationalist Mosadeq Gov-

ernment constitutes at least a chance, perhaps the last one, to combat

Tudeh rule and that although Mosadeq is admittedly very weak, there

is no better alternative presently in sight.

5. Persian-Soviet Relations

5(a) NEA concurs.

5(b) It does not seem to be useful in this fluid and vague situation

to reassert “western interest in Persia’s independence”. On the con-

trary, this does not seem a good time to wring our hands publicly over

Iranian developments, a move which would support Iranian vanity

and irresponsibility and would not measurably affect Soviet decisions

about aggression in Iran. In no circumstances, however, should the

United States allow the Soviets to obtain an impression that communist

pressure upon Iran would not produce dangerous reactions.

5(c) Since NEA does not believe that Soviet interests in Iran derive

primarily from Russian suspicions of “aggressive western influence”, it

seems naive to assume that the Russians would lessen their support of

the Tudeh if the West showed an inclination also to restrict its interest

in Iran. In fact, NEA considers that western withdrawal from Iran

would only strengthen Soviet pressures there.

6. Possible Action After the Establishment of a Tudeh Regime

6(a) NEA concurs and adds a qualification that, at present, neither

the United States nor the United Kingdom is willing to assume military

responsibility for intervention in Iran in the event of communist

aggression.

6(b) It has always been a part of United States planning that in the

event of a Tudeh coup, the United States and United Kingdom would

respond militarily to a call for help by a legitimate Iranian Government.

There is little doubt that the Shah, if extracted from Tehran and prefer-

ably Iran, would welcome an opportunity to call for such support and

would be only too willing to establish a government-in-exile with a

claim to legitimacy. The British paper does not explore this contingency

nor the desirability of providing such a framework for action among

the southern tribes of Iran. While a tribal rising might not “seriously

embarrass” a central Tudeh government, it might prevent the commu-

nists from reaching the Persian Gulf and the oil fields.

7. General Conclusion

NEA questions whether there is any validity in the use of the verb

“compel” in discussing means of influencing the Iranian Government

“to prevent a further expansion of communist influence in Persia”. We

know of no practicable way to “compel” the Iranian Government to do

anything. Furthermore, it is not entirely certain that the best way to pre-

vent a Tudeh coup is to urge the Iranian Government to take action.

The best way in NEA’s view would be to negotiate an oil settlement and

the next best would be to provide financial assistance.

8. The arguments against the statements of section 8(a) have been

made above and NEA suggests a substitute paragraph:

8(a) “Whether to inform Dr. Mosadeq that we believe his gov-

ernment represents a nationalist bulwark against communism and that

without requiring commitments regarding the oil dispute, financial

aid will be forthcoming so long as he maintains control of the

communists.”

8(b) If the tribes are to be used at all, it is our opinion that it should

be done immediately after a Tudeh coup, before the new regime has

time to consolidate its power. Otherwise, it is to be expected that the

Tudeh will take effective steps to destroy the power of the tribes to re-

sist. “Use” does not necessarily mean an attempt to overthrow the new

government; it might merely mean denying certain southern regions to

the Tudeh authorities and preserving the tribal organization and

fighting potential against attempts to destroy them.

March 1952–February 1953

ANNEX

Covert Activities

The opening paragraph of the Annex summarizes the main paper

and therefore includes the major points which have already been dis-

cussed. Sub-paragraph (d) is particularly in question in NEA, although,

so far as it relates to liaison and collaboration [less than 1 line not declassi-

fied] it would obviously be very difficult to attempt such liaison in the

absence of basic agreement on policies.

3. Suggestions for Covert Activity

In general, NEA has no objection to the points raised in this section

of the British annex, except that for the reasons stated previously it

would seem most unwise to allow “leakage” to reach the Russians indi-

cating that the United States [less than 1 line not declassified] were pre-

pared to “write off Persia”. This could easily set in movement events

which would far out-weigh the dubious advantage to be gained from

the impact of such “leakage” upon Mosadeq’s policies.

4. Since officers of NEA are not fully aware of the type of covert ac-

tivity presently carried on in Iran, they are not in a position to decide

whether any of these activities could be interpreted as “support to ele-

ments likely to provoke anarchy”. This is a point we should clarify with

CIA.

5. NEA holds the view that the tribes of Iran should be stirred to

activity by the United States and the United Kingdom only after a

Tudeh coup, but without waiting for a general war, on the ground that

if the Tudeh were given time to consolidate it could eliminate the tribes

as a factor in the picture. Another point which is pertinent to section 5

concerns the United States Consulate at Isfahan where there is no CIA

representative, a lack which could be made up if it is found desirable.

[5½ lines not declassified]

5(b) Big Bluff

NEA holds considerable reservation regarding the advisability of

the “big bluff”, not only for the reasons listed in the British paper but

also because planning along this line leads logically to a conclusion that

there is a solution to the Iranian problem in dividing Iran territorially

between a Russian and a Western camp. This is a particularly dan-

gerous basis for planning in view of both British and American reluc-

tance, if not unwillingness, to accept military responsibility for the

area.

Attachment

THE COMMUNIST DANGER IN PERSIA

London, undated.

I. Analysis.

1. Present Situation.

(a) The events of the last 18 months in Persia have seriously under-

mined the authority of the Government as a whole and particularly of

the Shah and the army.

(b) The Tudeh Party have profited by this to extend their influence,

which is now considerable.

(c) The Government itself shows signs of dividing into two or more

factions competing for power.

Conclusion

This situation carries a serious danger of a bid by the Tudeh to at-

tain power.

2. Possible Openings for the Tudeh.

(a) A coup planned in advance and aimed at the seizure of vital

points in Tehran.

(b) An extemporised coup following a breakdown in the discipline

of the armed forces.

(c) The exploitation of a tactical defeat of the armed forces to secure

the legalisation of the party and other measures desired by them; to be

followed by their accession to power.

(d) A tactical alliance between one faction of the National Front

and the Tudeh, leading to increased penetration by, and the ultimate

predominance of, the latter.

Not all the provinces would follow the lead of Tehran, particularly

if the Tudeh had come to power after a coup d’e´tat: but the loss of the

areas of resistance might not seriously damage Persia’s political and

economic structure.

Conclusion

It seems likely that the Tudeh would come to power as a result of a

tactical alliance with one section of the National Front.

3. Persian Action to Forestall these developments.

(a) A re-establishment of the authority of the Government and the

armed forces and a reduction in Tudeh influence by the suppression of

the party’s cover organisations etc. Such a policy would have to be ac-

companied by a convincing attempt to carry out social reforms.

March 1952–February 1953

(b) A coup d’e´tat using the army and led either by a military or a

National Front leader. There is little sign that any such leader can be

found at present.

(c) A tribal outbreak (like that in 1946) in opposition to growing

Communist influence in Tehran.

II. Possible Courses of Action.

4. (a) Whatever course is chosen absolute Anglo-United States soli-

darity is essential.

(b) The Western Powers could support and encourage a dictator,

but no suitable figure has yet appeared.

(c) They could bring pressure to bear on the Shah but this is un-

likely to be effective.

(d) They could encourage a tribal revolt. This would run counter to

a policy of re-establishing the Government’s authority.

(e) They could launch a campaign of covert propaganda etc. aimed

at stiffening the Government and increasing its anti-Tudeh activities.

(f) They could bring economic pressure, (since whatever the

present state of Persia’s finances, she will certainly eventually need ex-

ternal help) in the following ways:—

i) By negotiating an oil settlement,

ii) By arranging financial assistance.

For either i) or ii) it is essential that there should be complete

Anglo-United States solidarity. Otherwise the Persians will continue to

attempt playing off one power against another, with loss of precious

time.

Conclusion

Our most useful means of pressure is financial, (but depends on

complete Anglo-United States solidarity and on making no offer of

help in haste or without exacting conditions) accompanied by covert

propaganda.

5. Persian-Soviet Relations.

(a) The Russians have shown no signs of wishing to intervene in

the Persian crisis. Nevertheless they are vitally interested in the out-

come and dispose a powerful instrument in the Tudeh party.

(b) In an attempt to prevent their intervening by force it might be

desirable to reiterate the Western interest in Persia’s independence.

(c) Alternatively it might be possible to ‘neutralise’ Persia. This

might weaken Russian support for the Tudeh, on the assumption that

the prime Soviet interest in Persia is to prevent the spread of what is

seen as aggressive western influence.

6. Possible action after the establishment of a Tudeh re´gime.

(a) Overt military intervention; under present circumstances this

would be difficult to justify in the eyes of the world and might be very

difficult from a military point of view.

(b) Action to encourage the southern tribes to revolt, thus denying

large areas of Persia to Tudeh control. Such a revolt would not neces-

sarily seriously embarrass the Central Government.

7. General Conclusion.

It is clear that there would be comparatively little hope of over-

turning a Tudeh re´gime once it had been established. It is therefore im-

portant to prevent its establishment and it is considered that the best

way of so doing would be to urge and if possible to compel the present

Persian Government to prevent a further expansion of Communist in-

fluence in Persia.

8. There are two controversial points upon which some decision is

needed.

(a) Whether to attempt to forestall possible Soviet pressure on

Persia by some formal gesture of support for Persian independence: or

on the contrary to take such action as is compatible with our desire to

see Persia remain outside the Soviet orbit, to allay Soviet suspicions of

Western designs in Persia.

(b) Whether to make use of the centrifugal tendency of the

Southern tribes, either before or after the establishment of a Tudeh or

Tudeh-dominated re´gime. This idea seems at present to have more dis-

advantages than advantages. It should be emphasized that this analysis

does not consider what action might be desirable in case of general war.

In that case, use of the tribes might be very desirable, and would be

more effective if it had not been previously tried.

Annex

Covert Activities

[4 pages not declassified]

134.

Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State

for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Jernegan)

to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Matthews)

Washington, October 23, 1952.

SUBJECT

Discussion of British Paper on “The Communist Danger in Persia”

The first discussion with the British Embassy of the paper which

they handed in on October 8 was held yesterday. Those participating

on the British side were Mr. Burrows, Mr. Adam Watson, and Mr.

Ronald Bailey. The Americans were Mr. Kermit Roosevelt and [name

not declassified] of CIA, Mr. Beale of BNA, Mr. Lampton Berry of S/P,

Mr. Richards of GTI and myself.

Mr. Burrows provided a certain amount of background as to the

British thinking behind the paper, which did not however do very

much to fill out the bare bones of the document itself. The main points

brought out in the course of the discussion may be summarized as

follows:

1. The paper is to be regarded merely as a tentative compilation of

thoughts and suggestions and not as an approved statement by the For-

eign Office.

2. It seemed apparent that, at least so far as the British Embassy

here is aware, the paper does not represent a first step toward revision

of British policy toward Iran. So far as we could determine, all of the

suggestions in the document must be read within the context of the ex-

isting British attitude toward the oil problem.

3. The suggestion in Paragraph 4(f) of the British paper that Mo-

sadeq should be influenced by economic pressure through “negotiat-

ing an oil settlement” and “arranging financial assistance” merely

means, according to Burrows, that if and when a settlement is negoti-

ated or financial assistance is extended, conditions should be attached

to require the Iranian Government to take suitable anti-communist

measures. Burrows does not believe the Foreign Office is in fact consid-

ering the extension of financial assistance to Iran under any circum-

stances. He suggests that this item was included in the paper merely in

order to list all possibilities, and he reminded us that for the past year

Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Jernegan. Copies were sent to Richards, Beale,

Berry, and Roosevelt.

the Department has had in mind the possibility that we might be forced

to give financial aid to Iran even if an oil settlement were not reached.

Since this possibility existed in the American mind, the Foreign Office

had thought it well to mention it. (I confess I do not find this explana-

tion very satisfying but I suppose we must accept it in view of the fact

that Burrows could give no other.)

I commented that it seemed unrealistic to suggest that conditions

regarding anti-communist moves should be attached to the negotiation

of an oil settlement when it had so far been impossible to arrive at a set-

tlement even without attaching conditions. After some discussion,

however, both the British and we ourselves agreed that if he achieved a

satisfactory oil settlement Dr. Mosadeq might be disposed to move

against the Tudeh of his own volition, since he would be relieved of the

Western pressure and would no longer need to be so cautious about an-

tagonizing the Russians and their stooges. He would also no longer

need the Tudeh as a “bogie” with which to scare the Western Powers.

4. There was some discussion of the British emphasis on “absolute

Anglo-United States solidarity”. It appeared from what Burrows said

that this meant in their minds just what it said. We did not belabor the

point but I suggested there might be tactical advantages in maintaining

at least the appearance of independent action in certain cases. No at-

tempt was made, however, to arrive at a definition of the degree of soli-

darity which would be desirable. This is a point which I think should

have further attention in the Department if we are to avoid (a) upset-

ting the British by rejecting their appeal for solidarity, or (b) tying our-

selves hand and foot by agreement to a document which speaks of “ab-

solute” or “monolithic” solidarity.

5. We stated our opposition to the ideas of (a) “neutralizing” Iran,

(b) making a new statement of our interest in Iran’s independence, and

(c) causing the Russians to believe that a Tudeh coup would be the

signal for a British counter-coup in the south (the “big bluff”). I gath-

ered that the British representatives were disposed to agree with us on

all three points, although Burrows seemed attracted by the idea of neu-

tralizing Iran. On this particular point I took the line that we would

probably be very happy to see Iran neutralized, including the with-

drawal of American aid missions, if it could be done but that we did not

think it was feasible. We thought the Russians would simply seize the

opportunity to step in and grab Iran for themselves. We also feared that

neutralization, if successful, would encourage other Near Eastern and

South Asian states to adopt a neutral position and, if unsuccessful,

would be regarded as a betrayal of Iran and discourage other countries

from standing firm against the Russians.

6. With regard to the suggestions of military intervention or tribal

revolt after a Tudeh coup, we advanced the idea that such measures

March 1952–February 1953

would be politically more feasible if there were a legitimate Iranian au-

thority, some remnant of the former legal government, which would

ask our assistance and call on the tribes to defend it. We also suggested

the tribes should be encouraged and assisted to maintain control of

their own territory against the assumed Tudeh central government as

soon as such a government came into power, since otherwise the gov-

ernment would probably take steps to destroy their ability to resist and

their future usefulness to us in the event of a general war would be de-

stroyed. We emphasized that we did not at any time advocate aggres-

sive action by the tribes, as they did not have the military capability to

operate outside their own territory.

7. We also emphasized that we did not favor any movement by the

tribes prior to the coming into power of a Tudeh government. Such a

movement we argued would give the communists a good excuse to

stage a coup and would risk the loss of all of Iran in return for the very

uncertain prospect of holding only a portion of it.

8. The British put forward very strongly the view that the greatest

danger of a communist take-over in Iran does not arise out of the

country’s bad financial situation but rather Dr. Mosadeq’s unwill-

ingness to take measures to check the growth of communist strength.

Burrows argued that there are many things within the power of the

Government to do which do not depend on money and which are

simply not being done. Our objective, they said, should be to induce

Mosadeq to take these measures, utilizing whatever means of persua-

sion or pressure we can find. On the American side, we agreed that

money alone would not be the solution to the Iranian problem and that

we should in fact do everything possible to create a more positive

anti-communist attitude in the Iranian Government. However, we did

think that finances have a very important effect on the situation. We

pointed out that if the army were not paid it would in time disintegrate

and thus destroy the last concrete barrier against the Tudeh.

Burrows said he would like to report our observations to London

and get the Foreign Office reaction. [2 lines not declassified] It was

agreed that in the meantime the Department would try to put down on

paper some of its views on the more important points and to draft new

paragraphs for insertion in the British paper, as a step toward a sort of

“agreed text”. No time was set for the next meeting.

135.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 314

Tehran, October 27, 1952.

SUBJECT

Conversation with a Prominent Leader of the National Front

The Labor Attache´ recently met with Dr. Mosafar Bagai, leader of

the Iranian Workers’ Party and prominent member of the National

Front. Dr. Bagai was interviewed at his home, in a district of unlighted

back streets, in an atmosphere of considerable secrecy. This was the

fifth conversation of the Labor Attache´ with Dr. Bagai. He looked tired

and his pallor properly reflected his recent, and serious, illness.

The common denominator of the conversation, so far as the re-

porting officer was concerned, was the complete absence, at this date in

the deteriorating Iranian economy, of a plan. The conversation fol-

lowed these lines:

1. The break-up of the Iranian Workers’ Party is based on issues

long buried, but early recognized by Bagai. The beginning was in 1948

when Bagai believed that he could make a strong labor party, based on

socialist convictions, if he could unite with him in a middle-of-the-road

policy the anti-communist socialists led by Maleki and the largely lead-

erless religious elements. He found the Maleki-men to be hard and effi-

cient workers but not good socialists and too ambitious to attempt to

dominate the party through their own faction. Dr. Bagai alleged that

Mr. Maleki supported a change of government from a monarchy to a

republic. When Dr. Bagai left on his trip to Europe and to the United

States (and more lately) when he was ill, he left the power of the party

in their hands. On his return to active participation in party affairs he

found that although they paid lip service to socialist principles, they

were in fact communist agitators, and not loyal to Dr. Mosadeq.

Bagai therefore forced the issue and said that unless the party was

purged of those elements, he would resign. Asked if he would return if

the Maleki faction were forced out he agreed, and (having witnessed

the discrediting of Maleki) he had no alternative but to keep his word

and resume active participation, as leader, of the party. During this part

of the conversation Dr. Bagai seemed abstracted and warmed up

during the second phase of the talk.

dential; Security Information. Drafted by Finch. Received November 18.

March 1952–February 1953

2. The Government believes that once the British have gone that

the spying and attempts by the British Government to control Iran will

be reduced, but hardly eliminated. Bagai ascribed to pro-British officers

of the Iranian Government the failure of the Government to collect in-

come or duty taxes. He coupled a combination of those men and the

premature Mosadeq demand for rural reform as the basis for the re-

fusal of the large landowners to pay the taxes levied on them.

3. He professed to believe quite sincerely that the American Gov-

ernment has been the tool of the British in Iran (and the whole of the

Middle East). He sees as the only succor to Iran either tankers sent from

the United States (despite any legal actions which the British might

take) or cash help. He at once discounted my estimate of the unem-

ployment in Tehran at 40,000–50,000 (halving it), and yet said that

Tudeh was growing daily, especially among the “great numbers” of

unemployed.

4. He said that although it was true that his party was founded on

the concept of raising the standards of living for the poor, that the de-

velopment of such a program would not be possible without the pre-

liminary step of ridding the country of the British. He claimed to agree

with the Government that it must prepare an oil-less economy, but

stated that the Government (and he) have no plans for the gradual

movement away from the concentration of unemployed workers in

Khuzistan. He said that earlier he had proposed to the Government

that it use the unskilled labor to build irrigation canals in the south and

roads in the north but the Government did not favor it.

5. He believes that his split with Maleki will go on indefinitely,

with Maleki gradually losing the intellectuals’ support he now has; that

no worker does, or will, support Maleki. He pictures a withering away

of Maleki as a Titoist communist element and symbol.

6. He contends that with the departure of the British that America

will have an opportunity to have a new, independent and enlightened

oil policy for Iran. He spells that out in terms of distribution and mar-

keting facilities. Failing that he believes that America will be under de-

served attack, not only by the leftist people and papers, but also by Ira-

nian patriots who will realize that the Tehran Declaration was without

meaning.

7. He apparently hinges a part of his hope on the coming American

election, believing that a Republican President would at least act inde-

pendently of (if not in open opposition to) the British. On this score he

linked the American Democratic and British Conservative Parties in

their international relations. He thought that Point IV was doing some

good work, but that Iran not only did not need the Military Missions,

but that they were dangerous to Iranian neutrality. He suggested, in an

involved way, that Iran could hardly count on military defense from

the United States, a country which would stand idly by, thus permit-

ting the continuance of the British blockade, while Iranian nationals

were starving.

8. His only comment on the reported infiltration of Tudeh ele-

ments in the Party and Government was that the greater danger of the

moment was the retention of British elements in positions of power.

9. When questioned concerning the need to alleviate the desperate

conditions of the workers, Dr. Bagai stated that the present labor law

does not have adequate provisions for enforcement. He ascribed this to

the machinations of the AIOC influence with the government just after

the Second World War (when the labor law was passed). He stated that

the proof of his allegations were in the documents captured by the

Workers’ Party from the AIOC information office. Dr. Bagai stated that

it should be a primary responsibility of the deputies of the Parliament

to pass a new, and enforceable, labor law. He personally believes that

the only hope for effective enforcement is in the control by the gov-

ernment not only of labor wages but also of factory production and

distribution.

In short, Bagai has an exaggerated idea of the strength of his own

Party, of the readiness of Maleki’s branch to fade quietly away. He is

unwilling to recognize that the Tudeh Party has become a more impor-

tant political agency than his by far. He has no plan for financing the

Government deficit, no plan to reduce the concentration of dependent

National Iranian Oil Company workers, nor for feeding or housing the

unemployed, no plans to meet the economic crisis which winter is cer-

tain to bring.

He is waiting for the American election in the hope that the Repub-

licans will be elected, that their election will mean the solution either of

the oil question, or that it will generate an American urge to underwrite

whatever budget deficits might exist.

For the Ambassador:

Roy M. Melbourne

First Secretary of Embassy

136.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

1765. On occasion Iran break in diplomatic relations with United

Kingdom, following general estimate Iran situation made by Embassy,

Svc Attache´s and CAS:

1. General: Events since accession second Mosadeq NF gov-

ernment have impressed us with fact that political and social revolu-

tion in progress here. We believe it improbable, except under aegis dic-

tatorship, that former Iran ruling class will have power name any

future government. Varied political factors remain highly volatile, with

Tudeh Party still only predictable factor. This very certainty in face de-

teriorating Iran conditions and crumbling internal institutions makes

Tudeh (Commie) Party formidable danger. Present government for all

practical purposes continues along same road as Tudeh and has thus

far failed take any serious action against Tudeh. Should trend continue,

duration of which we cannot estimate, it possible that there would be

no dramatic moment or precise date which would signalize Iran Gov-

ernment had reached point of no return, had become pro-Tudeh re-

gime or that Tudeh had become dominant political influence. Unex-

pected developments could of course radically change political picture,

but we have no current evidence other than facts herein. These point in

only one direction.

2. National Front: As ruling coalition, Front outside its ranks faces

organized challenge only in Tudeh Party. Other political opposition

has been effectively disrupted, cowed, or has joined Front. Majlis re-

mains in its unrelaxed grip and government apparently intends it be

mere echo. This position strength we consider transitory, since internal

coalition rivalries may be expected develop to point of schism. If Mo-

sadeq should disappear from political scene, result would probably be

still weaker government. There not believed any recognized NF leader

with prestige sufficient replace Mosadeq and keep in check personal

ambitions other NF chiefs. For moment, Mosadeq, apparently with Fa-

temi as chief adviser, has temporarily rebuffed Kashani’s intrigues by

repressive measures against so called General Zahedi plot and thru

London and pouched to Moscow, Ankara, Baghdad, Kabul, Karachi, Cairo, Beirut, Da-

mascus, Amman, Tel Aviv, Jidda, Dhahran, Rome for Unger, Isfahan, Meshed, and

Tabriz.

striking action in breaking relations with U.K. There is real division

within Front over feasibility internal reforms on basis oilless economy

and no Front leader can answer how miracle can be accomplished. This

looms as possible future cause of dissension. However in view broad

political base of coalition there are some influential elements of Front

which appear be demonstrating increased awareness of dangers in-

herent in any attempted short term coop with Tudeh. Their strength

and real capacity cannot as yet be practically assessed, altho believed

presently inadequate for meeting this formidable challenge effectively.

3. Shah: His prestige and symbolic value declining and he under

complete control of Mosadeq. As political balance of power factor,

Shah being eliminated. This strikingly illustrated by recent government

inspired action dissolving Senate, which once stronghold of Shah’s in-

fluence. Shah has successively alienated groups of supporters thru

course he had followed so that one embittered Senator has called him

“most dangerous man in Iran”. While armed forces still ostensibly loyal

to him, time and NF administration will progressively weaken this tie.

We believe Front considers him useful as symbol so long as he concurs

with their purposes.

4. Landowners and Merchants: No organized nor unified opposi-

tion to Front found in these elements and constructive leadership con-

spicuously lacking. Such persons appear be thinking only of today and

what personal accommodation may be necessary to events of to-

morrow. There little idea of seeking to influence such events. We re-

mark growing tendency for these elements to think in terms of Front

today and Tudeh tomorrow.

5. Peasants: Effective mullah and Tudeh agitation has helped in-

crease peasant unrest. This has shown itself in violent outbreaks of

peasants against landlords. Resentments over division share of annual

product and tendency some areas for peasants try claim land as own

have been heightened by confusion over government’s agrarian reform

intentions.

6. Labor: Trade Union movement divided seriously, with further

divisions expected, so that Commie Central United Council Trade

Unions (CUCTU) presently has dominant position. Labor Minister has

been unable stem trend. Within Front, Baghai’s anti Commie Workers

Party has split, while new trade union projected by Under Secretary

Labor expected have little success. CUCTU only labor organization effi-

ciently run, possessing zeal and with available funds. Recently CUCTU

overcame long ministry opposition and secured legal registration

Commie dominated Telephone and Telegraph Workers Union.

7. Religious Influences: Altho religious elements of extremist char-

acter appear be gaining influence in political and social affairs of

country, they thus far provide no real reason believe they would be

March 1952–February 1953

practical obstruction to Tudeh control or that they could not be manip-

ulated by Commies. Conservative intellectual leaders being neutral-

ized by demagogic types such as Kashani, who, despite any conflicting

statements, we consider not averse coop with Tudeh if in immediate

interests.

8. State Administration: Government thus far unable stem disorga-

nization state administration and unwilling attempt curb its infiltration

by Tudeh. Education Ministry reportedly dominated by Tudeh sympa-

thizers with resultant strong effect on teachers and students. Tehran

University and various medical and professional faculties elsewhere

have effective Tudeh organizations. Justice Ministry strongly infil-

trated by Tudeh and this partially reflected in measures adopted

toward arrested party members. Posts and Tel Ministries infiltrated

and Tudeh organized, particularly radio facilities, which reportedly

used for party communications and possibly would figure in sabo-

taged plans if required. Other ministries altho less infiltrated have

Tudeh or subsidiary cells. Significantly, Int Ministry as direct arm of

government shows less Tudeh influence altho police thru bribes known

to temper conduct toward Tudeh and to give information party

requests.

9. Armed Forces: Mosadeq apparently believes he can control

armed forces and that their existence under such control essential to

maintenance his regime. He arranged series arbitrary shifts among se-

nior officers for political reasons, notably in general staff with appoint-

ment Chief of Staff Baharmast. He further reduced possibility military

coup by decentralizing command of Tehran garrison. Prime Minister

avoids serious damage morale by still resisting pressure to punish cer-

tain officers for attempts maintain order at time July riots.

However mediocre Chief Staff, combined with new political influ-

ences, undoubtedly has bisected potential capabilities of armed forces

thruout country. Local commanders with weakened direction from

Tehran may find themselves under greater local political pressure and

tend be more inactive. While air force remains only major military or-

ganization in Tehran area retaining identity, it deteriorating in effec-

tiveness. If General Staff does not provide air force with added funds

within next few months it expected cease exist as operational force. Re-

ports from ranking officers show Tudeh agitators in provinces at-

tempting indoctrinate youths subject to conscription.

There appears little chance in view lack leadership for armed

forces be employed in military coup against government. In fact, as

Shah’s position declines, forces may be expected veer toward Front and

not oppose government of day. Hence forces could even be source of

support for some subsequent pro Tudeh government, if political transi-

tion proceeds as current tendency indicates.

10. Tribes: It axiomatic in Iran as government authority wanes

tribes become restive. Responsible reports show Kurds at moment

most dissatisfied of all in view neglect by central government and dis-

satisfied by chiefs over recent and proposed land reforms. From south

reports being received of Qashqai and Bakhti arms collection and

growing political intrigues. Tribes would be important factor in any

countrywide unrest.

11. Tudeh: Membership figures of little value in appraising party’s

potential since this primarily determined by vital fact party unques-

tionably well organized and disciplined in contrast other political

factors in country. As only organized rival to Front, altho technically

illegal party, it carries ever increasing potential to gain leadership. Its

activity currently has little effective hindrance from government; party

operates thru numerous subsidiary organizations which blend into

clandestine party components. Its activities in various strata Iran so-

ciety have been discussed. In event present government disintegrates

and Tudeh believes it in position cope with any opposition forces re-

maining, party prepared telescope long term objective of securing Iran

into immediate effort. We believe general internal conditions could de-

termine timing for this altho staged transition thru pro Tudeh gov-

ernment and thence to outright Tudeh control appears more likely.

12. Foreign Relations: Significance for U.S. of Iran’s break in diplo-

matic relations with U.K. lies in fact U.S. for all practical purposes sole

bulwark West influence in Iran. U.S. with departure British also looms

as logical target for right and left extremists. This might encourage

USSR play more open role than in past. Latter has been content main-

tain silent, ostensibly passive political role while conditions work in its

favor. However USSR may resort to diplomatic pressure in endeavor

reduce U.S. influence and prestige and at same time to strengthen So-

viet position. USSR might, for instance, insist on elimination all U.S. of-

ficials from north Iran. At same time it could contrive to keep Soviet

technicians and sales organization in Iran Caspian fisheries.

National Front concept of foreign relations as neutralism between

West and East blocs expected be reflected in further government acts.

Government may consider U.S. military missions presently here as in-

compatible with this concept. Trend toward further restricting official

U.S. travel in country may be strengthened. Extremists may be ex-

pected encourage impatience and hostility toward U.S., both as scape-

goat for internal governmental failures and as withholder of massive fi-

nancial and economic aid to which most Iranians believe Iran entitled.

We believe Front’s intransigence toward foreigners has reached

state that, if large financial and economic aid accorded Iran (and it des-

perately needs such assistance) government would be inclined depict

such aid as its due. However, there basic if unreasoned hope that U.S.

137.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, October 30, 1952.

1771. 1. At Mosadeq’s request Warne and I called on him this

morning. He opened conversation by expressing deepest appreciation

of work which Point IV under Warne’s direction was accomplishing in

Iran. He said his various ministers who were cooperating with Point IV

had unanimously expressed to him their appreciation of what Point IV

was doing and admiration and affection for Warne. They were con-

vinced that Warne and Point IV personnel were really friends of Iran

and doing all they could to assist Iran and Iranian people. Warne

thanked PriMin, pointing out that he had always received full coopera-

tion from ministers in Mosadeq’s Cabinet and from other Iranian offi-

cials. He described certain recent activities of Point IV and assured

PriMin that spirit of cooperation between Point IV and members Ira-

nian Govt and Iranian officials could not be better.

2. PriMin said there were two matters in particular which he

would like to discuss. He hoped that we would understand that he was

raising them because of his earnest desire that work of Point IV be suc-

cessful in Iran. Point IV was so closely interwoven with present Iranian

Govt that its failure wld not only damage Iran but it wld damage

present Govt and its success wld be of benefit both to Iran and to Ira-

nian Govt.

3. Mosadeq referred to salaries being paid Iranians employed by

Point IV. According to his info scale salaries was higher than that of Ira-

nian Governmental employees. This difference was giving rise to cer-

tain amount resentment and jealousy. He hoped that Warne could take

steps to bring Point IV salaries into harmony with those paid to Iranian

Governmental officials and employees. If Warne could successfully

take these steps it might prevent development of friction which could

seriously injure work of Point IV in Iran.

4. Warne said that he had already gone into this matter and in fact

had asked a committee to make further investigations and recommen-

dations. In meantime he inclined believe there was really no great dis-

parity between Point IV salary scales and those of Iranian Govt. It shld

be borne in mind that (a) Point IV employees were required to give full

time to Point IV work; they put in longer hours and were not permitted

to accept other employment or resort to other means of adding to their

income whereas many Iranian Govt officials and employees were in a

position because of their short working day to augment their salaries

by engaging in other types of work. (b) Point IV employees had been

carefully selected and in general had higher qualifications than average

Iranian Governmental employees. Most of them for instance were

bi-lingual. Some of them upon entering Point IV had been given

[more?] responsible positions than those which they had occupied in

the Govt. It was understandable therefore that number were receiving

higher salaries. Nevertheless he prepared go further into matter and

take steps adjust certain salary scales which might seem out of line with

Iranian Governmental salaries.

Mosadeq said he was not insisting that income of Point IV em-

ployees shld necessarily be reduced. He hoped that their salary scales

cld be put on same level as that of Govt employees and that such addl

amts as they might receive be paid in form of overtime, bonuses for

special qualifications, etc. Salary scales might be published in order to

counter exaggerated rumors.

5. Mosadeq said he wished discuss another problem of delicate na-

ture. Before doing so he wanted to make sure that Warne agreed with

him that extremely close cooperation between Point IV and Iranian

Govt was necessary in interest of both organizations. When Warne ex-

pressed agreement, PriMin said unfortunately there were some Point

IV employees hostile to Iranian Govt who were using their position to

work against Iranian Govt. Most prominent of them was Ardeshir

Zahedi, who was in a key position and who, according to statements

made to Mosadeq by prominent member Majlis in presence of several

Natl Front leaders, was engaging in activities hostile to Govt Iran. It

was not necessary for Mosadeq to point out that Zahedi was son of and

undoubtedly under influence of Gen. Zahedi, who had been connected

with Brit and who had been carrying on activities aimed at overthrow

of Mosadeq. Presence man like Zahedi in Point IV wld strengthen

propaganda which certainly would be instituted by mbrs Tudeh and

March 1952–February 1953

other enemies US to effect that US was now taking place of Brit in in-

triguing for overthrow present Iranian Govt.

6. Warne said he had been conscious of fact that presence Zahedi in

Point IV might give rise to criticisms. PriMin would recall that Zahedi

had been lent to Point IV by MinAgriculture over year and half ago;

that Zahedi’s father at that time was cooperating closely with Natl

Front and was subsequently MinInt in Mosadeq’s Cabinet; and that

only recently had Zahedi’s father come out in opposition to present

Govt. Point IV was not political organization; practically all of its per-

sonnel had been lent to it by various agencies of Iranian Govt with ap-

proval of Iranian Cabinet mbrs. It had been his policy not to remove

Point IV personnel thus employed unless there was no longer need

[for] their services, or unless they shld be found to be incompetent or

engaged in improper activities. Zahedi had been under special supervi-

sion in view father’s present opposition to Govt and no evidence of im-

proper activities had thus far been found.

7. I told PriMin he shld be able as experienced administrator to un-

derstand that if employees of Point IV shld obtain impression that

whenever some mbr of Majlis or other influential Iranian shld make un-

substantiated charge against them, they would be discharged, morale

whole organization wld be lowered and it will be difficult for Point IV

to operate effectively. PriMin replied it might well be impossible to

prove subversive political activities of Point IV employees engaging in

them because these personnel might succeed in concealing such activ-

ities. In certain instances it shld be clear without proof that individual

employees were disloyal to Govt and that their continued presence in

Point IV was harmful to Point IV and Iran.

8. I said that Warne and I had discussed problem Zahedi shortly

after latter’s father had come out in opposition to Govt. We had de-

cided it wld be unfair to discharge him unless we cld find some evi-

dence of his involvement but that he shld be kept under close observa-

tion. Thus far we had not detected any improper activity on his part. In

response my question Mosadeq said that at present he had no com-

plaint against any other Point IV personnel.

9. Warne said he desired to cooperate closely with Govt and asked

PriMin if he wished that Zahedi’s connection with Point IV be severed

completely or that Zahedi merely be moved to some technical post

where he wld not have wide contacts and where his presence in Point

IV wld not attract undue attention. PriMin replied that in view of what

we had said he preferred that no action be taken at present re Zahedi.

He wld investigate charges which had been made and wld let us know

results later. He added with smile that perhaps General Zahedi might

find it advantageous in present situation again to become supporter of

Govt. In that event there need not be so much concern re son.

10. Mosadeq referred to visits of Point IV officials to northern Iran.

He said that Russians had been protesting to him at presence Amer-

icans in North and he was afraid that they might also insist upon Soviet

nationals being allowed engage in activities in that area parallel those

of Point IV. He therefore hoped that Point IV work in northern Iran wld

be carried on from Tehran exclusively by Iranian officials. Mosadeq ap-

parently was not aware that Point IV offices were operating in North.

He seemed particularly interested in Azerbaijan. We explained to him

that Point IV office had been opened in Tabriz many months ago; that

American Point IV personnel were directing its activities; and that

these activities were being carried on for most part through Iran Govt

agencies. We pointed out that thus far there had been no serious reper-

cussions because of presence of US Point IV personnel in Azerbaijan.

Mosadeq finally stated he wld not insist upon withdrawal these offi-

cials but he hoped that they wld carry on their work quietly and not at-

tract undue attention to themselves. He also again expressed hope no

high Point IV officials wld visit northern Iran since such visits wld be

sure to cause sharp Soviet reaction. Soviet Union likely to bring further

embarrassing pressure on him. It might even instigate acts of violence

against Point IV residents or visitors in northern Iran. It wld be disas-

trous to Iran if any Point IV officials in northern Iran shld suffer phys-

ical injury. Warne said that neither he nor any visiting high Point IV of-

ficials wld go to Azerbaijan without first consulting with PriMin.

Henderson

“Mosadeq sent word to me today that after careful investigation Zahedi he con-

vinced latter had been engaged in activities incompatible with his duties employee TCA

and shld be separated from that organization.

“Accordingly, Warne is informing Zahedi today that he is being removed at least

temporarily from role active employee.” (Ibid.)

138.

Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

STUDY OF CIA CAPABILITIES IN IRAN

REFERENCE

Memorandum for the Senior NSC Staff Entitled The Position of the United States

with Respect to Iran, dated 13 October 19522

A. CIA Capabilities Under Present Conditions (Para. 4.d., 13 October

1. Current special political operations in Iran are designed to coun-

teract Tudeh activities and reduce Tudeh influence. While these opera-

tions have had some success in delaying the trend toward Tudeh domi-

nation, they have not succeeded in reversing that trend, primarily

because of the widespread anti-Western feeling which makes Iran so

fertile a field for Tudeh exploitation. CIA has been unable to attack suc-

cessfully this more basic problem because of the Iranian reaction to past

and present U.S. and U.K. policies toward Iran. In its operations, CIA

has been forced to rely on strongly nationalistic elements. While these

elements are strongly motivated against the Tudeh threat, they share

the common Iranian views that all British influence must be eliminated

from Iran and that the U.S. has supported the U.K. in the oil contro-

versy. Because of this situation CIA has been unable to mount opera-

tions designed to reduce anti-Western feeling in Iran.

2. Under present conditions, CIA is in a position to influence spe-

cific political, military and religious leaders to speak out strongly

against the Tudeh threat on particular occasions and to induce certain

political and military leaders to institute administrative and security

actions to curb Tudeh activities (demonstrations, strikes, etc.) on spe-

cific occasions. It can also assist certain political factions to oppose

Tudeh candidates in elections, to maintain anti-Tudeh propaganda,

and to attack physically Tudeh facilities and demonstrations. CIA is

also in a position to obtain the publication of anti-Tudeh material in the

press, and in pamphlets, books, posters, etc.

3. However, CIA is not in a position to influence the Iranian Gov-

ernment (as opposed to individuals in the Government) to adopt a con-

sistent policy to curb the activities and reduce the growing influence of

the Tudeh Party. Nor is CIA able to influence the Iranian Government

(and people) to adopt a more moderate attitude toward the British gen-

erally and toward the oil controversy in particular, or to adopt neces-

sary financial, judicial, and administrative reforms. If, however, the

U.S. Government were to intervene, with or without British agreement,

to bring about an oil settlement and aid program which an Iranian gov-

ernment could justify to its own people, CIA’s ability to influence sig-

nificant elements of the Iranian Government to take anti-Tudeh as well

as more positive constructive measures to improve the internal situa-

tion would, of course, be greatly increased. (Paras. 4.c. and e., NSC

draft)

4. In the event of a government crisis involving the resignation of

Mossadeq, CIA might conceivably have some influence on the choice of

a successor.

5. In addition to these operations, CIA is making plans and taking

other preliminary steps to assist potential resistance groups in Iran in

the event of a Tudeh coup. Planning for such activity is underway and

limited stockpiling of mate´riel has been carried out. However, CIA’s

assets in Iran for such activity are limited and CIA is unable (for ob-

vious reasons) to concert its plans with the potentially friendly resist-

ance groups until the emergency actually arises. While, therefore, li-

aison on hot war stay-behind plans is being maintained with certain

potential resistance groups, nothing has been done to alert them to the

fact that CIA is planning to support them in circumstances short of

global war. This could of course be done, if the urgency of the situation

were thought to require it, but it must be recognized that to do so

would run definite security and political hazards. The existing liaison

can, however, be expanded and directed with the intent of action

against a Tudeh coup foremost in the minds of American repre-

sentatives, though concealed from the Iranian representatives.

B. CIA Capabilities in the Event of a Significant Increase in Tudeh

Influence

1. Any great increase in Tudeh influence, whether or not accompa-

nied by legalization of the Tudeh Party, would seriously reduce CIA

capabilities in the political and psychological fields in Iran. Such a de-

March 1952–February 1953

velopment would probably result in still greater leniency being shown

by the Iranian security forces toward Tudeh and a disposition on the

part of the government to crack down on certain political factions that

are Tudeh’s most bitter opponents. CIA would thus find it increasingly

difficult to induce anti-Tudeh individuals and groups to speak out or

take action against Tudeh. CIA-induced or supported anti-Tudeh

propaganda activities would be particularly hard hit. An increasing

number of newspapers would be reluctant to print anti-Tudeh material

and thus risk government suppression or the destruction of their facil-

ities by Tudeh activists.

2. A significant increase in Tudeh influence would probably have a

less serious effect on CIA preparations to support potential resistance

groups and might, in fact, increase CIA capabilities. Such a develop-

ment might well increase the willingness of these groups to deal more

closely with the U.S. and might even induce them to request assistance

in opposing Tudeh.

C. CIA Capabilities in the Event of Tudeh Domination of the Iranian

Government and Army (Para 6, NSC Draft)

1. Special political operations would probably largely cease. Many

CIA agents would almost certainly have to leave the country. The most

optimistic estimate is that CIA could induce sporadic terrorist activity

against Tudeh leaders, initiate rumor campaigns, and in general keep

the public aware of an underground, Western-oriented resistance

movement.

2. In view of its current limited resistance assets in Iran, CIA could

do almost nothing directly to oppose the establishment of a Tudeh re-

gime. It could, however, encourage and assist certain tribal groups to

maintain control of their own territory against a Tudeh central gov-

ernment. Under the assumed circumstances, these groups would prob-

ably be very receptive to a U.S. offer of assistance and might even take

the initiative in contacting U.S. representatives on the subject.

3. The establishment of a U.S. military base in Iraq, which we un-

derstand to be under consideration in the Department of Defense,

would greatly improve prospects for maintaining special political op-

that a communist government achieves complete control of Iran so rapidly that no legal

Iranian Government is available to request assistance, the position of the United States

would have to be determined in the light of the situation at the time, although politico-

military-economic discussions leading to plans for meeting such a situation should be

carried on with the British Government and, as appropriate, with the Turkish Govern-

ment. In this contingency, the United States should make every feasible effort, particu-

larly through special political operations, to endeavor to develop or maintain localized

centers of resistance and to harass, undermine, and if possible, to bring about the over-

throw of the communist government.”

erations in Iran and would obviously be of tremendous advantage to

CIA in mounting and maintaining resistance operations. It would pro-

vide CIA with a secure base near the area of operations; provide on-

the-spot communications and logistical assistance; and possibly make

available to CIA aircraft for clandestine operations into Iran. Perhaps

most important of all, such a military base would help to maintain the

morale of all Iranians opposed to the Tudeh Party. It would probably

also have a decisive effect on the degree of U.S. control over resistance

movements in Iran. Resistance groups would be much more amenable

to U.S. direction if it could be demonstrated that they constituted the

vanguard of a determined U.S. effort to hold the Near East against

Communism. In the absence of demonstrable U.S. military interest in

the area, the resistance groups would be inclined to follow their own

council, even if they obtained substantial quantities of military equip-

ment through CIA channels.

D. CIA Capabilities in the Event of a Tudeh Coup Followed by the

Withdrawal to the South of a Significant Proportion of Iran’s Armed

Forces (para 5.b., NSC Draft) and the Establishment of an

Anti-Tudeh regime in Close Relations with the Western Powers

1. Under these circumstances, CIA’s capabilities in all fields of ac-

tivity would be considerably greater than those indicated in paragraph

C for the following two reasons:

(a) CIA would have a secure base of operations within the country;

(b) It would presumably have the active cooperation of the anti-

Tudeh regime in the south in all its efforts to undermine and dislodge

the Tudeh regime in the north.

2. If the U.S. military missions now accredited to the Iranian gov-

ernment were to accompany the anti-Tudeh regime in its withdrawal to

the south and were to be expanded, CIA capabilities would be still fur-

ther increased.

3. However, in view of the fact that the USSR would presumably

give the Tudeh regime substantial assistance, and would increase its

assistance proportionately as our assistance appeared to threaten

Tudeh control of the north, it is unlikely that the Tudeh regime could be

overthrown by Iranian action supported solely by clandestine means.

read: “In the event of either an attempted or an actual communist seizure of power in one

or more of the provinces of Iran or in Tehran, the United States should be prepared to

support a legal Iranian Government, if requested to do so. Preparations for such an even-

tuality should include: . . . b. Measures necessary for the implementation of special polit-

ical operations in Iran and adjacent Middle Eastern areas, including prior authorization

to expend such funds and to procure such equipment as may be required. Effective li-

aison with the U.K. should be maintained with respect to such operations.”

March 1952–February 1953

139.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, November 4, 1952.

1836. 1. During my talk with PriMin this morning he said several

days ago info had come to him that Brit agent was circulating among

tribes in area of Luristan; stopping at houses of tribal leaders; asking

numerous questions re matters domestic concern; and in general stir-

ring up tribesmen. He had given orders for arrest this agent but was

later astonished to learn that foreigner in question was Amer citizen

named Dubois; who claimed to be mbr State Dept traveling in Iran.

This foreigner cld not give convincing explanation for his presence

among tribesmen. PriMin asked if I cld tell him more about Dubois.

2. I said Arthur Dubois arrived Tehran several months ago. He was

mbr Dept State engaged in research. He had not been in Iran for many

years. Purpose this visit was to spend several months in country get-

ting acquainted with changed conditions. It was not easy for researcher

in Dept to obtain accurate picture Iran from written reports. PriMin re-

marked that Dubois was therefore really a spy. I said that if US official,

friendly to Iran and working on Iranian matters in US, was engaging in

espionage if he traveled thru country endeavoring obtain first hand im-

pressions then Dubois was spy. Scores of prominent Iranians went to

US annually for same purpose and no one considered them as spies.

3. PriMin said tribal areas in Iran extremely sensitive. Amers going

into such areas likely be exploited by tribal leaders disloyal to central

govt, who by entertaining these Amers wld endeavor give impression

they had support of US. Furthermore, PriMin was afraid that Amers

going into these areas might unconsciously become agents of Brit who

no longer dare send their own nationals to tribes. He hoped that Amer

natls, particularly during this period, wld refrain from visits among

tribes other than those of official character.

4. I told PriMin I convinced that Dubois had not conducted himself

improperly or had not engaged in political activities. Dubois was plan-

ning in any event to return to US shortly after he had completed his

trip. I said I wld ask all Amer Governmental officials in Iran to refrain

from traveling among tribes merely for purposes of visiting friends,

satisfying curiosity, engaging in shooting expeditions, etc. I added that

of course it wld be necessary in pursuance of their work for various

Amer officials to visit or pass thru tribal areas. Whenever this necessity

140.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, November 9, 1952.

1907. 1. Two days ago Kashani sent message asking me to call on

him. I did so Nov 8. Our conversation somewhat disjointed and incon-

clusive since after one hour another appointment compelled me leave. I

shall see him again evening Nov 10.

2. It not yet clear just why he wanted see me unless he wished give

impression to friends or enemies or both he was in touch with US. He

started conversation by saying policies US Govt ruining his health and

damaging Iran and if continued might lead to third world war, destruc-

tion modern civilization, and ruin US. He was Iranian and his love for

Iranian people transcended all considerations. At same time he was

Moslem and believed precepts of Koran promised salvation for world.

March 1952–February 1953

He as the leading figure Moslem world was issuing call for internatl

Moslem conference take place soon in Iran thru which he hoped create

Moslem world unity. United Moslem world would devote itself to

combatting aggressive communism, tyrannical imperialism, and colo-

nialism. He needed US help in his enterprise which if successful would

prevent another world war. If US was really working for peace and

against oppression it should give him help.

3. When I asked him what kind help he needed he said he was not

asking for money. What he wanted was for US to come out openly

against imperialism and colonialism as it had come out against com-

munism. If US should remain silent in face of imperialistic and colonial

policies of UK and France, opponents of imperialism and colonialism

could only draw inference that US was partner of imperialist and colo-

nial powers. I told him US was against imperialism and against kind of

oppression of colonies which was usually referred to as colonialism.

Main objective US at present, however, was to obtain maximum unity

of forces of free world in combatting internatl communistic aggression

which was greatest threat world peace. This unity could not be ob-

tained if one mbr free world wld publicly attack other members of free

world for certain practices or policies which it did not happen to ap-

prove. In present world situation US was of opinion it could contribute

most to cause of peace by endeavoring through persuasion and by pri-

vate conversations to prevail upon other free countries to desist from

policies or practices which might seem contrary to spirit of UN.

Kashani said only real way to combat imperialism and colonialism was

to come out publicly against them. If US should not openly take sides in

this struggle he would denounce it just as much as he intended to de-

nounce countries guilty of imperialism and colonialism. He gave

number alleged illustrations of US partnership with imperialism and

colonialism and oppression in general, touching particularly on Mo-

rocco, Tunisia, Egypt, and Palestine. He said US partnership with im-

perialist powers in exploiting weaker peoples not in keeping with prin-

ciples to which US maintained it adhered. Turning to Iran he wanted to

know why if US was not taking side of imperialism it was supporting

Brit blockade by boycotting Iranian oil. It was difficult to explain to ex-

citable and unreasoning person like Kashani why Iranian oil was not

being sold to US. I did my best however do so.

4. In spite of his intemperate language Kashani seemed to be in

personally friendly mood and from time to time softened conversation

with jokes and anecdotes. I do not know what he intends to discuss

during our next conversation. He may be more specific in indicating

kind of help he would like have. Few days ago Busheri, former mbr

Mosadeq’s cabinet who is on friendly terms with Kashani, intimated to

me that Kashani wld be happy if US cld help finance cost of transport of

141.

Letter From Secretary of Defense Lovett to Secretary of State

Acheson

Washington, November 10, 1952.

Dear Mr. Secretary:

In response to a request for advice concerning planned or feasible

United States military courses of action in Iran in the event of a suc-

cessful Tudeh coup, the Joint Chiefs of Staff undertook military plan-

ning based on assumptions contained in the request for advice. The

studies undertaken by the Joint Chiefs of Staff have now proceeded suf-

ficiently to produce tentative conclusions. Their views are forwarded as

inclosure for use in connection with the current revision of NSC 107/2.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff have stated they will re-examine the courses of

action, and initiate planning as appropriate to implement any course(s)

of action which the revision of NSC 107/2 may indicate.

A copy of this letter and inclosure are being furnished the Director

of Central Intelligence. The study of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is not being

circulated to the National Security Council.

Sincerely yours,

Robert A. Lovett

cret; Security Information. On another copy of this letter is a handwritten note, dated No-

vember 19, that reads: “Delivered to the President for information, and returned.” (Eisen-

hower Library, Disaster File Series, NSC Staff Papers, Box 69, Iran Section)

March 1952–February 1953

Enclosure

Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of

Defense Lovett

October 31, 1952.

SUBJECT

Iran

1. Reference is made to paragraph 3 of the memorandum by the

studies referred to have proceeded sufficiently to produce tentative

conclusions which are forwarded herewith for such use as may be ap-

propriate in considering the revision of NSC 107/2. The Joint Chiefs of

Staff will reexamine the courses of action noted below and initiate plan-

ning as appropriate to implement any course(s) of action which the re-

vision may indicate.

2. If the United States national policy requires the retention of the

Middle East within the free world, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize

that one action which might contribute to the security of the Middle

East would be to provide positive U.S. military support to that area in

collaboration with the British, the Turks, and the Middle East countries

involved. It is believed that U.S. armed forces can be deployed to the

Middle East with the sympathy and cooperation of the indigenous gov-

ernments. An active indication of positive U.S. military action in the

Middle East would demonstrate both to the Communists and to the

free world that the United States is not going to permit Soviet domina-

tion of the Middle East.

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff desire to emphasize that the United

States cannot deploy forces to Iran without a grave risk of inciting the

USSR to invoke, with or without Iranian consent, the Soviet-Iranian

Mutual Defense Pact of 1921.

4. Studies were made to determine whether or not, under present

conditions, there are feasible U.S. military courses of action which

would strengthen the Western orientation of Iran and to determine

what military courses of action are feasible in the event of an appeal by

the Iranian Government to the United States for direct military assist-

ance. The conclusions in this regard are:

a. Without dislocation of current force deployments the only fea-

sible U.S. military course of action under present conditions, to

strengthen the Western orientation of Iran, is the present one, i.e., a con-

tinuation of arms aid and training missions. However, recent events in-

dicate that this course of action alone cannot be expected to produce

major results.

b. If a modification of current force deployments is decided upon,

the United States can demonstrate some tangible evidence of greater

U.S. determination to support the nations of the Middle East in their

opposition to communism by stationing U.S. armed forces in the

Middle East. The stationing of United States forces in the Middle East

would necessitate substantial upward revision of U.S. force ceilings or

a reduction of our commitments elsewhere.

c. Further, in event of an appeal by the Iranian Government to the

United States for direct military assistance, the following courses of ac-

tion are feasible from a military viewpoint:

(1) Conduct a show of force by periodic flights of carrier aircraft, or

aircraft from land bases outside of Iran, over key centers.

(2) Assist the loyal Iranian Army with logistic support by aug-

menting the present policy of arms aid.

5. With regard to feasible U.S. military courses of action in the

event of a Tudeh coup in Iran, studies were conducted within the

framework of four conditions:

Condition I

Communist (Tudeh) Party completely controls Iran. U.S. national

objective requires military action to prevent further spread of commu-

nism in Middle East.

Condition II

Communist (Tudeh) Party completely controls Iran. U.S. national

objective requires military action to re-establish a Western oriented

government.

Condition III

Anti-Communist Iranian forces withdraw to south and oppose

Tudeh regime. U.S. national objective requires military action to pre-

vent further spread of communism in Middle East.

Condition IV

Anti-Communist Iranian forces withdraw to south and oppose

Tudeh regime. U.S. national objective requires military action to re-

establish a Western oriented government.

March 1952–February 1953

6. Under Condition I—Communist (Tudeh) Party completely controls

Iran. U.S. national objective requires military action to prevent further spread

of Communism in Middle East. The feasible military courses of action are:

a. Furnish additional arms aid to appropriate Middle East coun-

tries so as to eventually enable them to possess the strength to secure

their frontiers against effective Communist infiltration.

b. Encourage the U.K. and/or other Commonwealth nations to un-

dertake a commitment to deploy additional forces to Iraq on the order

of 1 Division reinforced and appropriate air forces, subject to Iraqi

agreement, with a mission of assisting Middle East governments in pre-

venting the spread of Communist power to their countries.

c. Deploy appropriate Air Force units on the order of 1½ wings

plus support units, to southern Turkey with a mission of assisting

Middle East governments in preventing the spread of communist

power to their countries. This mission is to be accomplished in conjunc-

tion with friendly forces that may be deployed to the area. Since

Turkey, the key to Middle East defense, is the strongest anti-

communist nation in the Middle East and since its North Atlantic

Treaty Organization (NATO) mission supports the U.S. war plans, sta-

tioning of U.S. Air Forces in Turkey would materially demonstrate evi-

dence of U.S. support. Additionally, the combination of the U.K. forces

in Iraq mentioned above and the U.S. forces in southern Turkey would

further deployments in support of NATO war plans.

d. Deploy U.S. forces on the order of 1 Division reinforced and nec-

essary supporting air and naval forces to the vicinity of Basra with a

mission of assisting Middle East governments in preventing the spread

of communist power to their countries. This mission is to be accom-

plished in conjunction with friendly forces that may be deployed to the

area. It should be recognized that such a deployment would be tanta-

mount to associating the United States militarily with the United

Kingdom in a ground defense of the Middle East. Current war plans do

not contemplate the deployment of U.S. ground forces in this area, and

no provisions in this regard are included in current operational or mo-

bilization plans.

7. Under Condition II—Communist (Tudeh) Party completely controls

Iran. U.S. national objective requires military action to re-establish a Western

oriented government. The feasible military courses of action are:

a. Same as Condition I.

b. These limited U.S., U.K., and/or other Commonwealth forces

probably could not insure the re-establishment of a Western oriented

government in Iran, but could cooperate with and covertly support the

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) as required in the overthrow of a

Tudeh regime and re-establishment of a friendly government.

142.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, November 11, 1952.

1933. 1. I concluded my conversation with Kashani yesterday after-

hours Kashani stated little that was new. He devoted considerable time

to expounding his religious views, quoting liberally from Koran; in

friendly but unvarnished language he again criticized US Govt for sup-

porting imperialism and colonialism; he insisted that unless US Govt

changed its Middle Eastern policies, come out for real economic and

political independence Middle Eastern peoples, enabled Iran to sell its

oil, and supported loan thru Int Bank or other financial institution

which would result in carrying out of projects calculated to increase

productivity of country and reduce unemployment, Iranian people

would be compelled turn toward Sov Union; he outlined in some detail

various [sic] his plans for future Iran as well as for Moslem world.

2. Kashani laid special emphasis on his antagonism to communism

which he labeled as aggressive atheism. He said that if imperialism and

colonialism could be eliminated in Moslem world and people would be

given real opportunity raise living standards there need be no fear of

communism among Moslems. I remarked he seemed to overlook possi-

bility that internatl communism against wishes of majority population

might by force or otherwise take over country like Iran. Kashani stated

that communists could not hold Iran against will Iranian people. I

asked if 20 million Iranians would be more effective in freeing them-

selves from internatl communism than some 40 million Moslems now

under oppression in Sov Union. I said despite intense religious feelings

of Moslems in Central Asia, communists during last thirty years had

made considerable progress in replacing Islam with atheism in that

area. It had been impossible for new religious leaders to be trained;

many of them had been eliminated and those who survived had be-

come mere puppets of Sov States; Moslem children were being edu-

cated in atheistic schools. Kashani said he could admit that if commu-

nists once in control Iranian educational system they could gradually

eliminate religion. This situation made it all more important that Chris-

tian US cooperate with Moslem Iran to prevent spread of militant

atheism. Present US policies in spite of huge funds spent by US Govt

would not be effective in combatting internatl communism.

3. Referring to Moslem conference which he plans call in near fu-

ture Kashani said invitations had not as yet been issued. Instructions

had however been sent thru Min Fonaff to Iran diplomatic reps in

various countries asking they submit lists of influential religious-

political leaders whom it would be appropriate to invite and who

might be willing come. After these lists had been recd invitations

would be sent. Kashani maintained that delegates to conference would

be restricted to responsible religious-political leaders and no one could

attend without invitation from him.

4. Kashani said it was his intention in near future to undertake or-

ganization in Iran of national, as distinguished from state, army of mil-

lion Moslems who would be under his personal direction and leader-

ship. Members this “army” would agree to be given several hours

military training daily; they would be pledged to give their lives at his

call to the cause of Islam; they would be instructed in virtues of Islam;

they would be required to submit to strictest discipline. At coming con-

ference he would suggest that religious leaders in other Moslem coun-

tries also organize similar “national armies”. Armies of this kind were

necessary in order restore religious fervor and unity to peoples of

Islam.

5. During our talk I told Kashani in confidence I would probably be

going to Washington within few days for consultation. He said he

hoped I would inform my Govt fully re his conversation with me and

that I would endeavor make my Govt understand that it would be in

US interest and interest of world peace if it would give serious attention

to his statements. “I am not an ordinary person. I am leader of Moslem

world and Moslem world will soon be force to be reckoned with. It is in

interest of good people everywhere that Moslem world and US

cooperate.”

Henderson

March 1952–February 1953

143.

National Intelligence Estimate

NIE–75

Washington, November 13, 1952.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN IRAN THROUGH 1953

The Problem

To estimate probable future developments in Iran through 1953.

Conclusions

1. The Iranian situation contains so many elements of instability

that it is impossible to estimate with confidence for more than a short

period. On the basis of present indications, however, it appears prob-

able that a National Front government will remain in power through

1953, despite growing unrest. The government has the capability to

take effective repressive action to check mob violence and Tudeh agita-

tion and will probably continue to act against specific challenges of this

sort as they arise. The government is likely to retain the backing of the

Shah and control over the security forces. Although the danger of se-

rious Tudeh infiltration of the National Front and the government bu-

reaucracy continues, we believe that Tudeh will not be able to gain con-

trol of the government by this means during 1953. Neither the groups

opposing the National Front nor the Tudeh Party are likely to develop

the strength to overthrow the National Front by constitutional means

or by force in 1953.

2. Even in the absence of substantial oil revenues and of foreign

economic aid, Iran can probably export enough to pay for essential im-

ports through 1953, unless there is a serious crop failure or an unfavor-

able export market. The government probably will be able to obtain

funds for its operation. Some inflation will occur. Capital development

will be curtailed, and urban living standards will fall. However, we do

not believe that economic factors, in themselves, will result in the over-

throw of the National Front in 1953.

3. If present trends in Iran continue unchecked beyond the end of

1953, rising internal tensions and continued deterioration of the

economy and of the budgetary position of the government might lead

to a breakdown of government authority and open the way for at least

a gradual assumption of control by Tudeh.

(NIE–75) Probable Developments in Iran. Secret. The following member organizations of

the Intelligence Advisory Committee participated with the Central Intelligence Agency

in the preparation of this estimate: the intelligence organizations of the Departments of

State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. All members of the Intelli-

gence Advisory Committee concurred in this estimate on November 6.

4. Settlement of the oil dispute with the UK is unlikely in 1953.

5. During 1953 Iran will attempt to sell oil to other buyers, both in

the Soviet Bloc and the West. Shortage of tankers will limit sales to the

Soviet Bloc to token amounts. Small independent Western oil com-

panies will probably not buy significant quantities of oil. We estimate

that major Western oil companies will not be willing to make an agree-

ment with Iran so long as the current legal, economic, and political ob-

stacles exist. Nevertheless, some moderate-sized oil companies are be-

coming restive, and it is possible that combinations for the purchase

and transport of substantial quantities of Iranian oil may be made

unless there is direct and strong objection by the US Government. The

British would probably regard any arrangement between US oil com-

panies and Iran, in the absence of British concurrence, as a serious

breach of UK–US solidarity.

6. Kashani or possibly another National Front leader might replace

Mossadeq during 1953. Any successor would probably be forced to re-

sort to ruthless tactics to eliminate opposition. In his struggle to elimi-

nate his opposition and particularly if he failed to do so, Tudeh influ-

ence and opportunities for gaining control would increase rapidly.

7. The Mossadeq regime almost certainly desires to keep US sup-

port as a counterweight to the USSR and appears to want US economic

and military assistance. Nevertheless, there will probably be an in-

creasing disposition to blame the US, not only for Iran’s failure to sell

substantial amounts of oil or to obtain an oil settlement, but also for

Iran’s financial and economic difficulties.

8. Therefore, the US Point Four and military missions are likely to

find it even more difficult to operate during 1953 than at present. They

would probably be placed under severe restrictions if Kashani or other

extremists came to power. However, neither the Mossadeq Govern-

ment nor a successor National Front regime is likely to expel these mis-

sions during 1953.

9. The USSR appears to believe that the Iranian situation is devel-

oping favorably to its objectives. We do not believe that the USSR will

take drastic action in Iran during 1953 unless there is a far more serious

deterioration of Iranian internal stability than is foreseen in this esti-

mate. However, the USSR has the capability for greatly increasing its

overt and covert interference in Iran at any time, to the detriment of US

security interests.

Discussion

145.

Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of

Staff (Bradley) to Secretary of Defense Lovett

Washington, November 18, 1952.

SUBJECT

NSC 136—The Present Situation in Iran

1. This memorandum is in response to your memorandum of 10

November 1952, subject as above, in which you request the comments

and recommendations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff with respect to the

draft statement of policy by the National Security Council Staff entitled

“United States Policy Regarding the Present Situation in Iran” (NSC

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have studied the proposed statement of

policy and are in general agreement with those parts of the policy

having military implications. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend, how-

an asterisk and that there should be inserted a corresponding footnote

which reads:4

“If for overriding political reasons it is found necessary for the

146.

Memorandum of Conversation

PRESENT

President Truman, accompanied by

Secretary Acheson, Secretary Lovett,

Secretary Snyder, Mr. Harriman, Director of Mutual Security Agency

General Eisenhower, accompanied by Senator Cabot Lodge,

Mr. Joseph M. Dodge

[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Iran.]

2. Iran. Another situation had developed to a critical point. This

was the dispute between Iran and the United Kingdom over oil. We

had been trying for a year and a half to find a fair solution which would

provide compensation for the British and allow oil to flow from Iran

and funds to come to Iran. Both parties had been wholly unreasonable,

but in different senses of the word. The Iranians were unreasonable in

March 1952–February 1953

that they were not activated by reason but by emotion. The British did

not seem to understand this. They thought that by putting economic

pressure on Iranians they would act as reasonable people might under

the same circumstances. The result had been the opposite. They were

more concerned with freeing the oil of British control than they were in

the economic benefits which might come to them from the oil industry.

This had already led to very grave disintegration both within the Gov-

ernment and within the social structure within Iran, in economic diffi-

culties, and a political break with the British, who had been expelled

from Iran.

We were informed by our Ambassador that if the Iranians man-

aged their affairs reasonably they might survive for as long as a year

without selling oil and without major external help. However, they

would not act in this way. They would act emotionally, perhaps break

altogether their relations with the United States in various stages, dis-

charge large numbers of public employees, who would add to the un-

rest of that country, and in a very short time might have the country in

a state of chaos.

We were deeply disturbed at this prospect. The British seemed

more concerned about the consequences of a settlement which differed

from their desires as affecting British investments in other parts of the

world. This had led to a fundamental difference of view. Although we

had been working with the British for months, it seemed unlikely to us

that persuasion would result in any workable solution in time.

The Secretary said that we were also going forward under the

President’s authority to consider what the United States alone might do

to solve this problem. It seemed unlikely to us that it ever could be

solved in the face of determined British opposition. Without going into

detail, the reason for this conclusion was that Iran could only sell its oil

in volume in markets which would bring American distributors into vi-

olent competition and conflict with British distributors. Therefore,

some degree of British cooperation was necessary. It seemed to him

likely—although here he was speculating—that this could only be done

by a series of steps in which apparent American unilateral action was

started and thereupon stimulated some degree of British cooperation.

He thought we would probably proceed by jerks in this way, with alter-

nating periods of considerable bitterness.

It seemed to Secretary Acheson most important that the new Ad-

ministration should be closely in touch with this situation, because con-

siderable difficulties were likely to arise from it.

[Omitted here is discussion of matters unrelated to Iran.]

147.

Statement of Policy Proposed by the National Security

Council

Washington, November 20, 1952.

THE PRESENT SITUATION IN IRAN

1. It is of critical importance to the United States that Iran remain

an independent and sovereign nation, not dominated by the USSR. Be-

cause of its key strategic position, its petroleum resources, its vulnera-

bility to intervention or armed attack by the USSR, and its vulnerability

to political subversion, Iran must be regarded as a continuing objective

of Soviet expansion. The loss of Iran by default or by Soviet interven-

tion would:

a. Be a major threat to the security of the entire Middle East, in-

cluding Pakistan and India.

b. Permit communist denial to the free world of access to Iranian

oil and seriously threaten the loss of other Middle Eastern oil.

c. Increase the Soviet Union’s capability to threaten important

United States–United Kingdom lines of communication.

d. Damage United States prestige in nearby countries and with the

exception of Turkey and possibly Pakistan, seriously weaken, if not de-

stroy, their will to resist communist pressures.

e. Set off a series of military, political and economic developments,

the consequences of which would seriously endanger the security in-

terests of the United States.

2. Present trends in Iran are unfavorable to the maintenance of con-

trol by a non-communist regime for an extended period of time. In

wresting the political initiative from the Shah, the landlords, and other

traditional holders of power, the National Front politicians now in

power have at least temporarily eliminated every alternative to their

own rule except the Communist Tudeh Party. However, the ability of

March 1952–February 1953

the National Front to maintain control of the situation indefinitely is

uncertain. The political upheaval which brought the nationalists to

power has heightened popular desire for promised economic and so-

cial betterment and has increased social unrest. At the same time, na-

tionalist failure to restore the oil industry to operation has led to

near-exhaustion of the government’s financial reserves and to deficit fi-

nancing to meet current expenses, and is likely to produce a progres-

sive deterioration of the economy at large.

3. It is now estimated that communist forces will probably not gain

control of the Iranian Government during 1953. Nevertheless, the Ira-

nian situation contains very great elements of instability. Any US

policy regarding Iran must accordingly take into account the danger

that the communists might be enabled to gain the ascendency as a re-

sult of such possible developments as a struggle for power within the

National Front, more effective communist infiltration of the gov-

ernment than now appears probable, government failure to maintain

the security forces and to take effective action against communist ac-

tivity, or a major crop failure. It is clear that the United Kingdom no

longer possesses the capability unilaterally to assure stability in the

area. If present trends continue unchecked, Iran could be effectively

lost to the free world in advance of an actual communist takeover of the

Iranian Government. Failure to arrest present trends in Iran involves a

serious risk to the national security of the United States.

4. For the reasons outlined above, the major United States policy

objective with respect to Iran is to prevent the country from coming

under communist control. The United States should, therefore, be pre-

pared to pursue the policies which would be most effective in accom-

plishing this objective. In the light of the present situation the United

States should adopt and pursue the following policies:

a. Continue to assist in every practicable way to effect an early and

equitable liquidation of the oil controversy.

b. Be prepared to take the necessary measures to help Iran to start

up her oil industry and to secure markets for her oil so that Iran may

benefit from substantial oil revenues.

c. Be prepared to provide prompt United States budgetary aid to

Iran if, pending restoration of her oil industry and oil markets, such aid

is necessary to halt a serious deterioration of the financial and political

situation in Iran.

In carrying out a, b, and c above, the United States should:

(1) Maintain full consultation with the United Kingdom.

(2) Avoid unnecessarily sacrificing legitimate United Kingdom

interests or unnecessarily impairing United States–United Kingdom

relations.

(3) Not permit the United Kingdom to veto any United States ac-

tions which the United States considers essential to the achievement of

the policy objective set forth above.

(4) Be prepared to avail itself of the authority of the President to

approve voluntary agreements and programs under Section 708 (a) and

(b) of the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended.

d. Recognize the strength of Iranian nationalist feeling; try to direct

it into constructive channels and be ready to exploit any opportunity to

do so, bearing in mind the desirability of strengthening in Iran the

ability and desire of the Iranian people to resist communist pressure.

e. Continue present programs of military, economic and technical

assistance to the extent they will help to restore stability and increase

internal security, and be prepared to increase such assistance to sup-

port Iranian resistance to communist pressure.

f. Encourage the adoption by the Iranian Government of necessary

financial, judicial and administrative and other reforms.

g. Continue special political measures designed to assist in

achieving the above purposes.

h. Plan now for the eventual inclusion of Iran in any regional de-

fense arrangement which may be developed in the Middle East if such

inclusion should later prove feasible.

5. In the event of either an attempted or an actual communist sei-

zure of power in one or more of the provinces of Iran or in Tehran, the

United States should support a non-communist Iranian Government,

including participation in the military support of such a government if

necessary and useful. Preparations for such an eventuality should

include:

a. Plans for the specific military, economic, diplomatic, and psy-

chological measures which should be taken to support a non-

communist Iranian Government or to prevent all or part of Iran or adja-

cent areas from falling under communist domination.

b. Politico-military discussions with the British Government and

such other governments as may be appropriate, with a view to deter-

mining (1) courses of action which might be pursued and (2) the alloca-

tion of responsibility in carrying out such courses of action in the area.

c. Preparatory measures for the implementation of special political

operations in Iran and adjacent Middle Eastern areas, including the

March 1952–February 1953

procurement of such equipment as may be required. [less than 1 line not

declassified] should be maintained with respect to such operations.

d. Perfection of plans concerning the handling of the matter by the

United Nations if and when that becomes necessary.

6. In the event that a communist government achieves complete

control of Iran so rapidly that no non-communist Iranian Government

is available to request assistance, the position of the United States

would have to be determined in the light of the situation at the time, al-

though politico-military-economic discussions leading to plans for

meeting such a situation should be carried on with the British Govern-

ment and with such other governments as may be appropriate. In this

contingency, the United States should make every feasible effort, par-

ticularly through special political operations, to endeavor to develop or

maintain localized centers of resistance and to harass, undermine,

and if possible, to bring about the overthrow of the communist

government.

7. In the event of a Soviet attack by organized USSR military forces

against Iran, the United States in common prudence would have to pro-

ceed on the assumption that global war is probably imminent. Accord-

ingly, the United States should then immediately:

a. Decide in the light of the circumstances existing at the time

whether to attempt to localize the action or to treat it as a casus belli. In

either case necessary measures should include direct diplomatic action

and resort to the United Nations with the objectives of:

(1) Making clear to the world the aggressive character of the Soviet

action.

(2) Making clear to the world United States preference for a

peaceful solution and the conditions upon which the United States

would, in concert with other members of the United Nations, accept

such a settlement.

(3) Obtaining the authorization of the United Nations for member

nations to take appropriate action in the name of the United Nations to

assist Iran.

b. Consider a direct approach to the highest Soviet leaders.

c. Place itself in the best possible position to meet the increased

threat of global war.

d. Consult with selected allies to perfect coordinated plans.

e. Take action against the aggressor to the extent and in the manner

which would best contribute to the security of the United States.

f. Prepare to maintain, if necessary, an Iranian Government-

in-exile.

148.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Byroade) to the

Deputy Under Secretary of State (Matthews)

Washington, November 26, 1952.

SUBJECT

Proposal to Organize a Coup d’e´tat in Iran

Problem:

The British Foreign Office has informed us that it would be dis-

posed to attempt to bring about a coup d’e´tat in Iran, replacing the Mo-

sadeq Government by one which would be more “reliable”, if the

American Government agreed to cooperate. British and American in-

telligence agencies have had very tentative and preliminary discus-

sions regarding the practicability of such a move but cannot go further

unless the State Department is prepared seriously to consider it as a

matter of policy. The intelligence representatives have requested a defi-

nite statement on this point.

Background:

You will recall that the British Embassy on October 8 gave us a

paper which outlined possible ways of meeting the threat of Commu-

nism in Iran. Pursuant to your instructions, Jack Jernegan and others

from the Department and CIA have had three meetings on it with

British Embassy and Intelligence representatives. (The first of these was

summarized in Jernegan’s memorandum of October 23). Among the

possible lines of action mentioned in the British paper was the organi-

zation of a coup d’e´tat, but the paper itself dismissed this as an imprac-

ticable course because of the lack of a suitable Iranian leader. At a

meeting held yesterday, however, the British Embassy said that further

consideration has led the British Government to conclude that a coup

d’e´tat might well be within our capabilities and is probably our best

chance to save Iran.

While the Embassy representative (Bernard Burrows) did not give

details of the British reasoning, it appears that the Foreign Office has

come to this conclusion because (a) British intelligence has reported

that an organization which could handle the job exists in Iran, and (b)

Secret; Special Handling. There is no drafting information on the memorandum, which

was concurred in by Nitze, Berry, Beale, and Henderson.

March 1952–February 1953

the Foreign Office sees virtually no prospect of an oil settlement with

Mosadeq and has little hope that his Government will be able to pre-

vent a Communist takeover.

The British do not appear to have a specific candidate in mind as

the leader of the suggested coup d’e´tat. Judging from our preliminary

discussions with them, they would be willing to settle on any one of

several, the list including both “old guard” politicians and the more

moderate of the nationalist leaders. They say that the organization with

which they are in contact is equally flexible in its views about a leader.

None of the men mentioned, however, sounds like a really strong

figure who could command general support.

CIA and NEA believe that the ability of a new Government to

maintain itself following a coup would depend upon the prompt avail-

ability of political and financial support from Britian and the United

States and the early conclusion of an oil agreement. We gather that the

British concur in this. The British Government, however, would prob-

ably not be willing to offer to the new Government anything substan-

tially better in the way of an oil settlement than the proposals it would

be prepared to make to Dr. Mosadeq. It would rely, therefore, on a

more reasonable attitude on the part of the new regime and on the mo-

bilization of moderate public opinion in Iran to induce that regime to

accept these proposals.

Discussion:

The talks on the British paper started out on an informal and

strictly exploratory basis, at the express request of the British. The

change in the British attitude regarding a coup d’e´tat has now con-

verted them into something much more immediate and definite and

seems to require serious attention at a high level. (Sir Christopher Steel

has requested an appointment with you to discuss the whole matter.)

At the moment, we are called upon to say whether we are willing seri-

ously to consider the suggestion, so that the covert operating agencies

may know whether it is worth their while to get into detailed study of

the technical aspects, (which would involve considerable exchange of

highly sensitive information,) or whether we think the project should

be dropped here and now. Two British intelligence representatives

have come to Washington especially for this discussion but will be

leaving early next week unless the subject is to be pursued.

We could agree seriously to consider the coup d’e´tat proposal

without committing ourselves to its eventual execution, but it must be

recognized that we would be making a considerable step in that direc-

tion. The final decision to attempt it or not might have to be made by

the first of January, since the covert agencies say next April or May

would be the best time to make the move and about four months of

preparation would be necessary.

One element which must be taken into consideration in making

our decision is that we are presently thinking of unilateral action to as-

sist the Mosadeq Government in the event that the British do not agree

to an oil settlement acceptable to Mosadeq. It would be virtually im-

possible to proceed with plans to overthrow Dr. Mosadeq while at the

same time giving him open assistance. Obviously, our assistance

would have the effect of strengthening his Government, whereas the

proposed plan for a coup requires a period of “softening up” designed

to discredit him and make clear to the Iranians that he can expect no

help from the Western Powers. In any case, it seems most improbable

that the British would agree to collaborate in the preparation of a coup

if we were acting unilaterally in a different direction.

With reference to this last point, it is not inconceivable that one

reason for the British suggestion is a desire to forestall unilateral Amer-

ican assistance to Mosadeq. They might take even a tentative agree-

ment on our part to proceed with the coup plan as meaning that we had

abandoned the idea of unilateral action, and this interpretation might

lead them to be less flexible with regard to new oil settlement proposals

of the kind we are now discussing. Conversely, our refusal to consider

the new plan for a coup might induce them to make more determined

efforts to reach an agreement with Mosadeq. It must be expected that

rejection of the British approach would be interpreted by them as em-

phasizing our determination to press for settlement of the oil dispute

with the Mosadeq Government and, in conjuction with the Secretary’s

remarks to Mr. Eden, as emphasizing our continued disagreement

with their estimate that Mosadeq must go before a settlement can be

reached.

Another obvious and vital consideration is the degree of assurance

we can have that preparations for the move and our connection with it

would not become known, and that the coup would eventually suceed.

market Iranian oil and oil products.” (Telegrams 3510 and 1338, and President Truman’s

the Charge´ in Iran, Mattison, reported on Mosadeq’s cool reception of the plan. (Ibid., pp.

March 1952–February 1953

CIA believes that the project is probably feasible and that it could prob-

ably be handled in such a way that British and American connection

with it could never be proven. However, there can never be absolute as-

surance in regard to a matter of this kind especially in a country like

Iran. Many things could go wrong. Furthermore, it must be assumed

that the Iranians would charge the British with complicity in any

sudden political development of this sort, with or without proof, and

that this charge would be echoed by the Soviet bloc and probably many

elements of the Near East and Asia. The general trend in Iran has been

so steadily against the West that any sudden change brought about by

unusual methods would look fishy to world public opinion.

Even if the coup were successful, temporarily, it would not do us

much good if at the same time we further alienated the mass of Iranian

people and the other peoples of the Near East and South Asia.

There is also the danger of possible violent Soviet reaction, espe-

cially if the coup was not completely successful from the beginning. If

some national front leader, such as Kashani, were able to join forces

with the Tudeh and they established themselves somewhere in the

northern provinces, claiming to be the true representatives of the Ira-

nian people, we could have a situation even more serious than we have

today. Such a group would undoubtedly have strong Russian support,

and the difficulties it could create for the central Government in Tehran

are obvious. Even the resumption of the flow of oil and other Western

assistance would probably not be sufficient to redress the balance.

Conclusions:

1. Although we cannot be assured of success in our efforts to save

Iran under Mosadeq, agreement at this time to join with the British in

preparing a coup d’e´tat against Dr. Mosadeq would weaken any

chance of success of our present efforts to formulate a new oil settle-

ment proposal which might be acceptable to the Iranians and the

British.

2. It would necessitate renunciation of any policy of unilateral

American assistance to the present Iranian Government and would

produce a serious deterioration in our relations with Iran over the next

several months. Satisfactory relations might or might not be reestab-

lished after a new Government had been brought to power.

3. There can be no guarantee that the project would succeed or that

its leader could govern Iran more effectively than the present regime.

4. Even if it were successful, the proposed coup might in the long

run work to our disadvantage not only in Iran but in other parts of the

world, especially the Near East.

Recommendations:

1. That you receive Sir Christopher Steel early next week and hear

his statement of the British Government’s views.

149.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 3, 1952.

SUBJECT

British Proposal to Organize a Coup d’e´tat in Iran

PARTICIPANTS

British Embassy

Sir Christopher Steel

Mr. Bernard Burrows

G

Mr. Matthews

S/P

Mr. Nitze

NEA

Mr. Jernegan

cret; Special Handling. Drafted by Jernegan.

March 1952–February 1953

Sir Christopher Steel referred to the previous informal discussions

on ways of combating Communism in Iran and said that the British

Government had not yet come to any definite conclusions. However,

he thought both the British and American participants in the recent

talks had pretty well decided that there are only three possible lines

which events in Iran might take: (1) Mosadeq would remain in power

and would take steps to check the Tudeh; (2) Mosadeq would fall or be

helped out by the British and Americans and replaced by someone dis-

posed to take definite steps against the Communists; or (3) there would

be no change in the governmental attitude and the Communists would

gradually take control.

The British view was that Mosadeq was very unlikely to do any-

thing effective against the Communists. They felt he was by nature too

vacillating to take a strong stand. Mr. Burrows commented that there

was disagreement on this point between the British and Americans.

Mr. Jernegan confirmed that the Department and Ambassador Hen-

derson believed Mosadeq was sincerely anti-Communist and that if

he were able to effect an oil settlement or otherwise strengthen the fi-

nancial position of his Government, he would take a firmer position

against the Tudeh.

I said I understood the British Government was now suggesting

that our two Governments should promote some sort of coup d’e´tat to

replace Dr. Mosadeq. Sir Christopher replied that his Government was

by no means decided on this point but did think it should be seriously

considered and would like us to be thinking about it. I asked some

questions regarding the assurances of success of such an attempt, but

received only general answers. Sir Christopher and Burrows admitted

that the scheme had elements of uncertainty and danger. They insisted,

however, that it might be less dangerous than continued reliance upon

the Mosadeq Government as a barrier against Communism.

Mr. Nitze asked whether it would not be possible to test out the or-

ganization with which the British are in contact in Iran by undertaking

a campaign against Kashani and the Tudeh without trying to displace

Dr. Mosadeq. If such a campaign were successful it would give good

evidence of the possibility of staging a coup d’e´tat to put in a new gov-

ernment. Mr. Burrows did not think this would be feasible because he

doubted if the Iranian organization would be interested in an operation

which did not involve the removal of Mosadeq. Sir Christopher Steel

added that it was difficult, if not impossible, for anyone to do anything

effective against the Tudeh unless he controlled the machinery of the

Government. Mr. Jernegan concurred in this view.

I said we would not want to dismiss the idea of a coup, but we did

feel at least one more effort should be made to arrive at an oil settle-

ment with Mosadeq. I reminded them that we were presently working

150.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,

Central Intelligence Agency

Staff Memorandum No. 296

Washington, December 11, 1952.

SUBJECT

De-briefing of Ambassador Henderson

(The bulk of the following notes were made at the Ambassador’s

conference with the NSC Senior Staff on Tuesday, 2 December. Addi-

tional points have been inserted on the basis of statements made by the

Ambassador to CIA and State intelligence personnel at an earlier ses-

sion on the same day.)

1. Background. By reason of their Shiite religion and Aryan racial

background, the Iranians were isolated among the nations of the

Middle East. They were also traditionally underdogs. As a result they

had less admiration for force than other Moslems and more sympathy

for the defeated in any conflict. In their personal characteristics, the Ira-

Staff Memoranda—1952, Substantive. Secret; Security Information.

March 1952–February 1953

nians were intelligent, facile, and emotional to an almost suicidal de-

gree. The Ambassador stressed this emotional factor, which meant that

Iranians would not necessarily react as Americans might, but were ca-

pable of acting for purely emotional reasons.

2. Attitude toward foreigners and the oil issue. Historically the Iranians

had played off the British and the Russians, but had fared badly when

both worked together as in 1907. Now, the desire to expel all foreign in-

fluence from Iran had become an obsession. On the other hand, the de-

parture of the British had also created at least a temporary feeling of

loneliness, and this had contributed to the fact that the Iranians were

looking to the US more than at any previous time. They had no thought

of taking the British back or of having foreigners running the oil in-

dustry. On the compensation question, they were willing to give “rea-

sonable” compensation as a gesture, but were not willing to “mortgage

the country.” As to oil purchases, they badly wanted US companies to

buy oil, even if only at the rate of 4–5 million tons a year. If this was not

possible, they wanted US financial assistance, though because of the re-

buffs to this suggestion a year ago they would not ask directly for this,

but would only hint.

called NIE–75 an “admirable paper,” but added quickly that he would

stress its qualifications and dark side. Logically, he said that the esti-

mate was correct, but the situation was such that it was dangerous to

rely on logic. The most critical danger was that if the Iranians became

convinced that the US would not help, they might do “very rash

things,” and relations with the US could disintegrate very fast. From a

very low point three months ago (the time of the US–UK joint offer),3

the stock of the US had risen greatly, and the US was now looked to for

vital assistance. However, the Iranians must have something to show

that the US was supporting them, and this “something” must be forth-

coming very soon, at the latest by the end of February. The Ambas-

sador said that he himself was very nearly at the end of his tether in

making explanations for delay, and that a newly appointed Ambas-

sador would have a very short “tether.” As to the form of US assistance,

resumed oil sales would probably be too small to help much from a

strictly economic standpoint, but would help US prestige. On the eco-

nomic side, the Iranians did not want grandiose US-sponsored projects,

but rather would like the US to take over and support some of the

projects they themselves had started. Above all, the US must not inter-

fere in the government. The Iranians regarded US economic aid as in ef-

fect a “debt” (presumably for their past resistance to Communism and

for the wartime occupation).

4. Soviet offers. In response to Mr. Dulles’ question about the possi-

bility that the Soviets might use the expiration of the Caspian Fisheries

rights to make inviting offers, the Ambassador thought that Mossadeq

would seek to stall off this issue, perhaps by asking for a de facto con-

tinuation of the concession, to avoid making any firm answer to what

might be extensive Soviet demands.

5. Political forces within Iran. The Tudeh was growing influence all

the time, for negative reasons in the Ambassador’s judgment. The Am-

bassador gave credence to reports that 20–30 trained revolutionaries

had entered Iranian early July 1952. These had been taken by surprise

by the Qavam riots, and had not been in a position to take decisive ac-

tion then. They were probably now doing everything to lay a better

groundwork for another opportunity when it arose. The Shah had been

reduced to a negligible influence. Kashani, who three months ago had

been flirting with Tudeh to take over the government, now did not

have Tudeh support. Within the National Front, there did not appear to

be any strong potential leader. Saleh (Ambassador to the US) was prob-

ably the best, but his leadership ability was doubtful. Fatemi, the for-

eign minister, was ruthless, ambitious, and capable of strong arm

tactics, and might increase in power. On the military side, Zahedi was

probably the “best of the lot,” but it was doubtful whether he had any

real following. Any military man would suffer from the fact that ci-

vilians generally distrusted the military. Moreover, the Army was very

limited and narrow in its outlook.

6. Situation in the Iranian Army. The Army was now “in the wings”

marking time. The top command was largely demoralized and going

through the motions only. Mossadeq had deliberately sought to create

a cleavage between the top command (down to Lt. Col. level) and ju-

nior officers, and had largely succeeded. The Army as a whole was

probably still an effective force if given adequate leadership. However,

the present Chief of Staff probably would not act decisively in any

major disturbance, but would wait to see what the result was likely to

be.

7. Conditions for an oil settlement. The Ambassador named the fol-

lowing as the minimum Iranian conditions:

a. Iranian control of the oil supply and industry.

b. Free sale of Iranian oil at a fair price.

c. A money advance to the Iranian Government, which could be in

the form of a loan.

d. Provision for compensation to the British, either through a lump

sum or through arbitration under conditions that would limit Iran’s

151.

Letter From the Charge´ d’Affaires in Iran (Mattison) to the

Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs,

Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian and African Affairs,

Department of State (Richards)

Tehran, December 18, 1952.

Dear Arthur:

As a result of receiving the National Intelligence Estimate on Iran

we have worked out the following comments, which I am sending in

a letter to you for such use as you may care to make. There also is

attached a memorandum upon certain economic sections of the

Estimate.

Any variance of opinion that there may be in our view of the Intel-

ligence Estimate may be boiled down to a differing concept of the

present Government. Here we consider that even the concept of a Na-

tional Front organization, beset as it may have been by potential dissen-

sions, has become outmoded. In essence, what we have is a Mosadeq

Government with full support from only a portion of the traditional

National Front groupings—the others being too untrustworthy, if not

at odds with Mosadeq. At present the Iran Party and a few ambitious

men such as Fatami are the only “certain” Mosadeq henchmen,

whereas Kashani and Baqai maintain but a surface cooperation with

the Prime Minister. This really means that the only true organizational

support for Mosadeq rests with the Armed Forces. Mosadeq for the

time is not challenged as Prime Minister, but to go on the assumption,

as the Intelligence Estimate does, that “a National Front Government”

can carry on through 1953 seems unrealistic to us in view of what I have

said above and in view of the fact that only Mosadeq might possibly be

able to do the trick.

It is not unlikely that the elements becoming more antagonistic to

Mosadeq might even turn to the Tudeh Party for support. Kashani

might do this if he became convinced, as we believe, that his political

importance is declining vis-a`-vis Mosadeq. This would indeed be se-

rious, as the Intelligence Estimate implied, if Mosadeq should disap-

pear from the political arena and if political factions should bid against

each other for Tudeh support. Our hope (because this is speculative)

would be that the Armed Forces would not be too weakened by Mo-

sadeq maneuvers designed to assure political loyalty among the mili-

tary officers, so that a virtual military regime could take over if Mo-

sadeq disappeared from the political scene.

The political factors that are given in the Intelligence Estimate as

potentially operative after 1953 are just as inherent in the situation for

the near future, for it is most difficult to affirm that they would not

show their explosive possibilities at any time before the end of 1953.

Put another way, the Intelligence Estimate does not show convincingly

how these could not erupt in 1953.

We are inclined to believe that with the current nationalist em-

phasis upon an oil-less economy, the present Government’s objectives

may be achieved if “substantial” quantities were sold abroad, since this

would symbolize Mosadeq’s victory over the UK, and be a reaffirma-

tion of Iranian political independence. Similarly on oil, paragraph 5 of

the conclusions conjectures that Iran would make the same efforts to

sell oil to the Soviet bloc as to the West. This idea is developed in para-

with restrictive provisions of United States legislation, such as the

Battle Act, which would place such economic aid as Iran is now re-

ceiving in serious jeopardy. We doubt at this stage, with the prospect of

continued Point IV assistance on a scale comparable to the present—

not to mention military aid, which Mosadeq might continue to wel-

come since he controls the Armed forces—that the present regime

would actively seek to sell oil to the Soviet bloc.

This week we have received a visit from a pleasant G–2 colonel,

who works on Iran at the Pentagon and who told us that the Embassy’s

two estimate telegrams were considered too alarmist. We asked him on

what basis this impression was acquired and he stated that some like

himself, “perhaps taking the long view”, felt that Iran had existed for

thousands of years, had been getting into scrapes during that time, and

had been getting out of them, with something turning up to save the

situation. Our only reply, of course, to such an argument was that all of

us at times, in order to keep a sense of balance, could not help but hope

that some unknown “X-factor” or deus ex machina would intervene fa-

March 1952–February 1953

vorably to change the complexion of things. This contingency we had

provided for by emphasizing that our estimates were made on the basis

of present political factors. The so-called “X-factor” could be a policy

matter to the extent that the United States might try to change the situa-

tion through specific programs. But this had no part in an impartial es-

timate of the factors now operating upon the Iranian situation. This

type of “long view” as a basis for intelligence planning seems meaning-

less except in terms of new policy recommendations on our part, or

completely unforeseeable developments in Iran. The countries in the

communist world are “going on”, but unfortunately for our side, as

tools of the Kremlin’s policies. Naturally, we have to hope at all times

that things will break our way, but no serious planning policy can go

on the assumption that we will be given presents.

All best wishes and I hope to be seeing everyone back home very

shortly.

Sincerely yours,

Gordon H. Mattison

152.

National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, January 9, 1953.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN IRAN THROUGH 1953

The Problem

To estimate probable future developments in Iran through 1953.

Conclusions

1. The Iranian situation contains so many elements of instability

that it is impossible to estimate with confidence for more than a few

months. On the basis of present indications, however, it appears prob-

able that a National Front government will remain in power through

1953, despite growing unrest. The government has the capability to

take effective repressive action to check mob violence and Tudeh agita-

tion and will probably continue to act against specific challenges of this

sort as they arise. The government is likely to retain the backing of the

Shah and control over the security forces.

2. Even in the absence of substantial oil revenues and of foreign

economic aid, Iran can probably export enough to pay for essential im-

ports through 1953, unless there is a serious crop failure or an unfavor-

able export market. The government probably will be able to obtain

funds for its operation. Some inflation will occur. Capital development

will be curtailed, and urban living standards will fall. However, we do

not believe that economic factors, in themselves, will result in the over-

throw of the National Front in 1953.

3. Under these circumstances, the Communist Tudeh Party is not

likely to develop the strength to overthrow the National Front by con-

stitutional means or by force during the period of this estimate. Al-

though the danger of serious Tudeh infiltration of the National Front

and the bureaucracy continues, Tudeh is also unlikely to gain control

by this means during 1953. Nevertheless, unexpected events, such as a

serious crop failure or a split in the National Front as a result of rivalry

among its leaders, would increase Tudeh capabilities greatly. And if

dicates that the following member organizations of the Intelligence Advisory Committee

participated with the Central Intelligence Agency in the preparation of this estimate: The

intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force,

and the Joint Staff. This estimate, NIE–75/1, incorporates certain amendments to the con-

which was published November 13, 1952. All members of the Intelligence Advisory

March 1952–February 1953

present trends in Iran continue unchecked beyond the end of 1953,

rising internal tensions and continued deterioration of the economy

and of the budgetary position of the government are likely to lead to a

breakdown of governmental authority and open the way for at least a

gradual assumption of control by Tudeh.

4. Settlement of the oil dispute with the UK is unlikely in 1953.

5. During 1953 Iran will attempt to sell oil to other buyers, both in

the Soviet Bloc and the West. Shortage of tankers will limit sales to the

Soviet Bloc to token amounts. Small independent Western oil com-

panies will probably not buy significant quantities of oil. We estimate

that major Western oil companies will not be willing to make an agree-

ment with Iran so long as the current legal, economic, and political ob-

stacles exist. Nevertheless, some moderate-sized oil companies are be-

coming restive, and it is possible that combinations for the purchase

and transport of substantial quantities of Iranian oil may be made

unless there is direct and strong objection by the US Government. The

British would probably regard any arrangement between US oil com-

panies and Iran, in the absence of British concurrence, as a serious

breach of UK–US solidarity.

6. Kashani or possibly another National Front leader might replace

Mossadeq during 1953. Any successor would probably be forced to re-

sort to ruthless tactics to eliminate opposition. In his struggle to elimi-

nate his opposition and particularly if he failed to do so, Tudeh influ-

ence and opportunities for gaining control would increase rapidly.

7. The Mossadeq regime almost certainly desires to keep US sup-

port as a counterweight to the USSR and appears to want US economic

and military assistance. Nevertheless, there will probably be an in-

creasing disposition to blame the US, not only for Iran’s failure to sell

substantial amounts of oil or to obtain an oil settlement, but also for

Iran’s financial and economic difficulties.

8. Therefore, the US Point Four and military missions are likely to

find it even more difficult to operate during 1953 than at present. They

would probably be placed under severe restrictions if Kashani or other

extremists came to power. However, neither the Mossadeq Govern-

ment nor a successor National Front regime is likely to expel these mis-

sions during 1953.

9. The USSR appears to believe that the Iranian situation is devel-

oping favorably to its objectives. We do not believe that the USSR will

take drastic action in Iran during 1953 unless there is a far more serious

deterioration of Iranian internal stability than is foreseen in this esti-

mate. However, the USSR has the capability for greatly increasing its

overt and covert interference in Iran at any time, to the detriment of US

security interests.

Discussion

INTERNAL THREAT TO IRANIAN SECURITY

Continuing deterioration of Iranian situation, confusion in Tehran

highlighted by:

1. The oil problem. Mossadeq told Ambassador Henderson that on

army.

d) No indication of unified tribal plot. Concerted tribal effort

might result in breakdown of internal law and order.

(1) Soviet contacts among tribes, especially Kurds, long reported,

evidence slim.

(2) Bakhtiari are alleged to have accepted Soviet aid, reportedly

plan to repudiate it, set up independent pro-Western state in south if

government comes under Tudeh influence.

(3) British intrigues constantly reported especially among south-

western tribes including Bakhtiari.

e) Imminent failure of oil negotiations and continuing internal de-

cline will not necessarily arouse tribes to action.

4. Mossadeq 13 Feb threatened to throw up his hands and resign:

NSC Briefing 18 Feb 53. Top Secret; Security Information; Canoe. Prepared for Dulles for

his briefing to the NSC on February 18. The official minutes of the NSC meeting of Feb-

ruary 18 record under the heading “Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. Secu-

rity,” that the NSC “discussed the subject in the light of an oral briefing by the Acting Di-

rector of Central Intelligence on Latin America and on the situation in Iran.” (National

Box 23, 132nd Meeting)

154.

Memorandum From Acting Director of Central Intelligence

Dulles to the Under Secretary of State (Smith)

Washington, February 19, 1953.

In connection with your mention of Max Thornburg, I attach as of

possible interest a copy of a letter I have just received from him under

date of 10 February with regard to Iran.

Following our conversation and one I had with Foster, I have ca-

bled Max Thornburg at Bahrain to inquire as to his plans regarding re-

turn and asking whether he could make a visit to the United States at

this time if it proved desirable. I have not yet had a reply.

Allen W. Dulles

Since dictating the above, I received this morning the following

cable from Max Thornburg: “Yours 16th can come anytime after few

days if your judgement warrants stop. Would appreciate whatever no-

tice possible also probable duration visit so can rearrange other plans

as otherwise not returning USA until early summer. Max.” Shall I ask

him to come here?

Attachment

Umm a’Sabaan Island, Bahrain, Persian Gulf, February 10, 1953.

Dear Allen,

I attach no particular importance to the enclosed clipping which

represents the views of a certain Mr. McGaffin of London, but it does

seem to run uncomfortably close to the thinking in Washington, as well

as one can judge by external evidence. Because of that apparent paral-

lelism it caught my attention.

According to McGaffin, a “new” development faces us in Persia—

new, that is, in December. During these last weeks in office Dean has

had revealed to him that Mossedegh is now faced with a struggle be-

tween two rival factions—Kashani and Tudeh—as a result of which he

might be replaced with someone even less desirable to the West. Dean

has therefore remained close to his desk and Loy has rushed home to

acquaint Eisenhower (and no doubt Foster) with this disquieting intel-

ligence, and to urge that Mossedegh be supported by us at all costs,

even though this means disregarding British views. “They say” that

Dean told Eisenhower that the next forty days might mean either peace

or war, depending upon events in Tehran.

Accepting this depiction of the good Doctor’s dilemma, what is

“new” about it?

Even after we bow McGaffin out, queasy feeling remains that he

has been recently in Washington and reports what he observes, there as

well as in Tehran, and that Washington has recently discovered the sit-

uation and is prepared to meet it resolutely.

You are quite familiar with my views concerning Persia, but just to

put my mind at ease—and to keep yours from getting that way—I

would like to restate my own appraisal of that situation briefly. You

will recognize it as the same appraisal I expressed in Tehran in 1950, to

Dean in 1951, to David Bruce in 1952, and to many others throughout

that period.

Mossedegh was put into power by the unholy coalition between

Kashani and Tudeh in the summer of 1951 following Razmara’s

murder and Husain Ala’s brief interregnum. His popularity, based

upon the emotional appeal of a skillfully conducted “out-with-all-

foreigners” propaganda campaign, and supported by terrorist control

of the government, made him the logical compromise candidate of the

rival factions, until they were ready to fight it out between themselves.

March 1952–February 1953

From time to time he has been able to strike out at one or the other of

them, where their interests differ, but at no time has he been in a posi-

tion to move against them both where their interests coincide—as they

do in blocking any kind of an oil agreement that might help to restore

order and prosperity in the country, which neither of the rival factions

wants. Mossedegh just isn’t that kind of a Prime Minister, whatever his

personal virtues may be, nor has he ever been. Naguib is, and Shishakly

may be, but Mossedegh is not. He is as much a captive as the Shah him-

self, and as unable to make a deal which would stand up against the op-

position of Kashani and Tudeh, or against the anti-alien hostility which

he himself has done so much to arouse.

“But that”, the Department would say, “is exactly why we must

make the oil agreement—to strengthen him so he can put the rest of his

house in order”.

Suppose that we were successful in supporting him to the extent

necessary to produce an oil agreement, thereafter supplementing this

with aids of various kinds, and a month later he retires or perhaps joins

his fathers, one or the other of which may reasonably be expected. We

would be right back where we were in 1950—looking for another

Razmara.

Anyone who knows the men around Mossedegh as well as I do

must know that they are not the kind of men who can carry any prac-

tical program through to completion. Fatemi, Kazemi, Makki, Hassibi

and the rest are all ineffective political flaneurs. In other words, in

backing Mossedegh we are not backing an institution which possesses

the quality of continuity apart from the individuals in it, but only a vol-

atile personality that has become the popular symbol of “liberation”.

Such symbols don’t have successors.

If we want really to support Mossedegh, not as a symbol but as the

effective leader of a movement robust enough to survive the on-

slaughts of Kashani, Tudeh and other opposing forces, our effort must

be to make him part of an institution capable of doing what we have in

mind. Unless we are ready to create and support a Republic there

(which Persian voting power in the United States hardly warrants) the

answer seems to be to accept the institution traditionally and constitu-

tionally represented by the Shah, and make Mossedegh part of that.

While he lasts he could be as big a part of it as he wanted to be, and step

out when he chooses to with all flags flying, leaving in his place the best

man that can be found.

As you know, I am not one of those who regards the Shah as

“weak”, but only as young, beaten-down and understandably sceptical

about any real support coming from the United States or Britain.

For some time I have not been in a position to know details, but it

appears that instead of putting this kind of a proposition up to Mos-

155.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

3306. 1. Available information indicates Mosadeq Government

being subjected to opposition forces whose lines have not (repeat not)

yet hardened. National movement organization continues disintegrate.

Such pressure is having adverse effect upon health Prime Minister and

upon his relations with associates, several of whom privately assert

change of government will take place. Talk again reviving among

Prime Minister’s opponents as to type of successor regime which it as-

sumes Shah would support. This talk assumes such government would

be able handle any int disturbances.

2. Embassy and CAS sources indicate decline in Mosadeq’s mental

stability. He apparently depressed by growing sense of frustration and

at times has evidenced paranoid distrust of everyone, including even

his closest advisers. Some of closest associates admit Prime Minister in-

creasingly irrational.

Security Information. Repeated to London and pouched to Moscow, Kabul, Karachi,

Baghdad, Ankara, Cairo, Amman, Beirut, Rome, Dhahran, Isfahan, Tabriz, and Meshed.

Received at 12: p.m.

March 1952–February 1953

3. Both Police Chief Afshartus and Deputy Prime Minister Kazemi

reliably reported to have expressed private belief that change of gov-

ernment would take place “within few weeks”. Source close to Deputy

Hasibi, member pro-Mosadeq Iran Party, alleged even Hasibi had

stated “Mosadeq must go”. According to one reliable source Prime

Minister collecting documentary evidence to prove that some failures

of his government were due to bad counsel given by his closest ad-

visers. Kashani reported by press to have said in February 16 meeting

of deputies that government was failing to improve conditions in

country but “situation will change and all will be well again”. Other

factors indicate progressive weakening of Mosadeq’s political position.

Disintegration national movement coalition seems to be accelerating

3271, February 19).

As usual, in period of apparent declining fortunes of Prime Min-

ister, talk and maneuvers have begun looking toward eventual suc-

cessor. Political circles beginning privately allege Shah would welcome

and support change. Similarly, it appears that opposition elements to

Mosadeq are being drawn into Kashani’s orbit to achieve common pur-

pose. Some of these elements have no basic sympathy for Kashani but

gather around him as most effective symbol in fight against Mosadeq.

Perennial candidates Ali Mansur and General Zahedi are once more

being talked about and there are varied suggestions of types coalition

government which would achieve greatest future support and which

would be capable handling int disturbances, such as current Bakhtiari

tribal uprising.

conversation with Melbourne. Shayegan, as the Mosadeq government’s leader in the

Majlis, confirmed that the National Front, as previously understood, no longer existed. In

fact, the government no longer termed itself a “National Front” government. “According

Dr. Shayegan, current definition of government is nationalist movement embodied in Dr.

Mosadeq and his friends.” Shayegan blamed this development on the “personal ambi-

tions” of Kashani, Baqai, and Maki. Nevertheless, “Shayegan believed that fraction as re-

sult new situation had gained materially in efficiency and vitality, since disruptive in-

mentary members from the Iran Party to form a “splinter party called Association for Lib-

the National Front in the Majlis. “Only one (Shayegan) of 9 nationalist deputies who

sponsored oil nationalization in 16 Majlis remains in nationalist movement fraction sup-

porting Mosadeq. Approximately half remaining members nationalist movement frac-

tion openly demonstrated attachment to Prime Minister only after fall Qavam and forma-

156.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

3342. 1. Ardeshir Zahedi, son of Zahedi who severed relations with

Point IV several months ago at request Prime Minister, called on Com-

mander Pollard, Naval Attache´, at latter’s residence last evening. They

are old friends and have maintained friendly contact during last two

years. During course evening Ardeshir outlined to Pollard present dif-

ferences between Shah and Mosadeq and said it possible father would

become Prime Minister within few days. He stated that there had been

two groups working for successor to Mosadeq. One group had sup-

ported Ali Mansur, other Zahedi. Mansur group several days ago had

decided to throw in its lot with Zahedi. Also supporting Zahedi were

Kashani, Baqai, leading officers of armed forces, et cetera. Zahedi was

determined that before he would take over power an organization

should be perfected and plans would be laid to maintain law and order

so that incidents of last July would not (repeat not) be repeated. Zahedi

thought he would have support of Shah but he was not (repeat not)

sure. He would act, however, regardless of Shah’s attitude. Ardeshir

added that his father had always been friendly to US and Western

world and must depend on good will, particularly of US, for success his

government. His father had several candidates for each portfolio in his

proposed Cabinet and would if named Prime Minister give Shah op-

cret; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 12: p.m.

March 1952–February 1953

portunity to express his preferences in that list. General already had

good informal contact with court. If US should have in mind any per-

sonalities who might make good Cabinet members he sure his father

would be glad consider them.

2. Pollard thanked Ardeshir for giving him this information and

pointed out that it was US Government policy not (repeat not) to inter-

fere in any way in internal affairs Iran.

3. This morning Ardeshir again saw Pollard for few moments. He

said that his father was at time participating in meeting for purpose de-

ciding what measures should be taken to guarantee public security in

case General should become Prime Minister. During this meeting they

would select officer for position Chief of Staff. Ardeshir also indicated

that his father expected come in by constitutional means and would ob-

tain overwhelming support of Majlis. In order not (repeat not) to strain

relations with Kashani in early days his government he did not (repeat

not) propose to ask Shah to dismiss Majlis and call for new elections.

He would prefer, if possible, to work at least temporarily with present

Majlis.

4. Ardeshir also had brief conversation yesterday with Warne. He

told Warne that his father might become Prime Minister in next few

days. Although his father would be anxious to settle oil problem at

early date it would not (repeat not) be possible in view internal political

situation for him to do so immediately. He probably would need some

kind financial assistance from US before he would be in position to

settle oil dispute. It might be fatal for him to settle oil dispute at once

and then receive financial assistance because he would be charged with

selling out country.

5. Both Warne and Pollard realize delicacy of situation and have

stated they will use circumspection in any relations they may have with

Ardeshir. Pollard, however, had agreed to see Ardeshir for few mo-

ments shortly after noon today.

Henderson

157.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Current Intelligence,

Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, February 24, 1953.

PRIME MINISTER MOSSADEQ’S THREAT TO RESIGN

On 20 February Prime Minister Mossadeq sent a brusque message

to the Shah stating that he could no longer tolerate his unfriendly atti-

tude and would therefore resign on 24 February. Mossadeq said he

would announce publicly that he was forced to offer his resignation be-

cause of the intrigues of the Shah and the royal court. He charged that

the Shah was responsible for the current tribal unrest as well as encour-

aging retired army officers to plot against the government.

On this same day, 20 February, Ambassador Henderson presented

to Mossadeq the latest draft of the British offer to settle the oil dispute

and the American offer to purchase oil when an agreement was

reached. Mossadeq appeared friendly, but said he was sure that the

proposals in their present form would be unacceptable to Iran. He

promised to answer soon.

On 22 February Iranian Foreign Minister Fatemi announced that a

decision might be delayed several days. Subsequently, press reports

from Tehran predicted a rejection of the British offer and the threat of

Mossadeq’s resignation.

Mossadeq has recently taken several steps to reduce drastically the

Shah’s influence, probably to keep him from injecting himself into the

situation. Mossadeq has cut off the government subsidy for the Shah’s

important “Imperial Organization for Social Welfare” and is also at-

tempting to take from him the guardianship of the funds from the

wealthy Meshed Shrine. Mossadeq has also criticized the manner in

which the Shah is distributing Crown lands. Minister of Court Ala be-

lieves that Mossadeq is trying to reduce the Shah to a state of “servile

dependence.”

The Shah has repeatedly placated Mossadeq by making conces-

sions. He apparently has no definite plans for action should the Prime

Minister resign, and has given no indication that he has the necessary

determination either to take over control or to give resolute support to

any new Prime Minister named by him.

NSC Briefing 25 Feb 53. Top Secret; Information Only.

158.

Editorial Note

On February 24, 1953, representatives of the Governments of the

United States and the United Kingdom met in Nicosia, Cyprus, to pre-

pare for the possibility of a bid for power in Iran by the Tudeh Party.

Representatives of both governments agreed that, should the Tudeh

Party attempt to come to power, efforts would be made to preserve the

remnants of a free government which could then, from within Iran or

from the outside, lead a resistance movement against a Tudeh-

dominated Iran. To that end, the U.S. and U.K. officials agreed to (1) es-

tablish contact with the Shah to strengthen his resolve to resist a Tudeh

push for power; (2) establish contact with an Iranian political leader

upon whom Anglo-American representatives could rely to preserve

the vestiges of a free government (among those Iranian politicians con-

sidered for this role were Zahedi, Makki, Buruijirdi, Sayed Zia, and

Mosadeq); (3) initiate a propaganda campaign, using Anglo-American

facilities, against the Tudeh both within Iran and outside it; (4) activate

a stay-behind program; and (5) maintain contact with potential resis-

tance groups in southern Iran, including the Qashqai and Bakhtiari.

The meeting established the guiding principles of Anglo-American co-

operation, at both the policy and intelligence levels, and agreed that

specific contingency plans would be developed in the months ahead.

12, TPAJAX)

159.

Briefing Notes Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

for Director of Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, undated.

IRAN

ruary2 in view

a. palace intrigues,

b. Shah’s unfriendly attitude and

c. his responsibility for disturbances among tribes and in army.

2. Same day Ambassador Henderson presented last British offer

which received in friendly way but likely to be rejected. No real change.

3. Mossadeq is out to finish Shah and reportedly has made three

demands

1. Turn over Crown property to government

2. Abandon control of army

3. Clean out court

DCI Dulles’ briefing to the NSC. There is a notation on the notes indicating they were

“used.”

160.

Memorandum for the Record Prepared in the Directorate of

Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, February 25, 1953.

SUBJECT

Minutes of Meeting with Representatives of State, Defense, and JCS,

Defense

Colonel Wright (JSPD)

Lieutenant Colonel Black (OSD)

CIA

Brigadier General Balmer, [less than 1 line not declassified]

[4 lines not declassified]

Mr. Waller [less than 1 line not declassified]

[2 lines not declassified]

[Omitted here are 3 pages of discussion on matters unrelated to

Iran.]

4. Report on Iran:

Mr. Waller described current CIA psychological warfare and para-

military operations and plans with respect to five possible conditions in

Iran. These are: (a) the present government; (b) a more rational gov-

ernment oriented toward the West; (c) a more hostile government; (d) a

government under absolute Tudeh control; and (e) Soviet occupation.

Under present conditions, the prime target is the Tudeh Party, and

CIA is conducting operations to counteract its influence. Although

there is widespread feeling in Iran against British and U.S. policies, CIA

has influenced specific leaders, has tended to curb Tudeh’s outward

manifestations, and has had some effect in making distribution of

Tudeh literature more hazardous. The general line of attack has been to

discredit Tudeh in terms of nationalism and religion and above all to

blast open the front groups. CIA has also conducted operations against

Soviet influence and has met with some success in influencing the gov-

ernment not to renew the Soviet fisheries concessions. CIA has also en-

gaged in operations against the Nationalist leader, Kashani, and has

tried to provoke him into taking a stand for or against the Tudeh Party.

If a more moderate government, oriented toward the West, should

come into power, its greatest opposition would be that of the Tudeh

Party. In Mr. Waller’s opinion, if CIA had the cooperation of such a

moderate government, CIA could help restrict the Tudeh Party, at least

temporarily, and help neutralize the influence of Kashani.

Mr. Waller reported that legalization of the Tudeh Party and sig-

nificant increase in the power of the Tudeh would impair CIA’s capa-

bilities, since it would be more difficult to get anti-Tudeh groups to

speak out. Such a situation would probably not, however, interfere

with CIA’s dealings with potential resistance groups. Under the condi-

tion of actual Tudeh control, Mr. Waller said that CIA’s political and

psychological warfare capabilities would be severely curtailed, but that

CIA could encourage and assist tribal groups to maintain control

within their zones, Mr. Waller reported that CIA has stockpiled enough

arms and demolition material to support a 10,000-man guerrilla organi-

zation for six months and has entered into a tentative agreement with

March 1952–February 1953

certain tribal elements in the south of Iran to establish safe haven bases.

[1½ lines not declassified]

Mr. Waller said that cartoons are especially effective in Iran be-

cause of the high illiteracy rate, and showed samples of cartoons in use

at present.

Mr. Horsey asked what can be done to temper nationalism. Mr.

Waller reported that CIA has tried to encourage moderate elements

within the National Front and to oppose extremists, but so far this has

consisted more in opposing than encouraging.

In answer to Mr. Berry’s question, Mr. Waller said that CIA is both

attacking Kashani and trying to smoke him out on the Tudeh Party

issue. In answer to [name not declassified] question about the British psy-

chological warfare effort in Iran, Mr. Waller said that the British are in a

stay-behind status already and have been very active with anti-

Government tribal groups in Southern Iran. Mr. Waller also said that,

should the Tudeh Party come into power, the U.S. would probably be

allied with the British and reported that CIA had had some discussions

with the British about this possibility.

Mr. Berry gave his opinion that the Iranian armed forces would be

a big element in time of trouble and said that he hoped CIA is keeping

close liaison with them. Mr. Waller agreed on their importance but

stated that dealing with elements of the armed forces is difficult be-

cause of frequent re-shuffling of army commands. Colonel Black asked

about a recent article in the New York Times reporting the presence of a

Soviet agent in Iran. Mr. Waller said that CIA has had reports of Soviet

agents among the Azerbaijani Kurds, but that CIA had been able to

make little or no progress in counteracting Soviet influence in this very

remote country. In answer to Mr. Berry’s question about the loyalty of

the armed forces, Mr. Waller gave his opinion that it was doubtful if

they would fire on their own people in the event of urban demonstra-

tions or riots. Mr. Waller also expressed his view that one of the main

troubles with Iranian security forces is lack of adequate riot control

techniques.

Mr. Waller said that CIA’s operations could probably be more ef-

fective if more specific policy direction could be given as far as possible

in advance. Colonel Black asked about the reason for the Soviet reac-

tion to the Iranian cancellation of fishing rights, and Mr. Waller said it

was possibly designed to contrast with the British reaction to the oil

concession cancellation.

[name not declassified] raised the question of operational direction in

case of gradual Tudeh infiltration of government agencies in which it is

difficult to ascertain when the Tudeh has actually gained the upper

hand. Mr. Berry agreed there is dangerous possibility that we would be

too late in realizing Tudeh domination, and [name not declassified] asked

161.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

3393. 1. Ala Minister Court came to see me tonight, obviously wor-

ried and distressed. Said he wanted to talk in utmost secrecy. During

conversation between Shah and Mosadeq on February 24, latter had in-

dicated that it might be good idea after all for Shah leave country as

soon as possible and to remain abroad until situation Iran had become

more stable. Shah had jumped at chance get out of country; had said he

delighted Prime Minister had withdrawn objections to his departure.

How soon could he go? Prime Minister had suggested Saturday Feb-

ruary 28. During this talk Prime Minister had made no (repeat no) fur-

ther reference to his previous suggestions that government take over

crown lands, Meshed shrine revenues, etc. Prime Minister had insisted

he loyal to crown and wanted Shah to go for latter’s own good. Shah’s

departure would prevent him from continuing to be innocent victim of

intrigues against government.

2. Shah told Ala this morning his nerves in such condition he could

not (repeat not) remain Tehran until February 28; he desired leave

Tehran by auto morning February 26 for Baghdad, visit Holy Cities

Qerbala and Najaf, and then go to Europe. Ala in vain tried persuade

Shah postpone his departure. Shah insisted Ala immediately request

travel documents.

3. Prime Minister told Ala he thought it good idea for Shah leave

tomorrow. He could arrange travel documents at once. Ala finally per-

suaded Prime Minister it would look better if Shah would not (repeat

not) go until Saturday. Ala asked re regency in Shah’s absence. Mo-

cret; Security Information; NIACT; Noforn. Repeated to London, Baghdad, and Madrid.

March 1952–February 1953

sadeq said he had not (repeat not) thought of that. He then suggested

himself, Ghulam Reza (younger half-brother Shah), and Ala. He re-

fused consider Ali Reza, Shah’s full brother who usually considered

next in line of succession.

4. Shah was perplexed when he learned Mosadeq passing over Ali

in favor Ghulam for regency. He feared family rift. Decided to ask Ali

accompany him abroad for sake of appearances.

5. Ala fears hasty departure Shah will be interpreted as flight and

will lower Shah’s prestige to such extent as to endanger institution of

monarchy. Shah also thinks it possible Mosadeq may follow Naguib’s

example. Ala told me he personally in difficult situation. He bound to

secrecy by both Shah and Mosadeq. He sees disaster coming yet cannot

(repeat not) appeal to other Iranian representatives or leaders for

counsel and assistance. He would not (repeat not) remain silent if he

convinced any useful purpose could be served in persuading Shah not

(repeat not) to leave. Shah at present in almost hysterical state. Ala

feared complete nervous breakdown and irrational action if Shah com-

pelled to stay in present circumstances. In order preserve appearances

Ala trying arrange for Spanish Government invite Shah for visit. If this

arrangement could be effected, it was hoped that first announcement

would merely be Shah going on pilgrimage to Iraq. While Shah was in

Iraq, announcement could then be made he had accepted invitation to

visit Spain.

6. I agree departure Shah may be first step in direction of abolition

of monarchy. I asked Ala if there was anything which I could do. He

said that he feared not (repeat not). I was not (repeat not) supposed to

know of these plans and it might do more harm than good for me to

take any step which might give impression that he had talked to me

about them. In any event, Ala thought neither Mosadeq nor Shah was

to be swayed from their decision. Mosadeq so unpredictable it useless

for me try prophesy what he will do. Although he has assured both Ala

and Shah of his loyalty to Shah it quite possible that some of his ad-

visers who are opposed to monarchy may persuade him in not (repeat

not) distant future to demand Shah’s abdication.

Henderson

162.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

3397. 1. I dislike remaining inactive at time when monarchical in-

stitution which we have in past regarded as stabilizing influence

country is in grave danger (Embassy telegram 3393, February 25 re-

number years in view of peculiar situation Iran it has been one of our

policies to support Shah. During last two years it has become increas-

ingly clear that Shah is weak reed. His inability to take decisions cou-

pled with his tendency to interfere in political life has on occasions been

disruptive influence. Nevertheless Shah and court are basically

pro-West and their present opponents, which include not (repeat not)

only radical wing Iran party and other nationalist movement elements

but also Tudeh are in general either unfriendly to West or at best neu-

tral. It would be mistake for us to take position re dispute between Mo-

sadeq and court which would result in coalescence nationalist move-

ment and Tudeh. On other hand collapse of monarchy at this moment

leaves clear field to Mosadeq who surrounded by influences not (repeat

not) particularly friendly to West.

2. One of our problems is that those groups in Iran which are

anti-West or neutralist are in general inclined to be dynamic while

those which are inherently friendly toward West are for most part pas-

sive and seemingly incapable of organized action. Even Zahedi who

has been more dynamic than most political leaders fairly friendly to

163.

Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Office of

National Estimates (Kent) to Director of Central Intelligence

Dulles

Washington, February 27, 1953.

SUBJECT

Developments in Iran

1. Recent events in Iran, and the news of the probable departure of

the Shah, lead to the following conclusions:

a. Mossadeq has won a considerable victory. He has temporarily

repressed the major elements of non-Communist opposition to his re-

gime. If the Shah leaves Iran, the principal rallying-point for this oppo-

sition will have been removed from the scene.

b. The nature of Mossadeq’s victory emphasizes again that his

power is personal; it is not based upon a well-knit political and security

organization. Opposition has not been permanently suppressed. Un-

less Mossadeq consolidates his power to a greater degree than seems

likely he will feel obliged repeatedly to rely upon unpredictable coups

like that of the past weekend.

c. We believe it likely that Mossadeq will continue to dominate the

sible, but we believe it unlikely, that news of the departure of the Shah

might precipitate unrest beyond the power of Mossadeq’s government

to control.

164.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

Iran

2238. In view Shah’s apparent desire leave Iran and Mosadeq’s po-

sition that Shah should leave, Department sees little which could use-

fully be done to prevent Shah’s departure. We are currently assessing

significance this crisis and developments likely flow from Shah’s de-

parture, and would appreciate any comments you may have in amplifi-

cation urtel 33972 rpt London 1103. Department will attempt minimize

to press significance Shah’s departure Iran but there is every likelihood

press will take line that Shah has fled Iran and his case is similar to

Farouk’s.

Dulles

cret; Security Information; Limited Distribution; Priority. Drafted by Stutesman and ap-

proved by Richards. Repeated to London.

March 1952–February 1953

165.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

3431. 1. Court source extremely close Shah told Embassy Attache´

yesterday evening that Shah on insistence Mosadeq planning leave

country very soon. I authorized Attache´ convey through this source to

Shah my opinion that it might have extremely unfortunate conse-

quences for Iran if latter should leave country just now in apparently

hasty manner. Shah sent back message he did not (repeat not) really in-

tend leave country. He only pretending for Mosadeq’s benefit. Message

continued that Mosadeq had changed his mind and was now (repeat

now) insisting that Shah remain. Shah intended at last moment to defer

to Mosadeq’s urging and abandon trip.

2. I had lunch with Ala today. He had just received phone call from

Shah who apparently was disturbed at leaks re his departure plans.

Shah had asked Ala impress on me secrecy. Ala said Shah had told him

that if his plans should become known prematurely, developments

might take place which would prevent his departure. I asked Ala if

Shah seriously intended leave. He replied in affirmative; arrangements

were being made for Shah to broadcast message to his people at about

4 p.m. February 28 stating reasons for departure. Shah would leave by

car at 5 p.m. accompanied by Queen, two servants, several guards.

Gharagozlu, master ceremonies, and wife would proceed Baghdad by

plane March 1 to join Shah’s party. After visit in Spain Shah and Queen

plan go to Switzerland for winter sports and medical treatment. I be-

lieve despite message allegedly sent me by Shah he really intends leave

Saturday evening.

3. Ala says it extremely important that so far as possible press US

be influenced to take line that there no (repeat no) great political signifi-

cance in Shah’s departure. Speculation comparing Shah with Farouk

would weaken Shah’s position. No (repeat no) real parallel. Mosadeq

has given word of honor he will not (repeat not) undermine Shah in

latter’s absence and Shah believes Mosadeq. They are lunching to-

gether today.

Henderson

cret: Security Information; NIACT. Repeated NIACT to London and Baghdad. Received

166.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

3449. Early this morning stories regarding imminent departure

Shah pouring in from many sources. These stories had conflicting de-

tails. Altho some reflected confusion and bewilderment, there seemed

be general impression that Shah’s decision depart was in some way

connected with friction between him and Prime Minister. Most

common version was that Shah had decided leave because Mosadeq

was threatening if Shah did not (rpt not) do so he would issue procla-

mation to country criticizing Shah and asking people to choose be-

tween Shah and himself.

2. Embassy Attache´ reported that at dinner yesterday evening at-

tended by Bazaar merchants, Qashqai Chieftain Khosro, and others,

rumors of Shah’s departure in immediate future was chief source con-

versation. Practically all guests present, with exception Khosro who

privately expressed gratification that Shah was leaving indicated in

their opinion Shah’s departure would be detrimental to interests

country. Similarly at dinner attended by myself last evening editor of

largest newspaper in country and chief protocol Foreign Office told me

of rumors expressing their concern at ultimate effects on country.

3. I decided this morning that since news was now out I was more

free than hitherto to try to effect cancellation or at least postponement

Shah’s plans leave country. Unable obtain appointment with Foreign

Minister I was able arrange see Ala, Minister Court, at 11:15. Ala had

just returned from audience with Shah. He told me he had done utmost

persuade Shah at last moment not (repeat not) to leave. Shah however

was determined insisting that if he did not (repeat not) depart Mosadeq

would issue proclamation attacking him and members his family; it

would be difficult for him without necessary facilities effectively to an-

swer charges which would be made against him. He preferred leave

country to becoming involved in one-sided squabble. Ala said that

while he was with Shah word had been received that at instance

Kashani, President Majlis, who claimed to have heard news of Shah’s

departure only this morning, informal closed meeting of some 57

members Majlis was taking place to discuss situation. When Shah re-

ceived this news he had become excited and insisted on leaving at once

cret; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London, Baghdad, Ankara, and Dhahran.

Received at 12: p.m. This telegram is printed with redactions in Foreign Relations,

March 1952–February 1953

before lunch because he was afraid that if he did not (rpt not) get away

so much pressure would be brought upon him that he would have dif-

ficulty leaving without incident. I told Ala that as Minister Court I con-

ceived it to be his duty to inform Shah that in interest of country Shah

should not (rpt not) leave in this fashion. I also asked him tell Shah that

I had just received message indicating that very important personage

for whom Shah had most friendly feelings had also expressed sincere

hope that Shah could be dissuaded from leaving country (London tele-

present adviser, Valatbar, could join our conversation. I agreed and at

Ala’s request repeated to Valatbar what I had just told Ala. Ala said he

thought it would be good idea if I could talk directly with Shah. Would

I object? I said in circumstances even though I might later be charged

with interference in Iran affairs, I would welcome opportunity. Ala

called Shah on inter-Palace telephone and after few minutes conversa-

tion said Shah unable see me personally since Prime Minister already

on way to Palace to bid him farewell. Shah would appreciate it how-

ever if I would talk to him by telephone. I asked Ala if he sure tele-

phone not (rpt not) tapped; Ala said every possible precaution taken in

this respect.

4. Despite risks involved I talked with Shah. I told him that in

present emergency I had had no (rpt no) time to obtain instructions

from Washington but I knew US Government policies sufficiently well

to be confident that US Government just as I considered it would not

(rpt not) be in interest Iran for him leave country so hastily in present

circumstances. No (rpt no) matter what kind of announcement he or

Iran Government might make impression would be created through-

out world that he was departing under duress. Furthermore after he

departed Communist and other internal enemies of independent Iran

would fabricate stories against him. It would be charged that his

sudden departure was proof he was not (rpt not) worthy remaining as

Shah. He represented symbol unity and also hope for future Iran

throughout country. His departure would be sure to lower morale of

those enlightened elements of country who understood Iran’s external

dangers and were anxious preserve Iran independence. Shah repeated

he must go immediately. He had promised Prime Minister he would

leave today. He could not (rpt not) go back on his word. I said when

you gave your word it must have been with understanding that your

departure would be secret and would be accompanied by announce-

the Embassy in London that reads in part: “Foreign Office this afternoon informed us of

receipt message from Eden from Queen Elizabeth expressing concern at latest develop-

ments re Shah and strong hope we can find some means of dissuading him from leaving

ments which would assure your country and world at large that you

proceeding abroad for purposes not (rpt not) connected with Iran in-

ternal situation. Rumors now afloat that you leaving in order prevent

Prime Minister from issuing public statement denouncing you and

your family. No (rpt no) one would believe that your departure entirely

voluntary. Shah replied, “I not (rpt not) leaving under duress. Prime

Minister insists that I do not (rpt not) have to go unless I desire do so.

He says, however, that if I remain he will be compelled issue proclama-

tion attacking me and my family. In such circumstances I prefer to

leave.” I said I quite prepared to take this matter up with Prime Min-

ister personally. He replied, “it will be useless. He will tell you I am

leaving on my own volition and he cannot stop me.” I said “not (rpt

not) only US Government and American people in my opinion will be

shocked at your departure in present situation but many other friends

of yourself and Iran throughout world.” I pointed out that rumors of

his impending departure had already penetrated other countries. In in-

direct way I gave him understand views regarding his departure of

person referred to in reference telegram. Shah expressed appreciation,

but insisted he must go. He said he wished to thank US Government

and myself personally for friendship and support. He would now (rpt

now) bid me farewell. He hoped and expected to return.

5. After this conversation Ala said “you see how hopeless it is”. He

expressed hope despite Shah’s negative attitude my conversation

might still have some effect. I told him I prepared go at once to Prime

Minister. Did he perceive any objection? Ala replied not (repeat not) in-

sofar as court was concerned. He not (repeat not) sure that Prime Min-

ister would appreciate my intervention. At that moment messenger in-

formed Ala that Bureau of Majlis had arrived with request that Ala

arrange for it deliver urgent message to Shah. I returned to Embassy.

6. On my arrival I learned that members Majlis in secret session

had decided send message to Shah to effect that his departure from

country at this time would be inadvisable. I was also told by acting Air

Attache´ that Chief Air Staff had just informed him that General Bahar-

mast Chief of Staff was en route Palace to inform Shah that whole Gen-

eral Staff had decided to resign in case Shah should leave country. Thus

far unable to obtain confirmation firmness of resolve General Staff in

this respect.

Baharmast not (repeat not) strong character and he might well wilt

in delivering General Staff message to Shah. General Zimmerman

thinks Baharmast rather weak character.

7. I decided make endeavor see Prime Minister at once and asked

Saleh Embassy Iranian Adviser seek appointment. Saleh learned from

Mosadeq Secretary that Prime Minister in Palace with Shah. At Saleh’s

March 1952–February 1953

request Secretary left at once for Palace to tell Mosadeq I wished see

him urgently. I called on Mosadeq at 1:15.

8. Mosadeq back in bed apparently suffering from severe head-

ache. He received me in friendly though guarded manner. I told him I

coming without awaiting instructions from Washington in view of

what seem to me urgency of situation. Widespread rumors throughout

city that Shah was leaving Iran at once because if he did not (repeat not)

do so Prime Minister would issue proclamation denouncing him and

family. As friend of Iran and as his personal friend I considered it my

duty tell him that departure Shah just now would tend confirm these

rumors. Support of Iran independence was basic policy re Iran. In my

opinion and I sure my opinion represented that of US Government

Shah’s hasty departure in these circumstances would weaken security

country and I therefore, had come to him in hope that he could take

some last minute measure to prevail on Shah not (repeat not) to leave or

at least to postpone his departure. Mosadeq replied Shah preferred to

leave country. He did not (repeat not) request him do so and was not

(repeat not) in position order him not (repeat not) to do so. At this very

moment groups of persons including representatives British agents

were in Palace trying persuade Shah not (repeat not) leave. Some of

these people had entered Palace while he was telling Shah farewell and

had made unnecessary scenes. Shah was receiving these people freely

and could decide for himself what to do. I asked Prime Minister why it

was necessary for him to issue proclamation which clearly would be

critical of Shah unless Shah left. Prime Minister replied he could not

(repeat not) institute necessary reforms or obtain solution oil problem

so long as court served as basis of operations of British agents who

were trying stir up dissension in country. Unity was necessary if Iran

was successfully to emerge from present crisis. I told Prime Minister

had myself some knowledge of Shah’s attitude and I convinced Shah

not (repeat not) engaging in or countenancing participation of court in

activities against interest Iran.

Prime Minister maintained that people around Shah were causing

great injury to country. After some discussion it became clear it quite

useless endeavor prevail on Prime Minister alter his attitude. I told

Prime Minister I regretted having troubled him personally at time

when I knew he harassed with many worries. I had hoped discuss

matter in preliminary way with Foreign Minister but had been unable

to obtain appointment today. I had therefore called on Ala who clearly

was not (rpt not) in position deny Shah was leaving almost immedi-

ately. My call on Prime Minister had been prompted by hope that latter

would cooperate in preventing developments which might ultimately

if not (rpt not) almost immediately have consequences unfavorable to

Iran. Prime Minister said it would be better for me if I did not (rpt not)

make calls on Ala or anyone else connected with court at this critical

time. I was opening myself to charges of interfering in internal affairs

Iran. I said I fully conscious this danger but in my profession it some-

times necessary take risks just as it was necessary for him sometimes to

take risks as Prime Minister. I would regret being charged with inter-

vention but I would prefer charges this kind to feeling that I had failed

to do all that I possibly could to advance interests of friendly country to

which I was accredited as well as interests world peace. Prime Minister

altered his attitude and in more friendly manner repeated that he was

not (rpt not) insisting that Shah leave country. If Shah did not (rpt not)

do so he had no (rpt no) choice other than to issue proclamation to Iran

people. I said that in his political career he had undoubtedly on pre-

vious occasions found it possible to prevent differences from devel-

oping into open conflict which would be harmful to country. Was he

sure that he had no (rpt no) alternative other than to issue proclamation

critical of Shah and court unless Shah should leave country? Prime

Minister said he had given this matter much thought and he considered

that he was following proper course.

9. Before departing I gave Prime Minister note amending alterna-

tive text of original Compensation Agreement as suggested in London

case of press inquiries both he and I should merely state that during

course my visit I had corrected minor omission in one of documents

which I had handed him on February 20.

10. On my way to Prime Minister’s residence I found all neigh-

boring streets blocked with soldiers. On my departure 50 minutes later

I observed still more soldiers. Groups of persons in surly mood appar-

ently ready for demonstrations of some kind were observed gathering

in vicinity.

Henderson

300).

March 1952–February 1953

167.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

Iran

2254. Dept completely concurs your decision take energetic meas-

lieving that risk involved was worth taking in fluid situation. Deptel

2238 rptd London 57523 was not rpt not intended discourage you from

taking such action, but, since we then unable foresee circumstances

only to assure you that inactivity in crisis would be understood here.

Dulles

cret; Security Information; NIACT. Drafted by Stutesman, cleared by Jernegan, and ap-

proved by Richards. Repeated to London.

be the dangerous and irresponsible Mullah Kashani. Until the situa-

tion is clarified, the Iran Branch is devoting its main efforts to prepara-

tions for the most adverse development, namely a Tudeh attempt to

seize the government if the present situation deteriorates toward an-

169.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Dulles

to President Eisenhower

Washington, March 1, 1953.

SUBJECT

The Iranian Situation

Ever since the assassination of General Razmara in March 1951,

and the subsequent impasse and diplomatic break with Britain over the

oil negotiations, the Iranian situation has been slowly disintegrating.

The result has been a steady decrease in the power and influence of the

Western democracies and the building up of a situation where a Com-

munist takeover is becoming more and more of a possibility. However,

even the present crisis is likely to be unsatisfactorily compromised

without a Communist Tudeh victory. Of course, the elimination of

Mossadeq by assassination or otherwise might precipitate decisive

events except in the unlikely alternative that the Shah should regain

courage and decisiveness. The events of the past 48 hours have brought

a few surprises. The fanatical Moslem leader, Kashani, who is also Pres-

ident of the Majlis, has shown more power than expected both in influ-

encing the Majlis and in quickly marshaling for mob action his fanatical

followers. The institution of the Crown may have more popular

backing than was expected.

Today’s situation in Teheran remains tense and unresolved. Some

street demonstrations have occurred today, but the curfew is still in ef-

fect and general order is apparently being preserved.

The principal opposing forces are represented on the one hand by

Prime Minister Mossadeq and, on the other, by Mullah Kashani, with

the Shah apparently being used by Kashani.

The Communist Tudeh Party may be expected to capitalize on,

and increase, the tension in every possible way. The Tudeh Party,

which has always been anti-Shah, will probably back Mossadeq for the

time being.

Significant elements of the Army will probably remain loyal to the

Shah, but whether or not they can be forged into an effective weapon in

shaping political developments depends on the Shah’s determination

to use them. So far this determination has not appeared. On the other

hand, Mossadeq appears to retain control of the chain of command.

As between Mossadeq and Kashani, it appears that Mossadeq has

still the greater strength although he has obviously lost some prestige

in Parliament and among the people. Kashani’s following, however, is

better consolidated in the capital through a well organized “street ma-

chine”, which Mossadeq does not possess.

The Prime Minister appeared before Parliament Saturday night at

8:30. After an initial friendly reception he was subjected to bitter criti-

cism. Mossadeq reportedly asked Parliament for a vote of confidence,

asserting that if the position of his government had not been clarified

within 48 hours, he would appeal to the people. For the first time he

failed to sway the Majlis by his oratory. After an initial indication that

he intended to seek official “refuge” in Parliament, he returned to his

heavily guarded home at 2: Sunday morning.

Despite the weakening of Mossadeq’s position, he still appears to

be able to recoup. His National Movement faction, some 28 deputies,

has come up strongly in his favor; demonstrations have been staged in

his support, and he has replaced Chief of Staff Baharmast (on the

grounds that Baharmast failed to maintain public security) with Gen-

eral Riyahi.

If Mossadeq maintains control he will increase his efforts to re-

move or neutralize all opposition. His latent hostility toward the Shah

is likely to increase. He might resent Henderson’s activities during the

crisis.

Mullah Kashani has been a key figure in promoting the pro-Shah

street demonstrations. He has also led Parliament’s attack on Mos-

sadeq. If Mossadeq were to disappear, Kashani would be a serious con-

tender for his position. Although personally not acceptable to the Shah,

the latter would be inclined to appoint him prime minister if recom-

mended by Parliament.

Kashani, with a record of venality, would bring a large degree of

opportunism to the government. He has consistently followed a policy

of extreme nationalism antagonistic to the U.S. If he succeeded Mos-

sadeq, he would have a much narrower basis of support than Mos-

sadeq enjoyed before the current crisis and would, therefore, be likely

to resort to ruthlessness to destroy opposition. In his struggle to do so

Tudeh influence and opportunities for gaining control would increase

rapidly.

March–August 1953

Retired General Zahedi, currently imprisoned by Mossadeq, also

wishes to become Prime Minister, and his adherents are active in the

Majlis. It is unlikely that he will succeed.

The present situation offers the Shah an opportunity which he has

not as yet seized. His past record does not suggest that he will act.

In this situation it becomes urgent to survey Western assets in Iran:

1. The American Embassy. We have in Teheran one of our ablest

and most experienced foreign service officers who, as we view it from

his reports, is showing both courage and wisdom and deserves full

support. Henderson enjoys the respect of Mossadeq and the Shah in-

sofar as it is possible to have the respect of each in the present situation.

In addition to attache´s of the three U.S. services, there is an experienced

CIA mission [less than 1 line not declassified] with [less than 1 line not de-

classified] a pipe line to the leaders of the Quasqai tribal leaders. The

Chief of CIA’s Middle Eastern desk is en route to Teheran. Except for

the Soviet Embassy, with a large and highly competent staff and a

fortress-like compound covering a city block in the middle of Teheran,

no foreign mission other than our own enjoys enough prestige or

power to play an effective role in the situation. [2 lines not declassified]

2. An American military mission, headed by Major General Zim-

merman and including some 35 officers and about the same number of

enlisted men, is in Iran, mostly in Teheran, for Army training purposes.

This mission has been the object of vigorous Soviet attack, and as its

contract has not been renewed, it is staying on under sufferance. Natu-

rally it has had to stay out of Iranian politics. Consideration might,

however, be given as to what if any more active role it could play in the

event of a threatened Communist take over.

3. The same applies to the American Gendarme´rie Mission headed

by Colonel McClelland and composed of 16 American officers and en-

listed men.

4. CIA has been maintaining close contact with the Quasqai tribal

leaders with the view to eventual organization of resistance in southern

Iran if the North should go Communist. A considerable supply of small

arms and ammunition has been assembled [less than 1 line not declassi-

fied] the nearest safe available base. A considerable amount of cash is

available in Teheran. Both the arms and the cash could quickly be

supplemented.

5. Although the British have steadfastly denied it, there have been

persistent rumors that they have been organizing the southern Iranian

tribes with a view to an uprising at an appropriate moment to preserve

the southern portion of Iran from Communist control. British contact

with these tribes in the past has been close, and this may constitute a

contingent asset of some value to the West if the situation deteriorates

further.

170.

Memorandum Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, March 3, 1953.

CAPABILITIES OF CIA CLANDESTINE SERVICES IN IRAN

1. To Prevent Assumption of Power by Tudeh: CIA clandestine assets

in Iran are far from sufficient in themselves to prevent a Tudeh as-

sumption of power. Moreover, what CIA assets in Iran are depends

upon the use to which they will be put. For example, there are propa-

ganda groups which could operate effectively to support Mossadegh

but which would refuse to work against him. The same applies to other

groups as regards the Shah. Specifically, CIA capabilities in the clan-

destine field are as follows:

a. Mass propaganda means (press, etc.): CIA controls a network

with numerous press, political, and clerical contacts which has proven

itself capable of disseminating large-scale anti-Tudeh propaganda. The

network can also give effective propaganda support to Prime Minister

Mossadegh. It could not, however, engage in anti-Mossadegh propa-

ganda nor could it support a prime minister not acceptable to Mos-

sadegh. There is another group serving CIA which is capable of pro-

viding reasonably effective pro-Shah propaganda. It would not,

however, support a pro-Shah candidate for the Prime Ministry unless

the views of that individual were acceptable to this group. CIA pres-

cret; Security Information. A handwritten note on a sheet of paper attached to the memo-

randum indicates that it was prepared for the March 5 NSC meeting, but was not used.

Another copy of the memorandum indicates that it was prepared in the Iran Branch of

spondence TPAJAX)

March–August 1953

ently has no group which would be effective in spreading anti-

Mossadegh mass propaganda.

b. Poison pen, personal denunciations, rumor spreading, etc.: CIA has

means of making fairly effective personal attacks against any political

figure in Iran, including Mossadegh. It should be pointed out, how-

ever, that this sort of activity, unless it is in support of a general propa-

ganda program, will be so ineffective as to make it not worth consid-

ering under any plan seeking immediate results.

c. Street riots, demonstrations, mobs, etc.: CIA [less than 1 line not de-

classified] has proven an ability to produce anti-Tudeh demonstrations.

It can do so, however, only under favorable conditions, and provided

that the Central Government does not strongly object. In the event the

power of the Tudeh Party increases in Iran, demonstrations such as

could be produced by this group would be easily dealt with by Tudeh

counter-riots or Government suppression. [less than 1 line not declassi-

fied] could also provide effective pro-Mossadegh demonstrations and it

could provide fairly effective pro-Shah demonstrations on the condi-

tion that these demonstrations not be in effect anti-Mossadegh demon-

strations. CIA has no group in Iran which could effectively promote

riots demonstrating against Mossadegh.

d. Tribal support: The only tribal leaders now cooperating with CIA

are pro-Mossadegh and rather anti-Shah. These leaders are extremely

powerful, however, and have the capability of gaining for an anti-

Tudeh pro-Mossadegh government the support of the most important

tribes in Iran.

e. Assisting Iranians at internal security: CIA has no official liaison

with Iranian security authorities and has contact with them only by

virtue of the fact that several leading members of these security services

are paid agents of this organization. Should this government adopt a

policy in support of Mossadegh, however, it would be possible for us to

establish an official relationship with the Iranian police and security

forces through which we could greatly strengthen their ability to deal

with Tudeh agitators, Soviet agents, etc. It is the view of our Teheran

station that the Iranian Security Services, with our help and encourage-

ment, could take positive action against the Tudeh Party such as would

render it incapable of launching a coup d’e´tat under present conditions.

[1 paragraph (8 lines) not declassified]

2. To Provide Assistance in Iran After Tudeh Take-Over: Should a

Tudeh government take over all or a part of Iran, CIA capabilities

would be as follows:

a. The most powerful tribe in Iran is prepared to undertake in our

behalf general resistance activities to harass the Tudeh government.

Moreover, they are willing (and able, we feel) to enlist other tribes in

the area. [3 lines not declassified]

171.

Memorandum of Discussion at the 135th Meeting of the

National Security Council

Washington, March 4, 1953.

SUBJECT

Discussion at the 135th Meeting of the National Security Council on Wednesday,

March 4, 1953

Present at the 135th meeting of the Council were the President of

the United States, presiding, the Vice President of the United States, the

Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the Director for Mutual

Security. Also present were the Secretary of the Treasury, the Director,

Bureau of the Budget, General Vandenberg for the Chairman, Joint

Chiefs of Staff, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Administrative

Assistant to the President for National Security Matters, the Special As-

sistant to the President for Cold War Operations, the Military Liaison

Officer, the Executive Secretary, NSC, and the Deputy Executive Secre-

tary, NSC.

There follows a general account of the main positions taken and

the chief points made at this meeting.

[Omitted here is discussion of Stalin’s illness and its implications

for U.S. policy]

the National Security Council. Top Secret; Security Information; Eyes Only. Drafted by

March–August 1953

When the Council turned to this item on the agenda Mr. Cutler

sketched briefly current United States policy on Iran as set forth in NSC

136/1. He further informed the Council that the Senior NSC Staff had

discussed this policy and the situation in Iran at its meeting on the pre-

vious Monday. At that time the Staff had requested that the Director of

Central Intelligence and the Secretaries of State and Defense be pre-

pared to answer certain questions and to set forth the situation when

the Council met on Wednesday.

Mr. Dulles then proceeded to brief the Council on the develop-

ments of the past two or three days in Iran. Mr. Dulles said that there

was little doubt that the Shah had once more missed an opportunity to

take control of the situation, and that the present prospects were that

Mossadegh would remain in control for the immediate future though

with diminished power and prestige. It could be predicted that he

would set about destroying what remained of the Shah’s position and

would attempt also to “get” Kashani. It was also explained that, for

reasons of its own, the Tudeh Party was at the moment supporting

Mossadegh. Nevertheless, the true Communist position, said Mr.

Dulles, could be deduced from a broadcast of the secret Communist

radio in northern Iran. Its report on recent events was violently

anti-Shah, but, unlike the position taken by the Tudeh Party officially,

this radio also attacked Mossadegh as a vile servant of the Shah and

warned him that if he were to survive he must join with the people of

Iran and act with and for them against the Shah.

The probable consequences of the events of the last few days, con-

cluded Mr. Dulles, would be a dictatorship in Iran under Mossadegh.

As long as the latter lives there was but little danger, but if he were to be

assassinated or otherwise to disappear from power, a political vacuum

would occur in Iran and the Communists might easily take over. The

consequences of such a take-over were then outlined in all their seri-

ousness by Mr. Dulles. Not only would the free world be deprived of

the enormous assets represented by Iranian oil production and re-

serves, but the Russians would secure these assets and thus henceforth

be free of any anxiety about their petroleum situation. Worse still, Mr.

Dulles pointed out, if Iran succumbed to the Communists there was

little doubt that in short order the other areas of the Middle East, with

some 60% of the world’s oil reserves, would fall into Communist

control.

The President then asked the members of the Council what they

could suggest as to what the United States might do now to avert the

crisis. Was there any feasible course of action to save the situation in

Iran?

In reply, Secretary Dulles said that for a long time now he had been

unable to perceive any serious obstacle to the loss of Iran to the free

world if the Soviets were really determined to take it. We do not have

sufficient troops to put into the area in order to prevent a Communist

take-over, and the Soviets had played their game in Iran very cleverly

and with a good sense of timing. Nevertheless, continued Secretary

Dulles, he believed it was possible to gain time if we followed certain

courses of action. The real problem, it seemed to him, was what to do

with the time thus gained, in view of the apparent hopelessness of

Iran’s ultimate fate. Perhaps, he suggested, the Joint Chiefs of Staff

might provide some answer as to what we could do with the time we

could save.

In commencing his outline of these courses of action, Secretary

Dulles noted that all three courses were hazardous and all of them sub-

ject to change in case Mossadegh was assassinated. The first course of

action suggested by Secretary Dulles was to recall Ambassador Hen-

derson before he was dismissed by Mossadegh. In view of his interven-

tion on behalf of the Shah, which Secretary Dulles thought the only sen-

sible course to pursue, the Ambassador’s influence with Mossadegh

was probably now hopelessly impaired, and it might therefore be best

to recall him before he was kicked out.

The second course of action proposed by the Secretary of State was

for the United States to disassociate itself, regarding Iran, from the

British in an effort to regain popularity on the merits of a policy of our

own. This subject, he added, he desired to discuss with the President

and Foreign Secretary Eden. But, he said, it was well known that our

unpopularity in Iran is largely a derivation of British unpopularity and

our previous association in the minds of Iranians with unpopular

British policies. The trouble with such a course of action as this was

whether we should not lose more by going it alone, in the face of British

opposition in many other areas of the world, than we should gain in

Iran itself.

At this point the President interrupted Secretary Dulles’ outline to

state his firm belief that in such countries as Syria and Iraq, America

was hated even more than Britain, because of the policy which we had

been pursuing toward Israel. Had anyone ever thought, continued the

President, of saying to these other Middle Eastern states that they

ought to make a coalition with us as a means of withstanding an assault

by the Russians on them across the mountain ranges which separated

them from the Soviets?

March–August 1953

Secretary Dulles then asked if, before answering the President’s

question, he could go on to make his third and last point on courses of

action to gain time in Iran.

The third course, he said, was to go ahead and purchase oil from

the National Iranian Oil Company, supply that company with the tech-

nicians it needed, and furthermore to give material support to the

Mossadegh regime. This completed, said Secretary Dulles, the courses

of action which seemed open to us to gain time in the emergency. We

were not obliged to take all three of the courses he outlined, but one or

more of them seemed to him the best way to gain time. Unless, how-

ever, the Defense people really believed that it was desirable to gain

time and had specific reasons for this view, Secretary Dulles again ex-

pressed doubts as to the genuine desirability of pursuing any of these

courses of action except, perhaps, to recall Ambassador Henderson.

The reason for his doubt, he said, was that the losses we might antici-

pate in other parts of the world were likely to overweigh any gain in

Iran.

The President said he understood why Secretary Dulles hesitated

about these courses of action, but thought it possible that the British

themselves might be persuaded by the course of events lately to agree

to an independent policy vis-a`-vis Iran by the United States.

Mr. Stassen inquired if we had not just been given an important

reason to gain time in Iran. In view of Stalin’s illness and probable

death, was it not absolutely requisite that the United States assume a

firm and steady stand everywhere throughout the world? Soviet policy

was bound to be somewhat confused and hesitant in the immediate fu-

ture, and it was incumbent upon the United States to take advantage of

this fact.

Secretary Dulles replied that he believed that Mossadegh might

well last another year or two, and that he had not meant to suggest that

the United States should formally disengage itself from concern with

Iran.

Secretary Wilson inquired whether we were not in fact in partner-

ship with the British in Iran, and whether the British were not the senior

partner.

Secretary Dulles answered that this had been the case until fairly

lately, but that the British had now been thrown out.

The President added that we do have to respect the enormous in-

vestment which the British had in Iran, and that we must moreover rec-

ognize that their latest proposals, unlike earlier ones to the Iranians,

had been wholly reasonable. It was certainly possible, he added, for the

United States to do what it thought necessary to do in Iran, but we cer-

tainly don’t want a break with the British.

With this statement Secretary Wilson expressed strong agreement.

In commenting on the President’s statement, Secretary Dulles

pointed out his fear that it was now too late to hope that any reasonable

concession by the British to the Iranians could result in a settlement.

The only thing which would produce a settlement would be a complete

British capitulation.

Secretary Humphrey inquired whether he was to understand that

Secretary Dulles was already convinced that Russia would ultimately

secure Iran in any event, or, in other words, that we are going to lose

that country.

Secretary Dulles replied in the affirmative, and Mr. Cutler pointed

out that this, of course, meant that with the loss of Iran we would lose

the neighboring countries of the Middle East and that the loss would be

terribly serious.

The President commented that we could not move forces of our

own into Iran, but this did not imply to him the necessity of sacrificing

the other Middle Eastern states, because it was possible to get United

States troops into some of these countries. The difficulty in trying to do

this in Iran was the probability that an attempt on our part to do so

would result in Soviet invocation of its treaty of friendship and non-

aggression with Iran. We would then find ourselves at war with Russia.

Mr. Cutler again pleaded the wisdom of an American policy in

Iran independent of the British, and suggested that it might even be

wise for the United States to buy out the British oil company.

The President replied that he had long believed that this should be

done, but he could see no way of convincing Congress that it was the

part of wisdom for the United States Government or any American oil

company to buy the bankrupt Anglo-Iranian.

Mr. Stassen noted that it might well be possible for the United

States to get its money back once Iranian oil began to flow again.

But the President observed that at the moment at least there was

no market for Iranian oil, and that to obtain one would require cutbacks

in production in other oil-producing areas.

Reverting to the President’s worries about the attitude of Con-

gress, Mr. Cutler inquired how Congress would like it if the United

States stood idly by and let Iran fall into the hands of the Soviet Union.

It was generally agreed that Congress would take a poor view of

this eventuality.

At this point, Mr. Jackson said he believed that another possibility

existed for saving the situation in Iran. He thought that if the United

States could manage to secure a peace between Egypt and Israel, and

that if the Roman Catholic Church, as seemed likely, would agree to the

internationalization of the Holy Places in Jerusalem, and finally, if the

March–August 1953

British could be persuaded to go along, the Arab powers would fall in

line and the United States would be able to create a position of reason-

able strength in the whole Middle East area, including Iran.

The President said that Mr. Jackson was absolutely right, but, un-

happily, what he proposed would take a long time, and we are in the

midst of a crisis. “I’d pay a lot”, said the President, “for this peace be-

tween Egypt and Israel.”

Secretary Dulles added that this case was on the agenda for his

forthcoming talks with Anthony Eden.

The President then reverted to Secretary Dulles’ third course of ac-

tion, which involved giving material and financial support to Mossadegh.

That, said Secretary Dulles, would certainly give us time, but he

would like to hear now from the Joint Chiefs of Staff as to the value of

gaining time.

General Vandenberg responded by a statement that the only real

reason for gaining time was to get the Middle East Defense Organiza-

tion started. If the MEDO begins to function it might very well provide

the stability that we so desperately needed in the Middle East. General

Vandenberg, however, confirmed the President’s opinion that it would

take a very long time to get US or UN troops in position in Iran. We do,

however, have plans, he added, to send in a division of American

forces if this is the policy adopted by the President. General Vanden-

berg estimated that it would take some fourteen days to transport one

regimental combat team via Basra to a position in the defense perimeter

of mountains which might be held in Southern Iran. As for the First Ma-

was probably too long. General Vandenberg did agree with the Presi-

dent that the mountain line above the Persian Gulf could be held, and

the President thought this could even be done for a time with as little as

one regimental combat team.

General Vandenberg warned, however, that there was now more

serious question as to the loyalty of the Iranian armed forces to the

Shah. The latter had had several opportunities to assure himself of the

loyalty of his armed forces, but, as in other cases, had lost his opportu-

nity. There was now a new Chief of Staff of the Army who was one of

Mossadegh’s own choice.

Secretary Humphrey expressed himself as shocked to think that

we were contemplating the loss of Iran in this fashion, and Mr. Cutler

again inquired of the Secretary of State whether it would not be pos-

sible, in the forthcoming conversations with the British, to induce them

to waive their claims and let the United States proceed to negotiate uni-

laterally with Iran. The British had lost their investment in Iran in any

case, and a unilateral course of action by the United States was about

the only thing which had not been tried.

The President was impressed with this argument, and informed

Secretary Dulles that he ought to try to work out a position with the

British that would save their face but actually give the United States

control of the situation and freedom to act along the lines suggested by

Mr. Cutler.

Secretary Dulles answered that he had already talked about this to

Mr. Eden in the course of his recent visit to London. He had found that

the British did not anticipate any real crisis in Iran for a long time to

come.

Secretary Humphrey interposed with the statement that the British

always said that you could perfectly well take your time, and cited in-

stances where their estimate had been wrong.

The President said that the latest illustration of their wrongness

was in Egypt.

The Vice President said that there was yet another factor to be con-

sidered in discussing this problem with Mr. Eden. It was the Vice Presi-

dent’s opinion that greater rather than less hostility was to be expected

from the Russians after Stalin’s death. It was quite likely, therefore, that

they would increase their pressure in Iran to secure its control as rap-

idly as possible by a coup d’e´tat. Such a course of action might consti-

tute the miscalculation, which we all dreaded, which would cause the

beginning of World War III. Could not the British be made to see this

dangerous potentiality? We, not the Russians, insisted the Vice Presi-

dent, must make the next move.

Secretary Dulles complained that we are constantly slowed up by

the British, French, and others of our allies, in actions which we feel it is

vital to take in many parts of the world. They slow us up, we can’t

move in time to avert the consequences of our tardiness. Perhaps some-

thing like a Supreme War Council is the only solution for this situation.

At any rate, some mechanism should be found which would enable us

to act in time at the critical moment.

The Vice President rejoined that if the next move on the world

scene could be ours and not Russia’s, the whole situation in the world

might change for the better.

The President said that if a real Soviet move against Iran actually

comes, we shall have to face at this Council table the question of going

to full mobilization. If we did not move at that time and in that eventu-

ality, he feared that the United States would descend to the status of a

second-rate power. “If”, said the President, “I had $500,000,000 of

March–August 1953

money to spend in secret, I would get $100,000,000 of it to Iran right

now.”

The President then inquired of Secretary Dulles how soon it would

be possible for the President and Secretary Dulles to sit down with Mr.

Eden. Would it be possible this evening? We must find out immedi-

ately how the British really feel—whether they are ready to concede to

us on this situation, or whether they are going to be stiff-necked. The

question of unilateral action by the United States was clearly posed.

Secretary Humphrey interjected several times his conviction that

this was the propitious moment to strike a bargain with the British,

who were in need of assistance from us, and Mr. Stassen added that we

ought also to try to indicate that it is not an objective of United States

policy to liquidate the British Empire. If the British and, for that matter,

the French could be induced to believe this, they might prove more

amenable to leadership by the Secretary of State.

Secretary Wilson said that there seemed to him to be two great

things in the world to which the United States did not have an answer.

One was the obvious collapse of colonialism; the other was Commu-

nism’s new tactics in exploiting nationalism and colonialism for its own

purposes. In the old days, when dictatorships changed it was usually a

matter of one faction of the right against another, and we had only to

wait until the situation subsided. Nowadays, however, when a dicta-

torship of the right was replaced by a dictatorship of the left, a state

would presently slide into Communism and was irrevocably lost to us.

Mr. Stassen had already stated, in reply to the President’s wish

that he had money, that the Mutual Security Administration had avail-

able funds.

The President therefore turned to Mr. Stassen and asked him how

much he could actually dig up.

Mr. Stassen replied that he could probably find as much as the sit-

uation required—five million, ten million, forty million—if Secretary

Dulles decided that he could make headway by the use of such funds.

Apropos of a statement by the President, that he also wished that

for a change he could read about mobs in these Middle Eastern states

rioting and waving American flags, Mr. Jackson said that if the Presi-

dent wanted the mobs he was sure he could produce them.

The President said in any case it was a matter of great distress to

him that we seemed unable to get some of the people in these down-

trodden countries to like us instead of hating us.

At this point in the discussion Mr. Cutler interposed to read a

four-point record of possible action by the Council on this particular

item, which included an attempt to explore with the British the possi-

bility of unilateral United States action in Iran.

The President replied that it certainly seemed to him about time for

the British to allow us to try our hand.

Mr. Jackson then said he had another point which he felt would

contribute to an improvement of our position in the Middle East and

about which he felt it was possible to do something. This was American

action to remove the festering sore in the Middle East represented by

the 800,000 Arab displaced persons in Israel.

Secretary Dulles agreed that this was indeed a festering sore, but

pointed out that the Arab countries themselves were unwilling to ab-

sorb these 800,000 unfortunate people, since to do so would deprive

them of a bargaining point in their dealings with the Israelis. Accord-

ingly, said Secretary Dulles, he did not see what could be done about

them.

Mr. Jackson replied that it would certainly be possible to resettle

200,000 of these refugees, and that all 800,000 could at least be fed.

The President added that it was not enough to feed them, but that

he would be awfully glad if we could get some one of the Arab coun-

tries to take these people if we would pay a subsidy for each head.

After General Vandenberg had informed the Council that there

was one point relevant to the military aspects of the Iranian problem,

namely, the existence of a fair-sized British force in Iraq, Mr. Stassen in-

quired whether it was indeed the President’s view that some funds

should be expended at once in Iran if the Secretary of State agreed.

The President replied that of course this was a gamble, but if upon

examination it seemed a good gamble, he was prepared to take it.

The National Security Council:5

a. Discussed the subject in the light of an oral briefing by the Di-

rector of Central Intelligence.

b. Agreed that the following possible courses of action should be

explored in anticipation of further Council action at the next regular or

special meeting:

(1) Persuading the British to permit the United States to put the Ira-

nian oil industry in operation, without prejudice to an ultimate settle-

ment of the Anglo-Iranian controversy.

(2) The military feasibility of holding a line through the Zagros

Mountain range.

(3) Replacement of Ambassador Henderson.

(4) Provision of limited economic aid to strengthen Mossadegh’s

position.

172.

Editorial Note

Foreign Secretary Eden and Chancellor of the Exchequer Butler

wide array of strategic, political, and financial issues, including Iran. In

a meeting with Eden on March 6, Secretary Dulles stated that “we felt

while it was still obscure that the authority of the Shah had probably

largely and permanently disappeared. We felt Mosadeq would prob-

ably come through the present situation remaining in authority. We felt

further, however, that with the Shah gone or his authority gone that

when Mosadeq disappears by one means or another, that there was in-

creased doubt as to whether there would be an orderly transition to an-

other government.” This discussion of Iran focused on the appropriate

U.S. response should Mosadeq reject the joint U.S.–U.K. oil proposal of

signed to sustain the Iranian Government under such a scenario should

not concern oil. Secretary Dulles added, near the end of the discussion,

that “he thought we would have to play certain aspects of this problem

by ear as the situation developed. . . . It might be possible that in the im-

mediate future the USSR will lose interest in external aggression al-

though, of course, the reverse also was possible. The major objective for

both of us should be to keep going in Iran a government which will be

non-Communist. Additionally, he felt that no great premium should be

paid Mosadeq for acting as he has. There should, for instance, be no

major United States purchases of oil, but, on the other hand, we should

do what we can on a small scale to keep the Mosadeq government in

existence.” See ibid., volume VI, Part 1, Western Europe and Canada,

173.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, March 8, 1953, noon.

3597. 1. We agree in general Secretary’s evaluation Iran political

We think, however, there still some possibility Shah has not “largely

and permanently disappeared.” Despite aura passivity which envel-

opes him, struggle for his survival and contacts between him and oppo-

sition still continuing. Although clear-cut victory for Shah not likely,

there may be compromise which would leave him with certain vestige

influence. Many army officers very disturbed by continued inaction on

part Shah. Nevertheless all of them have not given up idea making

some move on his behalf even though without his advance consent or

knowledge.

2. As we see situation from Tehran we also agree with Secretary’s

outline our future policy re Iran as expressed to Eden. In view fluidity

Iran situation we may be compelled as Secretary points out to play to

extent by ear.

Henderson

cret; Security Information. Repeated to London. Received at 8: a.m.

174.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near

Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Byroade) to

Secretary of State Dulles

Washington, March 10, 1953.

SUBJECT

Proposed Discussion of Iran in the National Security Council, March 11

Developments of the past few weeks in Iran have been very con-

fused. In this situation it is difficult to plan policy action for the future.

We feel we must be prepared for all eventualities but can hardly take a

firm decision upon a course of action until we see who wins out in the

present internal political struggle in Iran and what the Iranian position

will be on the oil question and other matters affecting the West.

At the moment, it appears that Mosadeq is gaining the upper

hand. He has indicated to Ambassador Henderson that he will turn

down recent oil proposals and will attempt to place the blame upon the

United States. He asked Ambassador Henderson whether the U.S. Gov-

ernment, in the absence of an agreement regarding compensation between the

British and the Iranians, (A) would buy Iranian oil; (B) would encourage

private American firms (1) to purchase Iranian oil and (2) otherwise as-

sist Iran in production and export of oil; (C) would extend immediately

to Iran a loan to be repaid subsequently in the form of oil.

It is our recommendation, in the present fluid situation, that we

consider the adoption of Henderson’s recommended “Course C”, an

analysis of which is attached (Tab 1).

On March 4, NSC suggested three possible courses of action in re-

gard to Iran (NSC Action No. 729). Brief notes which you may wish to

see in an oral response are attached (Tab 2).

Top Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Stutesman. Printed from an uninitialed

copy.

Tab 1

ANALYSIS OF “COURSE C”

SUBJECT

Ambassador Henderson’s Recommended Course of Action to be followed

should Mosadeq reject recent oil proposals

Ambassador Henderson in his telegrams 2865 and 2866 treats of

policies which the United States might pursue in a new situation which

would be created by the rejection on the part of Dr. Mosadeq of recent

proposals to settle the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute. He arrives at a conclu-

sion that what he calls Course C should be followed:

“Course C: U.S. Government not to purchase Iranian oil in the ab-

sence of a compensation agreement and not to encourage or discourage

U.S. firms in this respect. The U.S. Government not to furnish Iran fi-

nancial assistance in such circumstances. The U.S. Government would

continue, however, to give TCA and military assistance and perhaps a

certain amount of economic development assistance so long as Iran de-

sired such assistance and appeared to benefit from it.”

Ambassador Henderson points out that if Course C is followed the

question remains whether it should be a matter of fixed policy or

whether it should be only a tentative position pending determination

of definite policy in light of subsequent developments. He recommends

adoption of Course C “just as fixed as any U.S. policy can be in the

present political situation” immediately after Mosadeq rejects the pro-

posals. His reasons are that postponement of determination by the U.S.

of its policy will be regarded as vacillation resulting from timidity or

lack of firmness in supporting the principles on which the decision is

based. Hesitation, followed by decision not to buy oil or give financial

aid, may so blur fact that we are acting on principle, not expediency,

that decision when reached may create more resentment than one

made now. He points, however, to grave risks which will be involved

in adoption of Course C. There is a possibility that Mosadeq and other

Iranian political leaders may in their disappointment and resentment

take steps to stimulate increased Iranian hostility against the West in

general and the U.S. in particular. In their efforts to cause us to change

our policy, they might encourage anti-West and pro-Soviet movements

in Iran to such an extent that Iran would lose its balance completely and

topple into the Soviet orbit. Indications of concern on our part that

these acts are leading Iran to destruction might merely encourage them

to take additional rash measures.

24, is ibid.

175.

Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

IRANIAN TRIBES MAY BE FACTOR IN ANY NEW ATTEMPT TO

OUST MOSSADEQ

A request in early January by a Bakhtiari tribal leader in Iran for

American aid to establish an independent regime in the south raises the

NSC Briefing 11 Mar 53. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]. Presumably prepared for

the March 11 NSC meeting but there is no indication that it was circulated to the NSC.

question of whether Prime Minister Mossadeq’s opponents will try to

use the tribes in an effort to oust him.

This request, which was made to American representatives in both

Tehran and Isfahan, is the first approach to the United States. [2½ lines

not declassified] There is no confirmation, however, of reports that the

Bakhtiari have obtained Russian, British or any other foreign backing

for such an attempt or that they are in a position to challenge success-

fully the government’s control of the area (see map, p. 15).

There is widespread suspicion in Iran that the British are using

Iraq as a base for intrigue against the Tehran government. New reports

of British activity among the Bakhtiari, the Qashqai and the Arab tribes

in the south have been received. The government and the army also

suspect the British of encouraging the Kurds in Iran and Iraq to unite,

and army units in the Kurdish areas in the northwest are constantly or-

dered to investigate reports that British agents have visited this tribe.

Iranian suspicion of Russian intrigue among the tribes is reflected

by the 1 December order of Chief of Staff Baharmast to military units in

northwestern Iran to investigate reports that the Russians were arming

the Kurds and the Tudeh in preparation for joint Tudeh–tribal action.

The Azerbaijan Democratic radio in Baku accused the British in early

January of arming the southern tribes for a revolt. The Tudeh has had

little success in its efforts to gain the support of any of the tribes, which

are among the most conservative elements in Iran.

The tribes are the only traditionally important political factor

which has not been neutralized by the government’s revolutionary pro-

gram or made impotent by an unsuccessful effort to unseat Prime Min-

ister Mossadeq. Their aspirations for regaining some of their lost au-

tonomy have been increased by the gradual transfer of power under

Mossadeq from the landlords and the army to the nationalistic middle

class.

[less than 1 line not declassified] show army concern over intrigues

among the Bakhtiari, the Kurds and even the Qashqai. Such intrigues,

however, appear directed toward strengthening the tribes’ position

against the government rather than toward overthrowing it. For ex-

ample, the Bakhtiari tribe, which lost much of its strength and influence

when the present Shah’s father disarmed it and moved its leaders to

Tehran, has been interested for more than a year in consolidating its

branches and in gaining some measure of independence of the

government.

However, traditional frictions between the tribes and the gov-

ernment have been aggravated by the army’s current efforts to carry

176.

Memorandum of Discussion at the 136th Meeting of the

National Security Council

Washington, March 11, 1953.

SUBJECT

Discussion at the 136th Meeting of the National Security Council on Wednesday,

March 11, 1953

Present at the 136th meeting of the Council were the President of

the United States, presiding; the Vice President of the United States; the

Secretary of State; the Secretary of Defense; and the Director for Mutual

Security. Also present were the Secretary of the Treasury; the Director,

Bureau of the Budget; the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission (for

Item 1 only); General Collins for the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the

Director of Central Intelligence; the Administrative Assistant to the

President for National Security Matters; the Special Assistant to the

President for Cold War Operations; the Military Liaison Officer; the Ex-

ecutive Secretary, NSC; and the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC.

the National Security Council. Top Secret; Security Information; Eyes Only. Drafted by

There follows a general account of the main positions taken and

the chief points made at this meeting.

[Omitted here is discussion of items 1 and 2 concerning policy

questions surrounding the development of practical nuclear power and

the effect of Stalin’s death on the Soviet Union and throughout the

Communist world.]

3. Developments in Iran Affecting U.S. Security (NSC Action No. 729–b;

Mr. Cutler briefed the Council on the latest available information

on Iran, which included the probability that Mossadegh was about to

turn down the latest plan for settlement of the oil controversy. Mr.

Cutler also outlined to the Council the three questions which Mos-

sadegh was thought to be about to present to Ambassador Henderson

by way of eliciting what assistance this Government was prepared to

give to his regime.

Secretary Dulles then stated that he had just received that morning

a telegram from Ambassador Henderson, stating that he had now

reached the conclusion that Mossadegh would not solicit an answer to

these questions unless he judged that he could expect a favorable reply

by the United States. We should not, said Secretary Dulles, in his

opinion give any hint to Mossadegh that he could expect a favorable re-

sponse to these questions. Any proposal that the United States pur-

chase Iranian oil at this time would constitute a terrific blow to the

British. In discussing this idea with him during his visit, Foreign Secre-

tary Eden had told Secretary Dulles that if we even sent technicians to

assist in reopening the Abadan refinery, Eden would be unable to sur-

vive as Foreign Secretary. Anything more than the technicians would,

of course, be that much worse. It was the feeling generally in the State

Department, continued Secretary Dulles, that we should not encourage

the Iranian Government as to any hope of reactivating the refinery or of

ument 147.

March–August 1953

buying Iranian oil. We might, however, give some slight added tech-

nical and military aid in order to assure the Iranian Government of our

friendly intentions.

Mr. Cutler raised the questions of the repercussions if the Iranian

Government, as it easily could, should determine to slash the price of

Iranian oil. There were plenty of tankers available to carry it, and the ef-

fect would be chaotic on the world price of oil.

Secretary Wilson speculated as to whether Prime Minister Mos-

sadegh had not framed his three questions in anticipation of a negative

response from this Government. The monkey would then be on our

back, and Mossadegh could point to the United States as hostile to Ira-

nian aspirations. Secretary Wilson, however, agreed that there was no

alternative but to say “no” to these questions. If we replied in the af-

firmative we would not only help to destroy what was left of the idea of

sanctity of contracts, but if we entered into an agreement to purchase

oil from Mossadegh we ourselves would quickly be swindled. Secre-

tary Wilson did say, however, that it seemed to him from his knowl-

edge of this problem, that the Iranians felt that in all past negotiations

with the British on oil settlement, the cards had been constantly stacked

against them. Could we not, therefore, as a friendly gesture, offer to

look over these past procedures in order to reassure the Iranian Gov-

ernment that their interests had not really been overlooked or would

not be overlooked in further negotiations?

Secretary Dulles responded by saying that we had already taken

pains to do this. He went on to say that of course if the British were

completely shut out from Iran and from the negotiations, it would not

probably be difficult to get results from Iran, but the United Kingdom

was involved deeply in concern for its own prestige, and this was a

much more difficult thing to deal with than any mere matter of com-

pensation. It seemed to Secretary Dulles that we must somehow try to

become senior partners with the British in this area and work in that

context.

Secretary Wilson expressed agreement, and said that our real ob-

jective was to try to secure a settlement while at the same time saving

British face.

Mr. Cutler asked Secretary Dulles to explain the latest terms which

had been offered to Mossadegh and which he was about to turn down.

Secretary Dulles did so, and explained at some length the Iranian

fear that if they submitted the issue of compensation to arbitration at

The Hague, they would undergo a protracted economic bondage to

Great Britain. But Secretary Dulles was inclined to think that even if the

Mossadegh regime refused to accept the latest proposals, these were

not the last possible terms. We might yet be able to meet this Iranian

dread of indefinite tutelage to the British. In any case, continued the

Secretary, we cannot force the British hand. They have suffered in re-

cent years terrible blows to their prestige—in the Suez, in the Sudan,

and elsewhere.

Secretary Humphrey also agreed with Secretary Dulles that we

could achieve our objectives if we could negotiate alone with the Ira-

nians, but that we could not afford to achieve our objectives in Iran if

we “did in” the British at the same time.

The President said that he had very real doubts whether, even if

we tried unilaterally, we could make a successful deal with Mossadegh.

He felt that it might not be worth the paper it was written on, and the

example might have very grave effects on United States oil concessions

in other parts of the world.

At this point, Mr. Cutler noted that General Collins would under-

take to discuss the feasibility of holding a line through the Taurus–

Zagros Mountain ranges in the event that military action to defend Iran

became necessary.

With the aid of charts and maps, General Collins proceeded to

discuss the feasibility of this holding operation and the very great diffi-

culty which was to be anticipated in the attempt. The mountain line, he

indicated, was some 1750 miles in length from the Persian Gulf to the

Mediterranean Sea. Although the mountains were formidable, the Joint

Chiefs of Staff estimated that at the very least it would require twenty

divisions to hold it in the event of hot war and Russian attack. It was

General Collins’ personal opinion that it could not be done in time of

war with a force of this size, even if the forces were available and could

be placed in position in time. For that matter, said General Collins, it

seemed plain to him that in event of hot war neither side—the Russians

or ourselves—would ever get any oil from the Middle East. The fields

were too vulnerable to attack by air and otherwise, and could be

counted out of production during hostilities.

Turning then to what could be done to defend the oil fields in the

event of a cold war situation, General Collins said that the Joint Chiefs

had likewise various plans under consideration. If a Tudeh govern-

ment were established in Teheran, we could of course fly a certain

number of aircraft over the area. If some kind of an Iranian government

asked for our assistance there were several possible courses of action.

The British had some few forces in Iraq which they might reinforce.

They had larger numbers of forces in Suez. The United States might be

able to base perhaps a wing or a wing and a half of aircraft in the gen-

eral area, but we could probably not move ground forces in even if any

were available in the area or could be brought down from Germany. Of

course, added General Collins, if we undertook to put American forces

into Iran itself, the Russians could be expected to invoke the treaty of

March–August 1953

non-aggression and friendship with Iran, and the result would be an-

other Korea, with the United States in a rather worse position.

Mr. Cutler inquired of General Collins what could be anticipated if

the Tudeh Party seized Northern Iran. Would it be possible in these cir-

cumstances for the free world to hold the south?

General Collins thought that this might be possible in very favor-

able circumstances, but it was much more likely that the Russians

would come to the assistance of the Iranian Communists in the guise of

volunteers. We would then be faced with a most difficult decision. It

seemed to General Collins, in conclusion, that about the most feasible

solution in the contingency envisaged by Mr. Cutler, was for the Cen-

tral Intelligence Agency to work out plans by which the free tribesmen

in Southern Iran could be armed. With some outside assistance such

forces might conceivably be able to hold the south in the event of civil

war in Iran.

The National Security Council:4

a. Noted an oral report by the Secretary of State on possible courses

of action with respect to the current situation in Iran, and agreed:

(1) That the three questions which the Iranian Prime Minister had

been considering asking the United States Government, should not be

answered in the affirmative if they are actually presented.

(2) To give economic and technical assistance to Iran on a modest

scale, if necessary in order to maintain the present government.

(3) That no proposal to buy Iranian oil should be made at the

present time.

(4) To explore the possibility of more equitable procedures for an

Anglo-Iranian settlement.

b. Noted an oral briefing by General Collins on the military diffi-

culties of defending a line through the Taurus–Zagros Mountain

ranges under either hot or cold war operations.

Note: The action in a above subsequently transmitted to the Secre-

tary of State for implementation.

[Omitted here is discussion of a decision to postpone consideration

of United States objectives and courses of action with respect to Latin

America.]

S. Everett Gleason

177.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,

Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, March 11, 1953.

SUBJECT

The Situation in Iran

1. The almost three-week-old political crisis precipitated by Mos-

sadeq’s attack on the Shah’s position and his subsequent effort to force

the monarch into exile has now died down in intensity but is still unre-

solved. Mossadeq retains control of the government and has steadily

consolidated his position. However, some disorder continues, the Shah

and other opposition elements have not yet made their peace with Mos-

sadeq, and the Majlis has still to act on a proposed vote of confidence in

him.

2. The present position of the various elements in the political pic-

ture is as follows:

a. Mossadeq retains a predominant position. He has consolidated his

grip on the reins of government, retained the support of the hard-core

National Movement deputies, won over such small right-wing groups

as the Pan-Iran and Somka parties, and successfully rallied popular

street support. Although he suggested last week that he might be

willing to forego a Majlis vote of confidence (pointing out that even the

opposition resolution called for his retention) he has not finally com-

mitted himself and will presumably take advantage of any sign of op-

position weakening.

b. The opposition has lost ground and energy and, for the most part,

appears content to accept a compromise by which the Shah and Mos-

sadeq would both remain.

(1) Kashani and other right-wing dissidents—Baghai, the bazaar mer-

chants, the mullahs—have done little since the rioting of 28 February

which resulted in the Shah’s decision not to leave Iran. Although pro-

Kashani deputies have blocked a vote of confidence by absenting

themselves from the Majlis and some religious extremists are still ful-

minating against Mossadeq and his circle, Kashani has stated that Mos-

sadeq as well as the Shah should remain and is reportedly now

“sulking in his tent.”

(2) The pro-Shah element2 in the army and air force, which also partici-

pated in the 28 February riots, has been greatly weakened by the arrests

Staff Memoranda—1953 (Substantive). Top Secret; Security Information.

March–August 1953

and transfers which Mossadeq subsequently carried out. Although a

new military plot was rumored over this last weekend, allegedly in-

volving the armored brigade in Tehran, it is unconfirmed. One of its

supposed leaders has since been assigned to a south Iran post.

(3) The old-line politicians, with leaders like General Zahedi and Ali

Mansour under arrest, have participated in the boycott of the Majlis

sessions but have otherwise been quiescent.

c. The Shah has continued in a state of nervous indecision. He has ap-

parently given some covert encouragement to advocates of strong ac-

tion to overthrow Mossadeq but has taken no positive action himself

and evidently would be quite content with a settlement allowing him to

remain in peace. He may still decide to leave Iran.

d. The tribes have played little part in the crisis. The fiercely anti-

Palace Qashqai leaders have continued to support Mossadeq. While

some Bahktiari leaders are still at odds with the government, there is no

evidence that they have attempted to capitalize on Mossadeq’s current

troubles. Other tribes, including the Kurds, have been quiet.

a. The Tudeh Party has attempted to capitalize on the situation by

joining or sponsoring pro-Mossadeq anti-Shah demonstrations. How-

ever, it has generally been physically rebuffed by both the police and

Mossadeq’s followers and has gained little more than experience and

some propaganda effect.

3. Although the political outlook remains uncertain, the probabil-

ities appear to be as follows:

a. With respect to the immediate crisis:

(1) It is extremely unlikely that the opposition will successfully

rally to unseat Mossadeq at this late stage. Such a development would

almost certainly require army participation, which is improbable now

that Mossadeq’s principal military opponents have been dismissed or

sent to pounding beats in the hinterland.

(2) There is still some possibility that the Shah might leave Iran, on

his own initiative or under pressure from Mossadeq.

(3) It appears most probable, however, that the crisis will end in

some sort of compromise whereby the Palace would be weakened but

not destroyed as a political influence in Iran.

b. Even if Mossadeq succeeds in expelling the Shah, powerful op-

position elements will remain, and new efforts to reassert his leader-

ship will be required from time to time. Mossadeq is unlikely to make

great progress in consolidating his control, and the regime as a whole

will thus be weaker than ever.

c. Tudeh has gained little immediate advantage from the present

crisis but may be able to capitalize on a future crisis, particularly if Mos-

sadeq resorts to violent attacks on the US.

4. An important corollary question is that of the oil negotiations

and Mossadeq’s attitude toward the US. Briefly, the record has been as

follows:

a. Following presentation of the package deal proposals on 15 Jan-

uary, Mossadeq raised a host of major and minor objections, finally

urging that impartial adjudication of claims be dropped in favor of a di-

rectly negotiated lump sum settlement, thus protecting Iran against

being saddled with an “unending burden.” After much consultation

between the US and UK, a new and “final” set of proposals was pre-

pared. These included concessions to Mossadeq on many minor points

and provided an alternate mechanism for limiting Iranian payments to

20 years, but they preserved the concept of impartial adjudication and

terms of reference which enabled AIOC to claim future profits. Hen-

derson presented these proposals on 20 February, just after the political

crisis started.

b. Mossadeq appears to be on the verge of rejecting these pro-

posals. He immediately pointed to the compensation terms of reference

as grounds for rejection and attempted to have them drastically

changed. Meanwhile he has been attempting to find out from the UK,

through the Swiss Legation, the amount of AIOC’s claims. On 9 March

he told Henderson that the oil talks should be abandoned3 but phoned

later to say that he had spoken prematurely and would consult the cab-

inet before making a final decision. There the matter rests.

c. Mossadeq’s recent talks with Henderson have involved some re-

criminations against the US. Last week the Mossadeq faction was

openly charging Henderson with meddling in Iranian affairs for urging

the Shah not to leave the country, though Mossadeq finally consented

to accept Henderson’s protestations of good faith. Apparently in re-

sponse to Soviet pressure, Mossadeq has called for withdrawal of TCI

personnel from the Caspian area. In discussing the oil question, he has

repeatedly asserted that the US would buy oil from Iran even without a

compensation agreement if it really had Iran’s best interests at heart

and has reiterated his old contention that the US was bound to provide

financial aid to Iran to prevent it from going Communist.

5. Mossadeq faces a difficult decision. His instincts tell him to reject

the present oil proposals. Yet rejection of the oil proposals will subject

Iran to a further period of economic uncertainty and increase general

pessimism and criticism of his leadership in Iran. He is probably also

angry with the US for its role in the oil talks and its support of the Shah.

Yet open defiance of the US would deprive Iran of an important coun-

terweight against Soviet pressure and a potential source of financial

help. In the end, he will probably reject the oil proposals but stop short

of a direct rebuff to the US, hoping that a successful oil formula may

March–August 1953

somehow be worked out or that the US may finally be persuaded to

come to Iran’s assistance.

R.L. Hewitt

178.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–5029a

Washington, March 16, 1953.

SUBJECT

Attitude of Shah Concerning His Present Position

SOURCE

A source with close contacts with the Shah (F). Appraisal of Content: 3

people was making him a virtual prisoner by frustrating his desire to

go abroad and live “like a human being” and that he did not know how

much longer he could carry on.

2. The Shah stated that all his efforts to fight Communism were

thwarted by Prime Minister Mossadeq, and that these were used

against him (the Shah) and his family as “evidence” that they were par-

ticipating in anti-Government intrigues.

3. The Shah denied that he “knew anything” about the tribal dis-

turbance set off in February 1953 by Abul Ghasem Bakhtiar3 and

blamed, by Mossadeq supporters, on anti-Government individuals

who allegedly were influencing the Shah.

Information Reports 5020–5029. Secret; Security Information; Control—U.S. Officials

Only.

179.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, March 18, 1953.

REFERENCE

Mr. Roosevelt’s recent talk with Woodhouse and Firth on Iran

The general subject of Mossadegh’s continuance in office was dis-

cussed here by top State Department officials with Mr. Eden. Gist of

discussion was to effect that situation has materially altered since De-

cember. While there is no obvious choice in sight to replace Mossadegh

it is felt that any assets which could be rallied to support a replacement

should, if at all possible, he preserved for at least a few months more

until the course of events may be clarified.

Iran 1951–1953. Confidential. A handwritten note on the memorandum indicates that it

was seen by Wisner. No other record of this meeting has been found.

180.

Progress Report to the National Security Council

Washington, March 20, 1953.

SUBJECT

Present Situation in Iran”

NSC 136/1 was approved as governmental policy on November

be circulated to the members of the Council for their information.

MEASURES BEING TAKEN TO IMPLEMENT

Condition I

1. Measures to be taken to support a non-communist Iranian Govern-

ment in the event of an attempted communist seizure of power:

a. Military: Predicated on the assumption that the Iranian Govern-

ment makes an appeal to the U.S. for direct military assistance, the JCS

have recognized three feasible U.S. military courses of action, namely:

(1) To conduct a show of force by periodic flights of carrier aircraft,

or aircraft from land bases outside of Iran, over key centers. Recom-

mendations concerning possible employment of U.S. naval and SAC

units have been requested from CINCNELM and CGSAC, respectively.

To date these recommendations have not been received.

(2) To assist the legal Iranian Army with logistic support by aug-

menting the present policy of arms aid. Since there is no way of fore-

telling what assistance might be needed or requested by the Iranians,

meaningful plans cannot be prepared in advance. However, the Chief

of Staff, U.S. Army, could draw up the necessary plans very quickly

when the necessary specific information became available.

(3) Furnish additional arms aid to appropriate Middle East coun-

tries so as to eventually enable them to possess the strength to secure

their frontiers against effective communist infiltration. The Joint Chiefs

of Staff keep this matter under continuous review.

b. Economic: It is doubtful that any increase in the present level of

tively) would be justified if the Iranian situation became more unstable.

If economic conditions in Iran continue to deteriorate as a result of the

continued instability of the government and its inability to market oil, it

is possible that a situation might arise where it would be in the U.S. in-

terest to give the National Front Government direct financial assistance

should such a request be received. The Department of State has recom-

mended that a contingency fund of $45 million be set aside for this pur-

pose, and the matter is currently under consideration by the Bureau of

the Budget. This action would be consistent with NSC 136/1, but

would have to be justified in the light of the situation existing at the

time the request is made.

c. Diplomatic: An attempted communist seizure of power would

probably be designed to exploit the increasing economic and political

difficulties facing Iran. Thus U.S. diplomatic planning in such a situa-

tion requires continued efforts on the part of our Ambassador in

Tehran to negotiate a settlement of the oil controversy between Mo-

sadeq and the U.K. and in the event of an attempted coup, to urge posi-

tive action, including the prompt use of security forces, upon such Ira-

nian authorities as may be capable of such action with a view to

preventing a communist seizure of power.

d. Psychological: The PSB on January 15, 1953, approved a “Psycho-

logical Strategy Program for the Middle East” (D–22) which includes

within this broader framework guidance for psychological operations

in Iran. When prepared, plans for specific psychological measures in

the event of an attempted communist coup in Iran will be consistent

with this program and with the approved PSB policies contained in “A

Strategic Concept for a National Psychological Program with Particular

March–August 1953

e. Special Political Operations: Current special political operations in

Iran, which are directed toward counteracting and reducing Tudeh in-

fluence, would be continued and, if circumstances permit, intensified

in the event of an attempted communist coup. These operations are de-

signed to:

(1) Influence specific political, military and religious leaders to

speak out strongly against the Tudeh threat.

(2) Induce certain political and military leaders to institute admin-

istrative and security actions to curb Tudeh activities (demonstrations,

strikes, etc.).

(3) Maintain anti-Tudeh propaganda.

(4) Instigate physical attacks upon Tudeh facilities and demonstrations.

(5) Obtain the publication of anti-Tudeh material in the press, and

in pamphlets, books, posters, etc.

(6) Influence the choice of a successor to Mosadeq in the event of

his resignation or death.

(7) Maintain liaison with potential resistance groups, in particular

elements of certain strong tribal elements in southern Iran.

(It should be noted that: (a) CIA’s detailed plan for covert opera-

and (b) certain of the special political operations listed under Condition

II, below, could, if circumstances warranted, be implemented under

Condition I.)

Condition II

2. Measures to be taken to prevent all or a part of Iran or adjacent areas

from falling under communist domination in the event of an actual communist

seizure of power in one of more of the provinces of Iran or in Tehran:

a. Military: In the event of a Tudeh coup in Iran, the JCS have recog-

nized three feasible U.S. military courses of action, namely:

(1) Furnish additional arms aid to appropriate Middle East coun-

tries so as to eventually enable them to possess the strength to secure

their frontiers against effective communist infiltration. The Joint Chiefs

of Staff keep this matter under continuous review.

(2) Deploy appropriate Air Force units, on the order of 1½ wings

plus support units, to southern Turkey with a mission of assisting

Middle East governments in preventing the spread of communist

power to their countries. The Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, has been re-

quested to recommend the composition of the Air Force organization to

be deployed to southern Turkey under this contingency.

(3) Deploy U.S. ground forces on the order of one Division, rein-

forced, and necessary supporting air and naval forces to the vicinity of

Basra with a mission of assisting Middle East governments in pre-

venting the spread of communist power to their countries. This would

be accomplished by the physical presence of U.S. military power, dem-

onstrations of strength and as a last resort, when authorized by proper

authority, combat operations. CINCNELM has been requested to make

appropriate recommendation with regard to this course of action but

his reply has not yet been received. Our present state of preparedness is

such that the 82nd Airborne Division, the 2nd Marine Division or an in-

fantry division in Europe could be moved on short notice provided the

necessary shipping were made available. The movement of any one of

these divisions would take approximately 60 days. The logistic support

required to maintain the deployment of these forces could be accom-

plished only at the expense of critical supplies now destined for Korea.

Similarly, any force deployments to the Middle East would necessitate

a substantial upward revision of U.S. force ceilings or a reduction of

our commitments elsewhere.

b. Economic: The U.S. Government would provide such economic

assistance as required to sustain and strengthen whatever non-

communist Iranian Government remained after the communist coup.

Specific plans for this eventuality cannot be prepared in advance, but it

is likely that requirements for such aid would follow the general pat-

tern, though on a reduced scale, of the economic assistance being given

the ROK Government. The early appointment of an over-all coordi-

nator for economic aid would, on the basis of Korean experience,

greatly increase the effectiveness of any specific economic measures

which might be undertaken in such a contingency.

c. Diplomatic: (1) The United States Government will not recognize

a communist government of Iran and will publicly support anti-

communist Iranian elements in Iran or abroad. Such support might in-

volve the recognition of an Iranian Government in exile. Since the Shah

might be a useful rallying point for such a Government, arrangements

to facilitate his escape from Tehran in an emergency are under consid-

eration. In addition, there will probably always be some prominent Ira-

nian public figures outside Iran (such as the Iranian Ambassador to the

United States) who could participate in such a movement. For political

and security reasons, no advance planning in this regard can be at-

tempted with any Iranian leaders, including the Shah.

(2) Any anti-communist Iranian Government will under such cir-

cumstances undoubtedly appeal to the United Nations for diplomatic

and military support. This appeal should be exploited in the United

March–August 1953

Nations to demonstrate the aggressive character of Soviet communism.

However, major policy decisions would be required before active mili-

tary support could be given by the United Nations.

(3) Unless compelling circumstances prevent it, or other satisfac-

tory arrangements can be made, the Saudi Arabian Government will be

asked for permission to use Dhahran as a transit point in connection

with contemplated U.S. covert operations.

(4) It is assumed that Turkey, Iraq and Pakistan would each feel

threatened by a communist government in Iran and could, therefore, be

expected to show sympathy for anti-communist Iranian elements. Dip-

lomatic planning is directed toward insuring the greatest possible

measure of cooperation of these countries in support of the non-

communist Iranian Government. It should be recognized that the ex-

tent of cooperation provided by those countries would, of course, be in-

fluenced by their appreciation of Soviet reactions to any measures

which they might initiate.

(5) The active cooperation of the British Government is of major

importance in any plans which may be developed to meet this contin-

gency. Every effort will be made through diplomatic means to secure

this cooperation, but the failure to secure U.K. support will not in itself

prevent the U.S. from taking such measures as are possible to achieve

our national objectives.

d. Psychological: No specific psychological measures have yet been

planned for implementation in Iran in the event of an actual communist

seizure of power.

e. Special Political Operations: (1) At the present time CIA has a

stockpile of small arms, ammunition and demolition mate´riel [less than

1 line not declassified]. The stockpile is in quantity designed to supply a

10,000-man guerrilla force for six months without resupply. In other in-

crements there is sufficient mate´riel to equip basically a 4000-man guer-

rilla force. [1½ lines not declassified] CIA is now considering the feasi-

bility of adding essential food stuffs and clothing to existing or other

stockpiles. An estimate of such requirements is in the process of

preparation.

and sea to certain strong tribal elements in southern Iran (in particular

the Qashqai tribe) who might, in the event of a Tudeh coup, be pre-

pared to conduct resistance activity against such a Communist gov-

ernment. However, for political and security reasons, no attempt has

been made to conduct advanced planning of this sort with Iranian

officials.

(3) CIA has an agreement with the Qashqai tribal leaders in

southern Iran to establish a clandestine safe haven base from which

guerrilla and intelligence operations could be conducted utilizing the

181.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of Intelligence and

Research, Department of State

No. 1378

Washington, March 31, 1953.

IRAN: POTENTIAL CHARACTER OF A KASHANI-DOMINATED

GOVERNMENT

The displacement of Prime Minister Mohammed Mosadeq of Iran

by his nearest political rival, Mullah Abol Qasem Kashani, would be

disadvantageous to Western interests. Both Kashani and Mosadeq are

political opportunists, but whereas Mosadeq, despite his passionate na-

tionalism, has an underlying respect for certain aspects of Western

liberalism, Kashani views contemporary problems from a narrowly

Moslem outlook, severely warped by many years of bitter conflict with

British authority.

Kashani’s Potentialities for Gaining Power

Mosadeq’s prestige and political skill virtually preclude Kashani

from coming to power as long as the incumbent Prime Minister is alive

and politically active. Should Mosadeq retire or die, however, Kashani

would be the leading contender for his mantle, since he has the largest

bloc of votes (after Mosadeq) in the Majlis and controls the largest po-

tential force, except for Tudeh, for public demonstrations and physical

intimidation of his opposition. Power to choose the Prime Minister re-

sides in the Majlis, and it is very unlikely that the Shah would risk an-

other “Qavam incident” by appointing as Prime Minister anyone who

did not have controlling Majlis support.

Despite these initial elements of strength, the succession of

Kashani cannot be regarded as a cut-and-dried proposition. His elec-

March–August 1953

tion as president of the Majlis despite Mosadeq’s disapproval was the

result of a tactical maneuver of the moment, and provides no assurance

that the Majlis would support Kashani for Prime Minister. Opposition

to the Mullah, which would be formidable, would arise from the fol-

lowing considerations: (1) his personal conceit and ambition for power,

which discourage cooperation; (2) doubts of the genuineness of his pro-

fessed interest in social and political reform; (3) his well-known record

for unscrupulousness and opportunism; (4) his open antagonism

toward the Shah and the army; (5) his outspoken support of various

bigoted practices; (6) his lack of business experience; and (7) his lack of

executive experience at any level of government. Should he gain

power his tenure might well be short, especially if his resort to violent

methods should result in his own assassination.

One other alternative must be considered, and that is the very real

possibility that Kashani does not want the responsibility of being Prime

Minister. He would probably prefer the power without the office, and

may actually envisage himself as president or titular head of an Iranian

republic.

What Is Kashani’s Appeal?

Kashani’s support derives from two factors: (1) political and reli-

gious emotion, and (2) material self-interest. Since World War I, when

his father lost his life allegedly as a result of British action in Iraq and

when Kashani participated in the declaration of Jihad (Holy War)

against the Allies, he has been in frequent bitter clashes with British au-

thority. During World War II he was interned by the British Army. This

record of suffering at British hands has made Kashani a popular hero—

a veteran in the fight against “imperialism” imposed by nations not

only foreign, but Christian. He has used this religious factor effectively

to stir up political support from pious figures throughout Iranian so-

ciety. He has also secured support by providing employment or mate-

rial advantages for followers. His political and philanthropic activities

require considerable funds. Reports that he receives contributions from

Iranians of all classes for favors promised or received are undoubtedly

true. But it is significant that this is a usual Iranian practice to which no

stigma is attached.

Kashani has—like Mosadeq—built his political career on oppor-

tunism, i.e., by taking advantage of developments for which he was not

primarily responsible. The most important of these, of course, was the

growing resentment of foreign interference and pressure in Iran during

and following the 1941–46 Anglo-Soviet occupation of Iran. Kashani

did not lead the move to oust the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, but once

it was underway he made tremendous personal capital out of it.

In building his political power, Kashani has taken full advantage

of his unusual theatrical talents, displaying exceptional skill in ex-

ploiting the rural contacts and the self-interest of the Iranian clergy,

and appealing to the piety of small merchants in urban centers. He has

not hesitated to use his position as a member of the Moslem clergy to

arouse latent suspicions of the Christian West, and many of his political

activities have followed the pattern of a ward boss, and sometimes

even that of a gangster.

The political supporters of Kashani and Mosadeq—as well as those

of the Communist-dominated Tudeh Party—are drawn from much

the same social groups. The Mosadeq–Kashani followers constitute the

socialistically-inclined National Front group which became politically

vocal in 1950 and which derives its strength from government workers,

skilled labor, small property owners, teachers, students, and some

clerics. Its concentration is greatest in urban areas where problems of

organization and communication are relatively easy. Adherents who

are religiously inclined tend to turn to Kashani for guidance. On the

other hand, the aristocrats and the Western-educated youth who form

the hard core of the National Front, in general, prefer Mosadeq. Mo-

sadeq’s advantage lies in his integrity, his current control of the gov-

ernment organization, and his political astuteness. Aside from Mo-

sadeq, the only other National Front leader whose prestige approaches

that of Kashani is Allahyar Saleh, currently Iranian Ambassador to the

US.

Kashani’s major domestic political targets are the Court, the army,

and more recently, Mosadeq. His resentment toward the Court prob-

ably arises from (1) the ruthless destruction of the clergy’s power by

the late Reza Shah; (2) a belief that the present Shah is dominated by

British-oriented advisers; and (3) resentment that a man of the Shah’s

non-religious character should be the titular defender and propagator

of the Shiah Faith of Islam. His resentment toward the army probably

arises from (1) the army’s role as the instrument of Reza Shah’s domi-

nation, and (2) the manhandling which Kashani received at the hands

of army officers following his arrest and exile at the time of the at-

Kashani’s present opposition to Mosadeq appears to stem from

personal pique that Mosadeq is not more amenable to persuasion or di-

rection from Kashani in appointments and policies. Kashani is also

jealous of Mosadeq’s justifiably higher reputation for integrity, and his

March–August 1953

better domestic and foreign press. Kashani’s present tactics against Mo-

sadeq seem designed more to embarrass the Prime Minister and “cut

him down to size” than to strengthen the Shah or bring about Mo-

sadeq’s replacement as Prime Minister.

Probable Policies of a Kashani-Dominated Government

A government under Kashani’s domination would be likely to

pursue the present policies of the National Front, though with in-

creased use of violence and even assassination to control the opposition

and a more open distribution of political spoils.

Unless Kashani could establish an immediate dictatorship—and

there are no indications at present that he has that capability—his

freedom of action would be severely limited by his need for political

allies. Since Kashani would not enjoy the popular confidence and pres-

tige accorded Mosadeq, his need for support would be greater, and the

obligation to use force more compelling.

The Kashani and ex-Mosadeq forces would probably unite in the

face of any serious threat from either the Court or the Tudeh Party.

Kashani’s potential opponents, including the army, are likely to be

disunited and to calculate that their chances for survival would be

greater as a result of negotiation with Kashani than if they joined the

Court or Tudeh in open opposition. His opposition probably would be

strong enough to force Kashani to carry out minimum social, economic,

and political improvements and prevent him from implementing any

inclination to transform Iran into a theocratic state.

Kashani has strongly supported the following basic National Front

policies: (1) nationalization of the oil industry; (2) elimination of British

influence in Iran; and (3) replacement of the political power of the tradi-

tional governing groups by that of the “people” expressed through a

“truly national” Majlis. He has also adhered to the National Front and

Tudeh propaganda line that all Great Powers, but especially the US and

the UK, (1) follow imperialistic policies, (2) conspire with one another

against weak nations, (3) control international organizations for imper-

ialistic purposes, and (4) pursue a foreign policy toward weak nations

which is not endorsed by their own public opinion.

On two themes, Kashani has gone much further than Mosadeq. He

has from the beginning asserted that the exploitation of Iran’s oil re-

sources was a national curse rather than a blessing because of the extent

to which revenues from the AIOC affected the Iranian economy and

government operations, plus the fact that control of the AIOC was in

foreign hands. He has therefore urged that Iran forget its oil resources

and develop a self-sustaining economy and governmental structure not

dependent on them. Secondly, Kashani—unlike Mosadeq—advocates

violent means, including demonstrations and political assassination, to

free Iran from the grip of those leaders—such as the assassinated Prime

Minister Ali Razmara—whom Kashani regards as traitors responsive

to foreign influence.

Attitude toward the West

There is no convincing evidence that Kashani has (1) sought sub-

stantial foreign aid in his quest for power, (2) received substantial for-

eign aid from any source, or (3) if he did so, either could or would carry

out any commitments he might make as a quid pro quo. In the current

power struggle in Iran, public knowledge of any acceptance of aid ei-

ther from the West or the Soviet bloc would rapidly destroy Kashani’s

power, and the likelihood that such assistance could be concealed in a

society such as Iran’s is practically nil. Furthermore, it appears improb-

able that Kashani needs at this time the type of aid which any foreign

source could supply. The instruments Kashani must deal with are

Moslem and Iranian, all intensely nationalistic and therefore anxious to

avoid the charge of subservience to any foreign power.

In view of Kashani’s convictions and aspirations, as well as the po-

litical forces which would limit his freedom of action, there are no

grounds for believing that he could or would wish to promote closer re-

lations between Iran and the UK except if accompanied by further

British surrender of power or prestige. Insofar as he regarded US activ-

ities as attempts to restore or replace British activities, he would be

likely to oppose them. At the same time, he would probably try to

maintain friendly relations with the US Government and Americans

and to seek US technical and economic assistance if available without

unacceptable political strings. However, Kashani would probably re-

gard any foreign efforts to further his political or personal ambitions as

motivated only by self-interest, therefore requiring no quid pro quo on

his part.

There is no likelihood that a government dominated by Kashani

would abandon the current Iranian policy of neutrality in the East-West

struggle. A Kashani government might attempt to establish a strong

neutral Moslem bloc. Under his guidance, Iranian relations with

Turkey and Iraq would not improve as long as Western influence re-

mains strong in these two countries.

March–August 1953

182.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–6360

Washington, March 31, 1953.

SUBJECT

Planned Coup d’E´tat against Mossadeq Government

REFERENCES

SOURCE

Appraisal of Content: 3.

1. Anti-Mossadeq Majlis deputies and retired Army officers are

planning a coup d’e´tat which is tentatively scheduled to take place

“two or three weeks hence.”

2. Those prominent in planning the coup are: Majlis Deputy

Seyyed Abul Hasan Haerizadeh, General Nadr Batmangelitch, and re-

tired Generals Abbas Garzan, Bahadori, and Fazollah Zahedi.

3. In the event that the coup were successful, General Zahedi

would become Prime Minister and General Garzan would become

Chief of Staff.

4. The group which is planning the coup claims that the United

States Embassy in Tehran is “fully supporting” the move.

that the coup would take place in “about twenty days” and that Gen-

eral Afshartus, the Chief of Police, probably would take part, along

with one Army “motorized division.”

porter of Zahedi, remarked to source, “We are not finished; we will be

in power before summer.”

Information Reports 6360–6369. Secret; Security Information; Control—U.S. Officials

Only.

183.

Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Psychological

Strategy Board (Morgan) to Director of Central Intelligence

Dulles

Washington, April 3, 1953.

SUBJECT

Psychological Measures in Connection with NSC 136/1

The Department of State has requested that the Psychological

Strategy Board supervise the preparation of plans for specific psycho-

logical measures in connection with NSC 136/1. This is in line with the

progress report of the Department of State on Paragraph 5(a) of NSC

panel for this purpose.

Please inform me if this recommendation meets with your ap-

proval and if you wish to be represented on the panel.

George A. Morgan

March–August 1953

184.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans (Roosevelt) to the Director of

Central Intelligence (Dulles)

Washington, April 4, 1953.

SUBJECT

Support for Special Operation TP AJAX

quested for the expenditure of funds up to [dollar amount not declassified]

for the specific purpose agreed to, with the understanding that:

a. The funds will not be committed until the intentions and capa-

bilities of the instigator of the operation are established to the joint sat-

isfaction of the American Ambassador and our Representative.

b. Payments will be made in installments as events progress.

2. Exemption is requested from submitting a project or an adminis-

trative plan for this undertaking to the Project Review Committee.

3. This special operation obviously requires special security meas-

ures, and will be handled on “Eyes Alone” basis among those who

need to know of it. For this reason, usual accounting procedures cannot

be rigidly adhered to, and it is therefore requested that written receipts

from the recipients not be required.

Kermit Roosevelt

Outlines and Renewals of Projects. Secret; Eyes Only. Wisner recommended approval

and Dulles approved.

2 “TP AJAX” is a handwritten addendum to the subject line.

following:

1. Be on the alert for a possible coup d’e´tat attempt by the Royal

Court and the group in opposition to Mossadeq.

2. In case trouble develops, be ready to “protect” the Mossadeq

Government because the Party does not yet deem circumstances favor-

able for seizure of power.

3. Agitate everywhere for a single anti-imperialistic front but

avoid any statement which might tend to arouse the people against

Mossadeq.

CS Information Reports 6700–6709. Secret; Security Information.

187.

Memorandum Prepared in the Embassy in the United

Kingdom

London, April 7, 1953.

Minister of Court Ala called on Ambassador Henderson on the

morning of April 4. He said that he had just returned from spending

two days with the Shah at a Caspian Sea resort. During the two days

Ala said that he had done everything he could to persuade the Shah

that Mossadeq would probably obtain all the reins of power unless the

Shah took some definite step in opposition. He pointed out that the

Shah’s position might become practically hopeless. The Prime Minister

was set on forcing the Majlis to approve the report of the 8-man com-

mittee. He would interpret the committee’s approval as authorization

for his becoming the actual Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces

and also for his controlling revenues which were currently accruing di-

rectly to the Crown. Ala also told the Shah that the only candidate who

had the necessary energy and backing to succeed Mossadeq was Gen-

eral Zahedi. The latter had agreed to present his undated resignation to

the Shah in advance so that should the Shah be displeased with him he

could dismiss him at any time. Among the General’s support was

Kashani, Haerizadeh and other dissident members of the national

movement, influential political leaders not connected with that move-

ment and many mullahs, merchants, army officers, etc.

The Shah seemed impressed and said he would give the matter

further consideration on his return to Tehran (on the afternoon of the

4th). Ala emphasized the necessity of acting quickly. He pointed out

that the Prime Minister was preparing a demonstration on April 5 or 6

to intimidate members of the Majlis. These demonstrations would

probably be supported by certain disguised Tudeh groups as well as

other groups imported from outlying districts and provinces.

In reply to a question by Ambassador Henderson, Ala said that

Kashani supported Zahedi but, as with Maki, he hesitated to go all out.

While giving lip service, both appeared to prefer to maintain a position

which would allow them to plead non-involvement should the attempt

to overthrow Mossadeq by peaceful or other means fail. Ala said he in-

tended to see Kashani later in the day in an effort to persuade him to

take a more forthright position.

March–August 1953

188.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–6963

Washington, April 8, 1953.

SUBJECT

1. Further Details Concerning General Zahedi’s Plans for Supplanting Mossadeq

2. Counter Measures by Mossadeq Government

REFERENCES

SOURCE

[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

Zahedi, told [less than 1 line not declassified] the following:

a. The forces in opposition to Prime Minister Mossadeq are

“marking time” until they are able to assess the reaction of the Shah

and the public to Mossadeq’s policy speech to be broadcast at 1430

hours (Tehran time) on 6 April.

b. Although the Shah returned to Tehran on the evening of 5 April,

General Zahedi decided not to contact the Shah until the latter had

heard Mossadeq’s address.

c. In the interim, the Minister of Court, Hoseyn Ala, has been

charged by the Zahedi group with the task of prevailing on the Shah to

support General Zahedi.

CS Information Reports 6960–6969. Secret; Security Information; Control—U.S. Officials

Only.

Zahedi continues to be active in his efforts to organize a coup d’e´tat against the Mossadeq

had said he was in direct contact with the Tudeh “and that a ‘sizable portion’ of Iranian

Government intelligence concerning possible military coups comes from the Tudeh. The

Party promised Mossadeq that, if a coup were successful, the Tudeh would kill the coup

CS–6961, April 8, reported that the Ayatollah Borujerdi had “written to all the mullahs in

the Majlis requesting that they organize their own political faction.” (Ibid., Folder 65, CS

Information Reports 6960–6969)

d. General Zahedi will “delay” his planned effort to unseat Mos-

sadeq if the Shah refuses to support the opposition. However, the

Zahedi forces plan to stage a demonstration when and if enough dep-

uties return to Tehran to permit a meeting of the Majlis.

e. If the Shah, after hearing Mossadeq’s radio address, “takes a

firm stand” against Mossadeq, the Zahedi group is “ready to take over

the Government.”

f. The Retired Army Officers’ Association, which is part of the

group supporting Zahedi, has set up emergency communications to as-

sure “immediate” contact in the event of a “call to action.”

g. The Government is maintaining continuous surveillance of the

following:

(1) The Royal Palaces and the homes of the Shah’s relatives and

advisers.

(2) The homes of retired Generals Zahedi, Taqizadeh, and

Gilanshah.

(3) The homes of all the Bakhtiari khans.

2. The Chief of Staff of the Iranian Armed forces, General Taghi

Riahi, has appointed his cousin, General Esmail Riahi, as Commander-

in-Chief of Kurdistan, Luristan, and Kermanshah, with headquarters at

Kermanshah. The purpose of this move is to halt the pro-Shah,

anti-Mossadeq conspiracies in northern and western Iran.

3. Prime Minister Mossadeq has instructed General Mahmud Af-

shartus, Chief of the Iranian National Police, to visit Azerbaijan and in-

vestigate personally reports of a “strong anti-Mossadeq movement”

there.

April 8, reads: “Milani and Angaji told Borujerdi that the people of Azerbaijan were ‘de-

manding’ that they (Milani and Angaji) abandon the National Front and Prime Minister

Mossadeq because of the latter’s attitude toward the Shah.”]

March–August 1953

189.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, April 12, 1953.

2. Following statements made by asset:

A. Shah will not fight against govt for protection his prerogatives.

B. Opposition giving impression it has dropped all plans over-

throw Mossadeq. However opposition still working secretly to stir up

public opinion against recommendation contained “Report of Majlis

Cttee of Eight”. Source doubts recommendation contained “report”

(defining and drastically limiting Shah’s powers) will pass Majlis,

though only few deputies are for Shah. Large number a majority [sic]

are against Mossadeq. “Report” is opportunity [to oppose?] Mossadeq

on ground other than [illegible] opposition [illegible].

C. Mossadeq in difficult position. He not sure of majority on “re-

port” or even of majority when and if vote confidence requested. Mos-

sadeq now soft pedalling. He making friendly overtures toward oppo-

sition and in particular toward Shah. What he wants is Shah to endorse

“report” without forcing Majlis vote, but source convinced Shah will

never append his signature to “report”. Source repeats “the Shah will

do nothing, he will not fight for his privileges; he will not renounce

them voluntarily. He is passive and will let events take their course.”

Mossadeq will not at this time take initiative of stirring mob and

causing street demonstrations in support “report.” Since incidents 23

Feb when his gate stormed and he had to climb over wall to save own

life he has developed healthy fear against crowd.

D. Thus neither opposition nor govt likely start acts violence.

E. Source sums up situation as follows. [illegible]

End of message.

190.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, April 14, 1953.

TEHE 959. [3 lines not declassified]

1. Political situation Iran “completely changed” over weekend

with following results:

A. Zahedi abandoned plans for “direct” attempt replace Mossadeq

at present.

B. “Important” elements both National Front and opposition now

considering possibilities Mossadeq’s voluntary retirement in favor can-

didate acceptable both sides, possibly Alayar Saleh, Iran Ambassador

to U.S.

C. Zahedi: Action agreeable “solution” mentioned in B above and

willing cooperate therein with National Front in exchange for a cabinet

post for Zahedi himself.

2. In meeting with Shah on 1 April deputy Hosein Makki urged

Shah “prevent” any opposition action against Mossadeq now “because

Mossadeq will retire voluntarily within 2 months”.

3. Ayatollahs Kasanf [Kashani] and Ehbeganq [garbled].

4. Above source feels declaration will not be written.

5. Mossadeq cabinet member expressed opinion that “Mossadeq is

trapped by anti-foreign forces he unleashed but which have now be-

come uncontrollable “and even if Mossadeq govt falls” there no possi-

bility oil settlement with British because “anti British feeling is too

deeply rooted for anyone to solve problem”.

6. Field comment: “Coalition” such as that suggested in para 1

above not unusual in Persian politics where theory “if you can’t lick em

join em” is old hat. In this case, Station feels both camps prefer alliance

rather than showdown in which each uncertain of outcome.

disseminated the information in this telegram. (Ibid., DDI Files, Job 8000810A, Box 10,

March–August 1953

7. Source comment: Re para 2 above. This may be entirely selfish

move by Makki because of business deals in which he and partner,

(Mabugdji—also rec’d Malugdji) (FNU) man representatives selling

machinery to 7 year plan and desire keep govt in power at least until

commissions paid.

source para (portion garbled being serviced) [less than 1 line not

declassified].

End of message.

191.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–7704

Washington, April 16, 1953.

SUBJECT

Opposition Test of Strength with Mossadeq

SOURCE

[2 lines not declassified]

1. The Iranian political crisis has been reopened with Prime Min-

ister Mossadeq taking the initiative in a planned surprise attack in

which the Government plans to use all of its assets to try to crush the

opposition and to force Majlis acceptance of the report of the “Com-

and Tudeh-sponsored, are to be staged that day in the Majlis Square.

2. On 15 April a Court representative attempted to enlist Mullah

Kashani’s support of the following plan (to which the Shah “appeared

favorably disposed”) to oust Prime Minister Mossadeq and replace him

by General Fazullah Zahedi:

a. Kashani would address a letter to the Shah stating that, in view

of the lawless condition in Tehran and threats to the Majlis deputies,

the Majlis no longer could function.

CS Information Reports 7700–7709. Secret; Security Information; Control—U.S. Officials

Only.

define the powers of the Shah. [Footnote is in the original.]

b. On the same day the above-mentioned Court representative

would prevail upon the Shah to issue a firman and proclamations

quoting Kashani’s letter, relieving Mossadeq, and appointing General

Zahedi as “Director of Public Security” to maintain order so that the

Majlis could designate an able and capable new prime minister in an at-

mosphere free from violence.

c. In the event that the firman dismissing Mossadeq could not be

obtained from the Shah, the opposition would refrain from participa-

tion in street conflicts, but opposition deputies would walk out of the

Majlis in order to prevent the formation of a quorum.

3. Kashani preferred a variation of the above plan, by which he,

Kashani, would draft a letter to be signed by Majlis members as well as

by himself. Kashani claimed that he could obtain signatures of “pos-

sibly forty deputies” before the Government could demand a parlia-

mentary showdown of the “Committee of Eight.”

4. Royal Court officials are deeply concerned over the demonstra-

tions scheduled for 16 April and anticipate bloodshed.

5. The following information increases Court fears of possible se-

rious repercussions in the wake of Government-planned demonstra-

tions on 16 April:

a. Bands of “hoodlums” have been directed by Government sup-

porters to attack the Palace, Majlis buildings, and American installa-

tions, but the security forces have not been ordered to stop them.

b. The Army guard (including tanks) has been reinforced around

Mossadeq’s house and Radio Tehran.

c. The Government is giving a holiday to all workers on 16 April

and the Bazaar is to close on the same day (thus freeing thousands to

gather in the streets).

d. All schools have been ordered to be closed on 16 April.

192.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Iran Branch, Near East

and Africa Division (Waller) to the Chief of the Near East

and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)

Washington, April 16, 1953.

SUBJECT

Transmittal of Branch 4 Estimate Entitled “Factors Involved in the Overthrow of

Mossadeq”

Attached hereto is a Branch 4 Estimate entitled “Factors Involved

in the Overthrow of Mossadeq”. This estimate drafted by Mr. Wilber

represents Branch thinking. It is believed that it will prove useful as a

guide for our PP planning, and as a reference source of background

information.

John H. Waller

Attachment

Estimate Prepared in the Iran Branch, Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

FACTORS INVOLVED IN THE OVERTHROW OF MOSSADEQ

Summary

I. Basic Assumptions

II. Evaluation of Principal Elements Concerned in Possible Replacement

Operation

A. General Fazlullah Zahedi

1. Current position

a. Biographical sketch (see Appendix A)

b. Evaluation of personality and capability

c. Motivation

d. Elements supporting Zahedi

TPAJAX Vol. I. Top Secret; Security Information. Also distributed to the Chiefs of the Po-

litical Propaganda and Foreign Intelligence Divisions in NEA.

e. Relations with the Shah

f. Relations with Ayatollah Kashani

2. Negotiations with Zahedi

a. The Shah

b. Financial aid

c. Oil issue

d. Composition of government

e. Policy of government

B. The Shah

1. Personality

2. Negotiations with the Shah

C. Forces which will play a role in any effort to replace Mossadeq

and to establish a stable government, and evaluation of their attitudes.

1. The Iranian Army

2. Tehran police

3. The Majlis

4. Political groups

a. Dissident elements of the National Front

b. Tudeh Party

c. Iran Party

d. Third Force

e. Baghai’s Toiler’s Party

f. Pan-Iranist

g. Sumka

h. Amayoun Party

5. Religious elements

a. Ayatollah Kashani

b. Respected political leaders

c. Fedayan Islam

6. Tribes

a. Qashqai

b. Other tribes

7. Social groups

a. Government officials

b. Merchants

c. Landowners

d. The general public

III. Assets which may be directed toward the replacement of Mossadeq

A. [1 line not declassified]

1. General factors

2. Political assets

March–August 1953

3. Military assets

4. Religious assets

5. Press assets

6. Activist assets

7. Penetration assets

8. Other assets

B. Other assets of the field station

1. [1 line not declassified]

2. Qashqai leaders

3. Former ranking members of the army and the police

4. [1 line not declassified]

5. [1 line not declassified]

C. [1 line not declassified]

IV. Estimate of the possibility of overthrowing Mossadeq by a Shah-

Zahedi combination, supported by U.S. assets and policy

Appendix A

Fazlullah Zahedi

Summary

This study is based upon the premises that U.S. interest and policy

requires the replacement of Mossadeq and that appropriate Agency

assets should be committed to the support of General Zahedi, the con-

tender for the Premiership who is currently most active and appears to

have the widest local support.

Agency assets in Iran are not by themselves capable of over-

throwing Mossadeq’s Government, but should Zahedi be supported by

these assets and by financial backing his chance of success would be

greatly enhanced.

Considerations bearing upon the replacement of Mossadeq and

the firm establishment of a government headed by Zahedi are pre-

sented in the opening section of this study as a series of basic assump-

tions. Other sections of the study supply the background material upon

which a number of the assumptions have been based.

Most vital of the basic assumptions is that which states that the

government of Zahedi will not be able to establish itself or to remain

long in power without the active support and moral leadership of the

Shah. Hence, it is considered essential that a U.S. representative be

placed in contact with the Shah in an effort to obtain a firm commit-

ment of such support. Lacking such a commitment or faith that the

commitment will really be carried out, the Agency should reconsider

any plan to take positive action in support of Zahedi.

Should Zahedi fail in his effort to replace Mossadeq when Agency

assets had been involved in this effort, the result would be that these

assets would be compromised and possibly destroyed. In addition,

such a failure would fan National Front and public antipathy to such an

extent that the Point IV and Military Missions might be expelled from

Iran. The reaction might include a swing to closer relations with the

USSR on the part of the Mossadeq Government.

Should developments cause active Agency support [to] be with-

held from Zahedi, a detailed plan of operations should be prepared for

such a time as Mossadeq falls from power as the result of other pres-

sures. Mossadeq’s prestige and power is definitely on the decline and

should this trend continue a successor, favored by the U.S., would find

the task of taking over much easier than at the present time. In fact, it

might be achieved without the backing of the Shah.

I. Basic Assumptions

These assumptions are listed in order of relative chronology. Sec-

tions which follow contain material in support of certain of the

assumptions.

1. Mossadeq must go.

2. Appropriate U.S. covert assets will be directed toward his over-

throw and U.S. policy action and financial aid will support his

successor.

3. General Zahedi is the only currently active candidate to succeed

Mossadeq who has a real chance of success.

4. For success Zahedi requires the energetic backing of the Shah

which insures adequate support by the armed forces.

5. At this time Soviet reaction to a forced change in government

would be limited in nature.

6. Failure of an attempted forced change would lead to violent Ira-

nian reaction against the U.S.

7. Zahedi can last only if he manages the immediate removal of all

dissident leaders.

8. Zahedi is allegedly anxious to settle the oil issue. A new pro-

posal agreement must at least appear to be more generous than any pre-

vious one: it must not insist upon compensation for years in which con-

cession would have covered.

9. Timing of oil agreement is of great importance as it should not

be announced immediately after Zahedi takes office.

10. Zahedi’s cabinet must include the strongest possible indi-

viduals, including a U.S. approved choice of his successor.

11. Kashani’s influence with the Zahedi government must be re-

stricted or neutralized.

March–August 1953

and the U.S.

13. [2 lines not declassified]

14. Should Zahedi himself fall from power the U.S. must act to re-

place him by the chosen member of his cabinet.

II. Evaluation of Principal Elements Concerned in Possible Replacement

Operation

A. General Fazlullah Zahedi

1. Current position

a. Biographical sketch (See Appendix A)

b. Evaluation of personality and capability

[3 lines not declassified] indicate that he is competent, energetic, ag-

gressive and patriotic. Derogatory comments also emphasize the ag-

gressive aspect of his character.

Associated with the Nazi efforts in Iran during World War II, he

has long been firmly anti-Soviet. A pro-Western orientation is reflected

in the education of a son in the U.S. and the activity of this son in the

Point IV office in Iran.

Local circles at Tehran believe him to be the only military man on

the scene who would stage a coup and follow it through with

forcefulness.

c. Motivation

Subject is personally ambitious, but at this particular time he prob-

ably feels he is the only man strong enough to bring order out of the

present chaos. He has displayed reason and restraint in answering

charges made against him by the National Front, and his self confi-

dence has certainly been reinforced by the fact that various elements

have asked him to assume leadership of the country. At least as early as

the summer of 1952 he was preparing to take over the government.

d. Elements supporting Zahedi

On 2 April 1953 Zahedi claimed that he was supported by the fol-

lowing elements:

Ayatollah Kashani

Minister of Court Ala and other Court officials

Military elements: Association of Retired Army Officers, several

Army officers in key posts, and General Batmangelish.

Amayoun Party (Group which consists largely of “old guard” anti-

National Front Senators. This group has Free Mason overtones.)

Large segment of the bazaar, including leading merchant Nikpur

Former supporters of Ahmad Qavam

Majority of the people (sic)

An evaluation of the position of some of these elements is given in

a following section. It must be noted that of this number only the Asso-

ciation of Retired Army Officers can be considered as wholeheartedly

behind Zahedi. Until very recently Zahedi seemed interested in ob-

taining power by constitutional means—as the choice of the Majlis—

but in April he was ready to stage a coup if he were to be appointed

Prime Minister by a royal decree. At this time he claimed to have se-

lected his cabinet and the heads of the army, gendarme´rie and police.

e. Relations with the Shah

Zahedi was a faithful servant of the late Reza Shah and has en-

joyed the confidence and good-will of his son, the present ruler. In 1947

the Shah named him Inspector General and in 1949 when General Raz-

mara forced him out of the Army the Shah named him as his Adjutant.

In 1950 the Shah appointed him to the First Senate and in 1951 he was

Minister of Interior in the pro-Shah cabinet headed by Ala, present

Minister of Court. Throughout 1952 there seems to have been little di-

rect contact between the Shah and Zahedi. Then on 11 April the Shah is

said to have favored Zahedi as successor to Mossadeq, but believed

that the decision was up to the Majlis and must wait until Mossadeq’s

popularity had declined even lower.

f. Relations with Ayatollah Kashani

Kashani undoubtedly plans to direct the affairs of Iran as the

power behind the successor of Mossadeq. As early as September 1952

Kashani is said to have selected Zahedi to replace Mossadeq.

April he stated that Kashani was reaching an understanding with Boru-

jerdi and Behbehani—influential religious leaders—on the necessity of

encouraging the Shah to stand up to Mossadeq.

Certainly Zahedi and Kashani do not trust each other: Zahedi says

he will get rid of Kashani in due course, while Kashani must feel that he

could control Zahedi.

2. Negotiations with Zahedi

Within the first two weeks of April 1953 Zahedi appeared ready to

insist that the Shah appoint him Prime Minister, but he has failed to

press this point. It is believed that Zahedi will not act precipitously and

will not attempt to carry out a coup or any more legalistic maneuver

without assurances of U.S. support. [3 lines not declassified]

[2 paragraphs (11 lines) not declassified]

(3) Oil Issue

Zahedi will be presented with the draft of an oil agreement which

is to be implemented after his government is firmly established. He will

be assured that implementation of the agreement will be followed by a

March–August 1953

very substantial sum from the U.S., either as a cash advance on oil sales

or as a grant.

[2 paragraphs (12 lines) not declassified]

B. The Shah

1. Personality

“The Shah has vivacity, imagination, and wit, tempered with a

deep sense of personal dignity and an almost mystical feeling of his

mission and duty to Iran . . . The Shah identifies himself strongly with

the Iranian Army, considering himself a qualified strategist and tacti-

cian. Devoting a great deal of his private fortune on charities, his popu-

larity is now much greater than at his accession. Were he to make him-

self absolute dictator on the model of his father, the Iranian people . . .

would acquiesce, but his attachment to democratic principles prevents

such a step” (NIS).

In spite of all of these admirable qualities, the Shah has shown

himself to be vacillating, hesitating and indecisive. On many occasions

when he has finally made up his mind as to a positive course of action

he has soon failed to follow through and abandoned his plans. Not

even those Prime Ministers in whom he had most confidence have en-

joyed his positive backing over any extended period.

It has been stated that the Shah might rise to a vital emergency, as-

sume the moral leadership of the country, and give sincere support to a

constructive government. It is just as possible that he will never be able

to overcome his handicaps of vacillation and indecision. However, in

his one great test—that of the recovery of Azerbaijan from the pro-

Soviet regime—he displayed real leadership. Again in March 1953 the

public demonstrations in his favor caused him to refuse Mossadeq’s

demand to leave Iran. The Shah has stated that he is prepared to sacri-

fice his life or his throne for the good of his country.

2. Negotiations with the Shah

It has been assumed that Zahedi will not be successful in estab-

lishing himself through a coup or legalistic maneuver without the

whole hearted support of the Shah. To support this assumption there is

the example of the short-lived premiership of Ahmad Qavam in July

1952 where such support was lacking. With control of the armed forces

now more firmly in the hands of Mossadeq, only the Shah has the ca-

pacity of appealing to the basic loyalties of the staff officers to a point

where they might follow the orders of the Shah and of Zahedi rather

than of Mossadeq.

Before definite negotiations are completed with Zahedi it is vital

that a U.S. representative be placed in contact with the Shah. This rep-

resentative should present the point of view that if the Shah will supply

the moral leadership the U.S. will support, by every means, the most

logical successor to Mossadeq. The alternative will be the continued

disintegration and eventual collapse of Iran. The point should be

stressed that this is the Shah’s final time for decision and, that failing

this time, he will have betrayed his country. Discussions should cover

the steps to be taken by the Shah in replacing Mossadeq by Zahedi,

worked out in all pertinent details. Should the Shah give the required

assurances, negotiations would be concluded with Zahedi. If the U.S.

representative felt that the Shah would not rise to the occasion, the pro-

jected operation should be discarded.

The choice of a suitable representative is of great importance.

George Allen, largely responsible for the Shah’s decisive action at the

time of the recovery of Azerbaijan, would be the ideal choice. A mili-

tary man, such as one of the former heads of the U.S. Military Mission

to Iran, is another possibility. It would seem less advisible to employ

the current diplomatic representative, because his presentation would

lack the special quality of that of a special representative and because of

the risk that his efforts might be disclosed and his usefulness in Iran

ended.

C. Forces which will play a role in any effort to replace Mossadeq and to

establish a stable government, and evaluation of their attitude

1. The Iranian Army

The bulk of the security forces have a strong sense of traditional

loyalty to the Shah, but the rank and file may be expected to follow the

orders of their superiors who were appointed to their present posts by

Mossadeq. The events of July 1952 when the action of force at Tehran

was not supported by the Shah tended to weaken the traditional bonds

of loyalty between the throne and the army.

Any coup promoted by Zahedi or any legalistic maneuver to put

him in power would fail unless supported by the armed forces at

Tehran. Until about a year ago the First Division at Tehran, the

so-called Guards Division, was in a position to control the course of

events and this force was loyal to the Shah. Mossadeq, realizing the sit-

uation, had this division split into three separate brigades with officers

of his own choosing in command. There are also two armored brigades

and the central MP Brigade at Tehran. Headquarters has no informa-

tion as to the personal sympathies or political inclinations of the com-

manders of these brigades. It is very doubtful if any of these com-

manders would obey orders of Zahedi directed at the overthrow of

March–August 1953

Mossadeq, but more probable that some of them would execute orders

of the Shah acting in support of Zahedi.

Should the commanders of the brigades at Tehran incline to nei-

ther side the outcome of any coup or legalistic maneuver to replace

Mossadeq would depend upon whether Mossadeq or Zahedi could

muster the largest civilian mobs.

There is no indication that Zahedi has control over armed forces in

the provinces which he could move against Tehran.

2. Tehran Police

The Tehran Police have demonstrated—in July 1952—their in-

ability to maintain order in face of mob violence. Hence they are not an

element of importance, although headed by an officer appointed by

Mossadeq.

3. The Majlis

The Majlis is not a4 factor to be considered in the course of a

forceful coup. Should Zahedi come to power by a legalistic maneuver,

he might receive an initial vote of confidence particularly if effective

political action were taken among the deputies.

The Majlis numbers 79 deputies but this total number has never

been present at recent sessions. Of this number 30 are allegedly loyal to

Mossadeq. Four deputies are on the fence and the balance of 46

members is potentially anti-Mossadeq. This potential opposition is as

follows:

Freedom Faction (composed of former

supporters of Mossadeq, led by Haerizadeh)

Ayatollah Kashani supporters

Opposition deputies

Pro-Shah deputies

Total

However, in spite of this potential opposition Mossadeq has won

overwhelming votes of confidence in the past. These votes have been

on his handling of the oil issue and on his retention of special powers.

In recent weeks the opposition has increased in strength and should a

test come on some such subject as the future position of the Shah in the

constitutional government—and come at a time when a potentially

strong successor is on the scene—Mossadeq might fall. Following the

traditional pattern of past years, this successor would be given a vote of

confidence by the Majlis.

4. Political groups

a. Dissident elements of the National Front

Within the last year the National Front of Mossadeq—a very loose

association of individuals of varying stature and power to influence the

public—has tended to break up. These dissident elements are active

within the Majlis—Haerizadeh, Baghai, and Makki—and without it.

There seems little chance that these elements will coalese in positive

support of such a figure as Zahedi and it also seems unlikely that they

can assemble sizeable groups of anti-Mossadeq demonstrators.

b. Tudeh Party

The Tudeh Party has consistently and bitterly attacked the political

activity of Mossadeq. However, since one of its basic aims is to disrupt

internal security it has rushed to support of Mossadeq in his attacks

against the Shah. By 4 April 1953 Tudeh members had been alerted to

the possibility of a coup against Mossadeq and had been ordered to be

ready to “protect” Mossadeq.

The Tudeh Party may be able to assemble up to 10,000 demon-

strators at Tehran from its Party members and the several pro-Soviet

front groups active there. However, on 15 April 1953 it assembled only

about 1,000 people in a pro-Mossadeq, anti-Shah demonstration.

c. Iran Party

This group is a leftist element of the National Front and is strongly

pro-Mossadeq. It claims a membership of 10,000, with the percentage at

Tehran not defined. This figure is much exaggerated, especially in view

of the resignations of ranking members that took place at the recent an-

nual convention of the Party. The Party’s strength is in the member-

ship of a considerable number of high level permanent officials of

the government and the Party has not mustered its members for

demonstrations.

d. Third Force

This political group is headed by Khalil Maleki, once a leader of

the Tudeh Party and more recently party organizer and theoretician for

Baghai. Maleki claims 10,000 members, certainly an exaggeration as the

party publications appeal to intellectual socialists. The Third Force has

been pro-Mossadeq and is not expected to lend its support to the Shah.

It has no record of mustering demonstrators.

e. Baghai’s Toilers Party

Earlier a lieutenant of Mossadeq, Baghai has openly opposed him

over the allegedly undemocratic and unconstitutional methods of Mos-

sadeq. Should a show down between Mossadeq and the Shah be di-

March–August 1953

verted to a vote on the continuation of Mossadeq’s plenary powers,

Baghai would probably oppose Mossadeq. Baghai has not more than

three faithful followers among the Majlis deputies. The Party claims

10,000 members but—given the defection of Maleki, probably has less

than 2,000 active members. The Party has not been mustered for street

demonstrations.

f. Pan-Iranist

This group is violently anti-Soviet and anti-foreign in general.

Small in total numbers, it does have branches in many provincial towns

and its importance resides in the fact that it can call out small groups of

street fighters. The group has been consistently pro-Mossadeq, but has

a strong inherent loyalty to the Shah and might split on the issue of

which of these individuals it should support.

g. Sumka

This National Socialist Party is small in size but capable of pro-

ducing fanatical street fighters. Repressed from time to time by Mos-

sadeq, it might side with the Shah in a show down. It is very

anti-Soviet. In October 1952 its leader tried to interest Zahedi in sup-

porting his party.

h. Amayoun (or Amiyun) Party

Zahedi claims the support of this group. It is believed to be an as-

sociation of individuals of conservative leanings who have formerly

held high posts in the government and have more recently been

members of the Senate. Ala, Minister of Court, is a member. The group

has British and Masonic overtones.

5. Religious Elements

a. Ayatollah Kashani

On the occasion of recent show-downs with Mossadeq Kashani

has always lost out. For this reason he has turned to support of the Shah

in an effort to build up a coalition—directed by himself—which would

be capable of replacing Mossadeq. As president of the Majlis Kashani

has considered it beneath his dignity to actually preside at the sessions

and from this and other indications it seems certain that he is not inter-

ested in becoming Prime Minister himself, but in directing a successor

to Mossadeq.

Kashani’s power is not that of a spiritual leader, but of a schemer

who can obtain the funds necessary to call out mobs from the bazaar

section of Tehran. To date these mobs have not been as effective as the

groups mustered by either Mossadeq or the Tudeh Party.

b. Respected religious leaders.

This element is headed by Ayatollah Borujerdi, resident at Qum,

the supreme spiritual leader of the Moslems. It includes such figures as

the influential Behbehani at Tehran. These individuals have tended to

avoid entanglement in the political arena, but on 11 April 1953 Zahedi

reported that Kashani, Borujerdi and Behbehani were reaching an un-

derstanding on the need to bolster the Shah in resistance to Mossadeq.

About this same time two clerics who are also deputies in the Majlis

from Tabriz informed Borujerdi that the people of Azerbaijan were de-

manding that they leave the National Front because of Mossadeq’s atti-

tude toward the Shah. Borujerdi is alleged to have instructed them to

form a religious faction within the Majlis.

While it is extremely unlikely that he could be persuaded to take

such a step, were Borujerdi to call for the active support of the Shah his

spiritual associates could assemble a very large force of demonstrators

and influence public opinion to a very high degree.

c. Fedayan Islam

This group of fanatics, with a record of political assassinations, is

unfavorably disposed to Mossadeq and bitterly opposed to certain

members of his government. This small group is currently cool toward

Kashani, who is allegedly trying to establish good relations with them.

Quiet at present, this group may break out at any time. However, it is

not known how its leader, Navvab Safavi, may be influenced in any

specific direction.

6. Tribes

a. Qashqai

Two of the leaders of this most powerful of the Iranian tribes are

deputies in the Majlis. They have consistently given their support to

Mossadeq, largely because of their antipathy to the present Shah which

stems from the severe repression of the tribe by Reza Shah. At the same

time these leaders are reported to be on good terms with Zahedi. If of-

fered substantial political and economic benefits by Zahedi they might

remain passive in the event of the replacement of Mossadeq. Otherwise

they might resort to armed action—as in 1946—and so disrupt the in-

ternal security of southwestern Iran.

b. Other tribes

The Bakhtiari leaders would probably support Zahedi, as would

the Lur, Shahsevan, Khamseh and Zolfaghari tribal elements. The

Kurds would probably not take sides. It is unlikely that any of these

groups would take up arms, either in support of Mossadeq or of the

Shah.

March–August 1953

7. Social groups

None of these groups could be expected to pursue an active role in

the replacement of Mossadeq. However, individual members might be

sources of funds or aid in maintaining internal stability.

a. Government officials

With the exception of members of the Iran Party, the higher offi-

cials would tend to remain neutral with respect to Mossadeq. The

lower levels, subject to increasing economic uncertainty, would be glad

to see him go.

b. Merchants

Kashani can muster the support of a large segment of the leading

merchants in the bazaar. The top level, engaged in foreign trade, might

well furnish funds for activity against Mossadeq and Zahedi claims to

have the financial backing of one member of this group. The mass of

small shopkeepers, without influence, support Mossadeq.

c. Landowners

The majority of the landowners are opposed to Mossadeq and

would employ their influence to attempt to keep order in the provinces

in the event of his overthrow.

d. The General Public

Zahedi claims the support of the “majority of the people”, but it is

far more likely that the man in the street continues to admire Mossadeq

for his strong stand against the British and as a symbol of resurgent na-

tionalism. However, this element is of no practical value to either side

unless effectively organized and led. Action by this element will come

only from the groups already listed in earlier headings.

III. Assets which may be directed toward the replacement of Mossadeq

These assets should be mobilized only in relation to a detailed plan

of operations and such a plan would be the primary responsibility of

the field station. Should all these assets be engaged in an all-out effort,

it is certain that some of them would be exposed. Should the operation

fail, some of these assets might be totally destroyed.

A. [1 line not declassified]

1. General Factors

[2 paragraphs (7 lines) not declassified]

2. Political Assets

[6 paragraphs (19 lines) not declassified]

3. Military Assets

[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]

4. Religious Assets

[6 paragraphs (17 lines) not declassified]

5. Press Assets

[less than 1 line not declassified] have extremely wide connections

with the Tehran press. These contacts could be used to create an atmos-

phere favorable to Zahedi once he had taken over power. At the

present time the great bulk of the press is already anti-Mossadeq. Once

Zahedi was in power it should be possible to use the very severe press

law put into effect by Mossadeq to suppress all pro-Mossadeq organs.

[less than 1 line not declassified] should also make a major effort to win

over the two most important Tehran papers, Ettelaat and Keyhan, to the

support of Zahedi. Keyhan would probably be more receptive to such

an effort.

[less than 1 line not declassified] also have the capability of producing

and distributing posters, pamphlets and throw-aways.

6. Activist Assets

[less than 1 line not declassified] have the capabilities of bringing out

gangs of street fighters. Through [less than 1 line not declassified] contacts

with leaders of various segments of the Pan-Iranists they have encour-

aged this group to engage in street fights with the Tudeh Party. It is

questionable whether [less than 1 line not declassified] could bring out the

Pan-Iranists to fight for the Shah. They might be able to establish con-

tact with the Sumka Party for this purpose and they probably could

produce small, independent groups [less than 1 line not declassified].

7. Penetration Assets

[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]

8. Other Assets

[3 paragraphs (8 lines) not declassified]

B. Other Assets of the Field Station

[4 paragraphs (13 lines) not declassified]

2. Qashqai Leaders

The field station has [less than 1 line not declassified] contact with the

several brothers who head the Qashqai tribe. This contact has been in

preparation for Qashqai resistance of the Soviet invasion of Iran and

the station has not attempted to influence these leaders with respect to

current political situations. With regard to the replacement of Mos-

sadeq, it is not possible that the station would persuade these leaders to

support the Shah. The most the station could do would be, as an inter-

mediary between Zahedi and these leaders, to pass on assurances of

political and economic benefits if they would refrain from open hos-

tility toward Zahedi.

March–August 1953

3. Former ranking officers of the army and the police

The station has [1 line not declassified] and who could be directed to

attempt to win the support of present army commanders for an opera-

tion against Mossadeq.

4. [1 line not declassified]

[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]

5. [1 line not declassified]

[1 paragraph (7 lines) not declassified]

C. [1 line not declassified]

[5 paragraphs (24 lines) not declassified]

IV. Estimate of the possibility of overthrowing Mossadeq by a Shah–Zahedi

combination, supported by U.S. assets and policy

The act of overthrow would be either a coup d’e´tat or a rapid legal-

istic maneuver with Zahedi put into office by royal decree.

The attitude of two factors would determine the success of such an

attempt. These factors are: (1) the Tehran Army garrison, and (2) the

Tehran mobs.

Neither Zahedi nor any other military figure would be able to per-

suade the commanders of the Tehran garrison to follow his orders

rather than those of Mossadeq as delivered through the Chief of Staff.

However, should Zahedi be able to approach these commanders in the

name of the Shah he should at least be able to neutralize the opposition

of a large part of the garrison. Thus, a firm decision on the part of the

Shah is essential to success.

Tehran mobs are composed of a number of elements. On at least

two occasions in recent years they have overcome the resistance of the

police and military to take over the capital for a matter of hours. Such a

until the present Mossadeq has been able to draw the greatest street

crowds, but this activity may have been more spontaneous than

planned and directed. In fact, information as to how pro-Mossadeq

crowds are summoned and directed is completely lacking. All available

assets in Iran engaged in the operation of overthrowing Mossadeq

should concentrate on the tasks of weakening the ability of Tudeh and

Mossadeq to call out mobs and of building up the size and leadership

of pro-Shah mobs.

Should the Shah–Zahedi combination be able to get the largest

mobs in the streets and should a sizeable portion of the Tehran garrison

refuse to carry out Mossadeq’s orders, the overthrow of Mossadeq

would be certain.

193.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS DB–3966

Washington, April 17, 1953.

SUBJECT

1. Attitude of Shah toward General Zahedi’s Plans for Ousting Mossadeq

2. Attitude of Shah and Opposition Leaders toward Present Crisis

SOURCE

[4 lines not declassified]

1. As of 10 April the Shah’s attitude toward General Fazullah

Zahedi’s plans for ousting Mossadeq was reported to be as follows:

a. The Shah is sympathetic to Zahedi’s candidacy but he prefers a

“parliamentary” solution to the present crisis rather than forceful ac-

tion to remove Mossadeq.

b. The Shah does not want to appoint Zahedi by firman at this time

and thus incur personal responsibility for the overthrow of Mossadeq.

The reason for this attitude of the Shah is his lingering fear of the British

who he believes do not want to see Mossadeq out of power just now.

The Shah is convinced that the British have two policies in Iran:

(1) An official policy which follows to a certain extent the Amer-

ican line;

(2) A secret policy, the real one, which currently calls for the sup-

port of Mossadeq. The Shah is influenced in this latter supposition by

the fact that certain personalities, such as Deputies Abdullah Moazami,

Jayad Ganjei, and Haji Agha Reza Rafi who in the past have been con-

sidered as spokesmen for British interests, are now approaching him

and urging that he accept the recommendations contained in the report

of the Majlis “Committee of Eight” which, if accepted, would drastic-

ally curtail the powers of the Shah.2, 3

c. The Shah fears that a Zahedi “experiment” might bring about a

repetition of the Qavam fiasco.

CSDB Intell Reports TS–88046 3966. Top Secret; Security Information; Control—U.S. Offi-

cials Only.

March–August 1953

d. The Shah is inclined to postpone a change of government until

such time as Mossadeq’s popularity will have further ebbed. The Shah

feels that there is a strong undercurrent sapping away Mossadeq’s

power and that this should be allowed to take its course.

2. As of 11 April:

a. the Shah would definitely not fight against the Mossadeq Gov-

ernment to protect his prerogatives but would continue his completely

passive position and let events take their course;

b. the political opposition to Mossadeq had dropped, at least tem-

porarily, all plans to overthrow the Prime Minister. However, the op-

position was still working secretly to stir up public opinion against the

recommendations contained in the report of the “Majlis Committee of

Eight.” The opposition asked its friends and supporters not to attempt

or encourage street demonstrations against Mossadeq or in favor of the

Shah. Furthermore, the opposition urged Zahedi not to run the risk at

this time of further compromising his political future by attempting a

test of strength with Mossadeq. The opposition decided to conserve its

assets by making a strategic withdrawal;

c. Mossadeq was beginning to doubt his ability to command a

Majlis majority in support of the report of the “Committee of Eight” or

even for a vote of confidence. Mossadeq, therefore, was reluctant to

force a decision on the report in the Majlis although he was still hopeful

that he could persuade the Shah to endorse the “report” without Majlis

action. The Prime Minister was, in fact, making conciliatory gestures

toward the opposition, and, in particular, toward the Shah.

3. On 11 April, Mullah Borujerdi, Kashani, and Behbehani, leading

clerical figures from the spiritual and/or political point of view, were

reaching mutual understanding on the need to bolster the Shah in his

resistance to Mossadeq.

4. On 12 April:

a. Majlis opposition leader Seyyed Abul Haerizadeh indicated to

Zahedi and other colleagues in the group opposing Mossadeq that this

was not the time to attempt to force Mossadeq’s resignation;

c. Moscow’s recent overtures of conciliation toward the West also

were having their effect on the opposition by lessening the fear of the

Tudeh Party.

194.

Briefing Notes Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

for Director of Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, April 21, 1953.

THE IRANIAN SITUATION

The failure of the Iranian Parliament to meet during the past week

again

underscores

Prime

Minister

Mossadeq’s

current

political

weakness. A report sponsored by the Prime Minister, aimed at further

reducing the Shah’s powers, has been before parliament for the last

month. Mossadeq’s supporters, however, have been unable to secure

the necessary quorum to act on it.

Eight opposition deputies have left Tehran and thus have blocked

all efforts to convene a quorum. Mossadeq reportedly asked the Shah to

dismiss parliament, but the latter refused.

Mossadeq’s extensive but disunited opposition is also in a weak

position, mainly because of the Shah’s unwillingness to take any initia-

tive. General Zahedi and other leading political figures who have been

plotting against Mossadeq have, according to late reports, postponed

plans for a coup, awaiting a more propitious time. Mullah Kashani,

president of parliament, a long-time critic of Mossadeq, has moved

cautiously in the present situation. Opposition elements to Mossadeq

in the army are apparently not well coordinated with his political

opponents.

Mossadeq controls the Army Chief of Staff and he has a large pop-

ular following which the Communist Tudeh party has temporarily

joined. While he has not been able to secure parliament’s cooperation

NSC Briefing 22 Apr 53. Secret; Security Information. Prepared for DCI Dulles for his

briefing of the NSC on April 22. The official minutes of the April 22 NSC meeting record

that DCI Dulles gave an oral briefing on Iran and that the NSC noted the March 20

Progress Report on NSC 136/1 and directed that “all outstanding copies of this Progress

Report be recalled by the Executive Secretary.” (National Archives, RG 273, Records of

Progress Report is Document 180. The memorandum of discussion at the NSC meeting of

April 22, drafted by Gleason, notes that “Mr. Dulles spoke briefly about the situation in

Iran. He noted a further decline in both the prestige of the Shah and the power of Mos-

sadegh. He described the situation as one of perpetual crisis, but predicted no dramatic

turn of events within the next several weeks.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC

Series, Box 4, 140th Meeting of the National Security Council)

March–August 1953

in recent days, Mossadeq has a compact bloc of parliamentary votes,

which can, in turn, prevent effective action against him by his parlia-

mentary opposition. Since neither the Prime Minister nor his oppo-

nents appear at present strong enough to win decisive control, the situ-

ation is deadlocked for the moment.

The rioting on the 15th and 16th in Shiraz, in the southwest, which

threatened the lives of American Point IV personnel was appar-

ently caused by Communist exploitation of demonstrations by rival

factions.

Current Tehran cables reflect high tension and suggest that the sit-

uation is building up to a climax which could result in a breakdown of

public order as antagonistic groups struggle for power.

American Embassy’s statement regarding the Shiraz incident, but is

continuing its efforts to unseat the Prime Minister.

2. The Shah promised “two weeks ago” to give financial aid to

General Fazullah Zahedi but to date no aid has been received.

3. Dr. Mossafar Baghai has joined Zahedi against Mossadeq.

CS Information Reports 8550–8559. Secret; Security Information; Control—U.S. Officials

Only.

196.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–8642

Washington, April 27, 1953.

SUBJECT

Zahedi Campaign to Replace Prime Minister Mossadeq

SOURCE

[3 lines not declassified]

1. General Fazullah Zahedi appeared before the Shah on the night

of 19 April 1953 to request that the Shah support Zahedi’s campaign to

replace Mossadeq as Prime Minister.

2. The Shah answered (in essence) that he agreed that “something”

must be done and that Zahedi was the man to act, but Zahedi should

wait until the Shah felt that the time was opportune. The Shah stated

that he would give Zahedi a more definite answer on 24 or 25 April.

Mullah Kashani, who urged the Shah to take action “now,” thereby

capitalizing on public concern over the disappearance of Chief of Police

General Mahmud Afshartus. 3

4. The Shah told Mustafa Kashani to wait “two days—not two

weeks or two months, but only two days.”

5. Meanwhile, Prince Ali Reza, the Shah’s brother, told the Shah

that he was tired of the present situation and that, if the Shah refused to

act against Mossadeq, Ali Reza would act on his own.

CS Information Reports 8640-8649. Secret; Security Information; Control—U.S. Officials

Only.

March–August 1953

6. Ali Reza was “very busy” among young Army officers, agitating

against Mossadeq.

197.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–8818

Washington, April 28, 1953.

SUBJECT

Current Iranian Situation

REFERENCES

CS–88172

SOURCE

[3 lines not declassified]

1. The Shah appointed Abol Ghassem Amini as “Deputy Minister

of Court” as a “token of good will toward Mossadeq and to calm Mos-

sadeq’s suspicions of the Royal Court.” Amini is a relative and sup-

porter of Mossadeq.

2. Ali Reza Gharagazlu, the Shah appointee to replace Minister of

Court Hoseyn Ala, has declined the appointment. The post will remain

vacant and Amini will assume Ala’s former duties and responsibilities.

3. By these actions the Shah is attempting to “placate” Mossadeq in

an effort to prevent the latter from making public “documents” which

are alleged to implicate the Shah and the Royal Court with:

a. the kidnapping of Police Chief Mahmud Afshartus; and

b. the tribal rebellion led by Abol Ghassem Bakhtiari, a kinsman of

the Queen.

CS Information Reports 8810–8819. Secret; Security Information; Control—U.S. Officials

Only.

Mossadeq supporter, as ‘Chief of Court’ in order to ‘balance’ the appointment of

pro-Shah Ali Reza Gharagazlu as Minister of Court replacing Hoseyn Ala.” (Ibid.)

198.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

fication Iranian internal situation would render possible give affirma-

tive reply re both programs mentioned. Still difficult with future so

murky make firm recommendations re advisability adoption village

council program. Successful executive should contribute significantly

future Iran. Spirit constructive cooperation necessary in rural commu-

nities if Iran have healthy economic life. Without special training type

envisaged this program it would probably take generations before

rural communities would acquire understanding necessary as basis for

public spiritedness and free cooperation. Question is whether in

present conditions which, in view economic situation, severity internal

conflicts and stresses resulting from foreign pressures likely continue

unsettled for some time, program this character closely identified as it

is with Mosadeq’s political fortunes and requiring multiple contacts

with explosive elements in town and village has sufficient chance

success to warrant adoption. Recent trends cause me believe chances

Received at 9: a.m.

ments regarding probable political consequences of proceeding with implementation

TCA support Mosadeq’s agrarian development and urban housing program.” (Ibid.,

March–August 1953

success not (repeat not) good and I see no (repeat no) immediate pros-

pect just now (repeat now) reversal these trends.

2. I recommend adoption housing program which might with ad-

vantage be strengthened to absorb some of funds not (repeat not) used

in village council program if decision made not (repeat not) adopt latter

or reduce its scope.

3. Despatch going forward next pouch treating in more detail

problems touched on herein and discussing in light recent develop-

ments certain other problems re aid. In this despatch conclusions

drawn that (A) aside from difficulties of political and security character

which any kind aid must encounter in deteriorating situation here,

technical assistance not (repeat not) accompanied by economic assist-

ance not (repeat not) likely achieve worthwhile results in country so

economically arid as Iran; and (B) if Congress approves for Iran tech-

nical assistance programs say in neighborhood 10 million dollars for

1954 without adding at least twice as much for supporting economic

aid, chances in Embassy’s opinion success such technical aid so slight

consideration should be given withdrawal TCI entirely.

4. I am showing this telegram Warne, Director TCI for whose judg-

ment and courageous fighting spirit I have respect and have invited

him comment on it either by telegram or despatch.

Henderson

technical assistance was construed by Iranians as an indication of U.S. support in their oil

dispute with the British. Hence, “the time may come in the not too distant future when

conditions in Iran will have degenerated to such an extent that the continuance of the ex-

tension of limited amounts of technical and economic aid will no longer serve useful pur-

poses; when the continuance of the extension of such aid might be more disadvantageous

to the United States than its discontinuance . . . I do not believe that that time has as yet

come . . . The Department should know however that the possibility exists that it may

Project and advised against “any decision pull back piecemeal from our acknowledged

objectives, as decision not (repeat not) go forward on Village Council Project this late date

2816, May 4, in which it instructed, “in view worldwide objectives TCA, Congressional

interest land reform, and probable adverse reaction by Mosadeq should TCI withdraw

this time from Project, go ahead with Village Council Project.” (Ibid.)

199.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

new approach oil problem. NIOC or government bring suit against

AIOC in Iranian courts to recover on claims during period AIOC oper-

ated concession and on new claims arising from damages inflicted

since nationalization. AIOC would be invited appear bring records

submit counter claims. Case would be conducted with fairness ap-

parent to all impartial observers. What would I think such approach?

2. I said it might afford considerable international entertainment

but not (repeat not) likely solve oil problem. Public UK and various

other countries could not (repeat not) be convinced trial such circum-

stance would be fair. AIOC almost certain not (repeat not) answer

summons. Trial absentia would have little weight. Prime Minister in-

sisted Iranian courts proper tribunal; AIOC might not (repeat not) be

interested pressing its claims against Iran but Iranian claims active and

could not (repeat not) languish. I said I thought free world would con-

sider international tribunal more appropriate than Iranian courts for

settlement claims. I asked if he would object my informing US Govern-

ment his plans. He said matter still under consideration not (repeat not)

discussed with leading political advisers. Therefore confidential. I

could however tell US Government if I thought no (repeat no) leaks.

3. Prime Minister remarked I did not (repeat not) seem favorably

impressed his idea. I repeated I did not (repeat not) think his contem-

plated approach would serve any useful purposes so far as settlement

oil dispute was concerned. Prime Minister apparently on impulse said

“I am willing have this dispute settled by someone whom Britain and I

can trust. I agreeable President Eisenhower act as arbiter. I ready give

him full power to decide issue. Will you be good enough to ask Presi-

dent Eisenhower if he would undertake settle this matter for us?” I re-

plied I had no (repeat no) authority convey any additional messages re

settlement oil dispute. Appropriate way to make suggestions re settle-

ment dispute by direct contact with British or through Swiss who rep-

resented British interests. Prime Minister said he wished make no (re-

peat no) formal suggestions unless he had some reason hope they

might be acceptable. Would I not (repeat not) be willing at least report

our conversations US Government? I agreed provided it be clearly un-

derstood he was not (repeat not) making any proposals to me; that we

Noforn. Received at 2: p.m.

March–August 1953

were not (repeat not) reviving discussions re settlement oil problem.

Was I to understand he prepared give President Eisenhower full

powers with no (repeat no) strings attached settle oil dispute and ac-

cept without reserve whatever decision President might make? Prime

Minister hesitated. He said only decision President Eisenhower would

be called upon to make would be amount of compensation due after

deduction Iran’s counterclaims. Although he trusted President com-

pletely, Iran public sentiment would never allow any foreigner decide

question British return Iran. British could never return regardless of

Iranian Government in power. After further thought Prime Minister

said if British indicate willingness abide by decision US President, he

would ask Majlis gave him full power go to US to lay case before Presi-

dent. After arrival in US he would send message requesting Majlis to

permit him transfer his full powers to President. He must obtain Majlis

approval for each step in explosive problem matter this kind. I asked if

he sure, (a) Majlis would give him full powers, or (b) Majlis would later

be willing authorize him transfer full powers to President. He said if

British in good faith would be willing to give full powers to President

and British would cease for time being causing him trouble through

their agents in Iran he convinced Majlis would follow his lead this

matter. I said then danger this new idea might give rise false hope of

settlement. If British should be prevailed upon to give President full

powers Iran public might well say British willingness this regard indi-

cates British sure decision will be their favor. Prime Minister said he

sure he could manage situation Iran if UK Government could manage

in London. I would report our conversation to US Government but not

(repeat not) in form of offer. US President faced with staggering burden

duties. It would not (repeat not) be easy for him act as arbiter in case

this kind. Furthermore, task of thankless character sure to create resent-

ment in both countries. Nevertheless if President had reason believe

dispute might be disposed of as result his personal arbitration he might

view importance to free world of obtaining settlement undertake task.

Unfortunately I not (repeat not) in position as result of informal conver-

sation this kind assure US Government there good reason believe dis-

pute could be settled this way. In past, Prime Minister had suggested

various approaches to me but after consulting his advisers had at-

tached so many conditions approaches proved blind alleys. Never-

theless I would report his remarks to State Department.

4. I also told Prime Minister that even if US Government should be

willing again to become involved in this dispute it would not (repeat

not) be easy induce UK endeavor find solution oil dispute so long as

Mosadeq remained Prime Minister. UK Government seemed believe as

it made concession after concession Mosadeq continued to retreat ap-

parently in expectation that British would make fresh concessions. My

impression was British had lost practically all hope any settlement

while Mosadeq remained Prime Minister. Prime Minister maintained

he desired dispute settled; he had never moved backwards; in fact on

occasions he had been willing make concessions which would have

rendered him vulnerable sharp criticism by Iran public and by political

leaders opposed to him including even stooges of British.

5. In view my previous experience with Mosadeq I not (repeat not)

inclined place hope in settlement oil problem through channels which

he now suggests. Even if British Government would find it possible en-

trust President decide dispute it would in my opinion be very difficult

for Mosadeq obtain full powers from Majlis or transfer those powers to

President. In any event Majlis likely insist decision be in framework

nine-point national law and in right pass on President’s decision. Fur-

thermore I doubt British would be happy at idea of matter of compen-

sation being completely divorced from question future disposition Iran

oil.

6. Even though Mosadeq’s latest suggestion likely collapse before

making appreciable headway I do not (repeat not) think it in interest

free world for US take completely negative attitude at time we stressing

settlement question compensation may be key future fate Iran. I ven-

ture suggest therefore unless it decided President in no (repeat no)

event should become involved in this troublesome problem matter be

discussed with British and they be informed unless they strenuously

object US answer be that President did not (repeat not) believe he could

be useful in this matter unless he should be informed jointly by Iran

and UK their desire submit to him such differences as they unable to

settle between themselves for decision and that government of both

countries would do utmost persuade their respective legislatures to ap-

prove any decision President might make. US Government therefore

suggests if after careful consideration Prime Minister desires make

such approach he might directly contact UK or contact through Swiss.

If it believed unwise for President become involved I might be author-

ized inform Mosadeq that although this expression confidence in Presi-

dent deeply appreciated, President believes he could be more useful to

both Iran and UK in future if he should refrain from making decisions

on merits their respective claims; that he hoped Iran and UK would be

able find solution as result direct contact or by agreement on some ar-

biter other than President in whom both would have confidence.

7. Have marked this telegram Noforn merely because Department

and London might desire decide between themselves what if anything

tell British.

Henderson

200.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

4311. 1. I have met Amini, new Acting Minister Court twice briefly

since his appointment. First April 30 at reception Embassy and second

afternoon May 2 Iraqi Embassy. On latter occasion I congratulated him

on and wished him success in new difficult position. He replied task ex-

ceedingly difficult. He found himself in most awkward situation. I said

I could understand. I personally had highest regard for Ala, his prede-

cessor, who had been my friend for many years. I had deep respect and

affection for Shah and I exceedingly fond Mosadeq whom I considered

one of great men Middle East. Amini said he in same position. I told

him I would be pleased call on him at his convenience. He replied he

would welcome opportunity talk with me and would be glad see me

even though there was no (repeat no) protocol requirement that chiefs

of diplomatic missions call on Minister Court. I took hint and said

perhaps he and his wife would like have tea some afternoon with wife

and self. He indicated that would be preferable but I did not (repeat

not) set date.

2. May 3, Chief CAS informed me Khosro Qashqai had told him he

understood Chief would like have chat with Amini and he had ar-

ranged for him see Amini discreetly same evening. Chief had replied

he had not (repeat not) indicated desire see Amini but would be glad

meet him. I approved meeting.

3. Chief informs me during discussion in presence Qashqai Amini

stated differences between Shah and Mosadeq should be settled

soonest. Present situation of suspense weakens court, excites opposi-

tion and benefits only Tudeh. Basis of settlement of differences will

have important bearing on future Iran. If this settlement is to benefit

Iran and be permanent it should be in harmony with US policies. It im-

possible Iran remain neutral. Iran must be committed to West and only

logical association is with US. Said before advising Shah regarding

terms settlement he must know (question A) what US policy is re-

garding Iran particularly regarding Mosadeq? Amini continued that as

soon as differences between Shah and Mosadeq settled Amini will sug-

gest Shah visit Caspian. Afterwards he wishes arrange Shah go abroad.

cret; Security Information; Priority. Received at 9: p.m. At the top of the page is a hand-

He would like suggestions regarding country which Shah might visit,

preferably one with monarchical government. (Question B)

5. [sic] Re question B, chief said choice country for Shah visit could

best be determined by court itself. It would seem, however, that impor-

tant factor to be taken into consideration was what reaction Iranian

public opinion would be. He would ask Ambassador whether Embassy

might be able assist in arranging invitation.

6. In reply question C, chief stated in his opinion US would not (re-

peat not) favor attempt effect change in regime. In view geographical

position Iran and internal political pressures change of regime would

be hazardous venture which might seriously jeopardize Iranian inde-

pendence and social stability. Shah could be sure US would not (repeat

not) condone move this kind. Chief remarked he sure Khosro would

agree attempt change regime might be fatal to country. Khosro who on

previous occasions in past had commented to members Embassy staff

“Shah must go” and he “favored republic” said on this occasion he not

(repeat not) against Shah provided latter behaved as “their Shah” and

not (repeat not) like “Prime Minister”.

7. Amini asked if it possible have answers his questions by May 6

or latest May 8.

8. After departure Amini chief informed Khosro it would be pref-

erable for all concerned if next interview could be between Amini and

chief alone. He hoped Khosro would take initiative in suggesting this to

Amini since he did not (repeat not) wish Amini gather impression chief

trying arrange private meeting without Khosro’s knowledge.

9. Amini has raised some delicate questions which in my opinion

should be carefully considered before reply given. Several days ago

Shah through trusted source sent message to me he did not (repeat not)

have full trust in Amini and Embassy should not (repeat not) fully

credit Shah certain views which Amini might express on Shah’s behalf.

Understand Amini has made progress of late in obtaining Shah’s confi-

dence. Fact that Amini carried on this conversation in presence Khosro

who although Amini’s close friend one of most vindictive enemies of

Shah might indicate Amini playing some kind of game, Khosro under-

going change attitude or Amini naive.

10. After discussion appropriate members staff and some thought,

I shall make recommendations re type answers to be given. My present

thinking is Amini’s position so unclear it might be preferable in an-

swering question A state US refraining from intervening in Iranian in-

ternal affairs and, therefore, not (repeat not) supporting any particular

person. It has great respect for Mosadeq and wishes cooperate with

him in correct manner during time he Prime Minister. It also regards

Shah as factor for stability in country which should not (repeat not) be

weakened. Re economic aid we might point out extremely difficult so

201.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

4324. 1. Key members Embassy staff in agreement with me Amini

Acting Minister Court has not (repeat not) as yet proved trustworth-

iness to extent warranting our giving him specific reply question A [less

member influential family Kajar blood and not (repeat not) likely sin-

cerely support present Shah whose father ousted Kajars. Family con-

sidered ambitious and opportunistic prepared form temporary alli-

ances to its advantage. Its friendship with equally opportunistic

Qashqai Khans and MFA Fatemi strengthens our doubt regarding its

motivations.

2. Various unconfirmed rumors afloat regarding present objectives

this family. One is it hopes brigadier brother Minister Court now chief

gendarme´rie will be made chief staff and be in position with alliance

Qashqais and other prominent political and military figures effect coup

which would eliminate both Shah and Mosadeq and make brigadier

dictator. Another rumor is that Minister Court working with Mosadeq

get Shah out of country and in absence make Prince Abdor Reza suc-

cret; NIACT; Security Information. Received at 8 a.m. Printed from a sanitized version;

the original was not found.

cessor. Mother Abdor Reza Kajar and wife sister of wife Minister Court.

These rumors should not (repeat not) be taken too seriously. Never-

theless they serve illustrate complicate character present political

situation.

3. If Department approves I would like authorize [less than 1 line

not declassified] reply somewhat as follows Amini’s questions:

Answer question A Ambassador states fixed policy US Govern-

ment not (repeat not) intervene Iranian internal affairs by giving polit-

ical support any particular Iranian political leader or groups. US Gov-

ernment would like maintain friendly relations and cooperate loyally

with Iranian Government headed by Mosadeq just as with constitu-

tional Iranian Government headed by another Iranian political leader

who indicated by public word and action desire to maintain friendly

relations with US. Ambassador unable at this time give assurances re-

garding extension on part US financial or substantial economic aid to

Iran. He thinks it would be difficult in view public opinion in US to ex-

tend this kind aid in view present status oil dispute. US Government

while not (repeat not) intervening in matters primarily domestic con-

cern Iran is of opinion that institution Shah is stabilizing and unifying

factor and that any substantial weakening of institution Shah in present

circumstances might result in series of events which would undermine

Iranian independence.

Answer to question B Ambassador understands US Government

believes it might endanger Iran independence for Shah to leave country

in immediate future. He doubts therefore willingness US Government

become involved in facilitating Shah’s departure.

Answer to question C as worded in reference telegram.

4. In case Amini should inform [less than 1 line not declassified] that if

US unable extend financial substantial economic aid to Iran Mosadeq

may have no (repeat no) choice other than to ally himself with Tudeh

and continue cooperate with extremists of Iran party, [less than 1 line not

declassified] might reply US Government not (repeat not) convinced it

necessary for Mosadeq make such alliance or continue such coopera-

tion merely because US cannot (repeat not) give assurance in present

circumstances financial or economic assistance. If however Mosadeq

with support Majlis and tacit acquiescence Shah decides to go in such

direction responsibility for what might happen to Iran will fall upon

him, Majlis and Court.

Henderson

March–August 1953

202.

Monthly Report Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, May 6, 1953.

IRAN

April 1953

A. General Developments

1. The opposition to Premier Mossadeq appears discouraged and

has shelved its immediate plans for the overthrow of the present gov-

ernment in favor of biding its time and conserving its assets. This dis-

couragement is in large measure owing to the Shah’s ineffectuality and

his unwillingness to resist Mossadeq’s demands (as exemplified by his

recent replacement of Minister of Court Ala by a man more acceptable

to Mossadeq). The opposition was further discouraged by Ambassador

Henderson’s statement to the effect that U.S.–Iran relations had not

been disturbed by the mob attack on the Point IV office in Shiraz, a

statement which was generally interpreted to mean that the U.S. gov-

ernment still favored Mossadeq as Prime Minister.

B. Station Synopsis

[3 paragraphs (19 lines) not declassified]

C. Operational Summary

[3 paragraphs (26 lines) not declassified]

D. Paramilitary Operations

[2 paragraphs (7 lines) not declassified]

John H. Waller

Chief, NE–4

4, Monthly Report—April 1953, Country Summaries and Analyses. Top Secret; Security

Information.

3 [text not declassified]

203.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

4356. 1. In considering various policy problems re Iran Department

may be interested brief evaluation by Embassy present position Mo-

sadeq. Although at present Court appears to be weakening in struggle

with Mosadeq and opposition in Majlis unable mobilize its resources

effectively against him Mosadeq’s position is certainly weaker than it

was before he undertook struggle against Shah last February.

2. Appointment Amini Acting Minister Court as successor Ala

generally regarded here as victory for Mosadeq. Since his appointment

Amini has been intermediating between Mosadeq and Shah and has

been issuing number conciliatory and optimistical though at times con-

flicting statements re progress in achieving understanding between

Mosadeq and Court. Doubt exists however that Amini really working

in interest either Mosadeq or Shah. Objectives powerful Kajar–Amini

family not (repeat not) entirely clear but activities Amini may eventu-

ally serve further to weaken position Mosadeq without strengthening

Shah.

3. Although opposition in Majlis has not (repeat not) been able take

effective offensive it has not (repeat not) been dispersed and continues

through guerrilla tactics to prevent Majlis from having quorum and

government from engaging in constructive activities. Even if, as is

being optimistically predicted in pro-government circles, Majlis may be

able meet within next few days there is justified doubt that it can take

action of character which will appreciably strengthen Mosadeq’s posi-

tion. For instance unless some surprise event should take place gov-

ernment may encounter extreme difficulty in depriving Baqai of Parlia-

mentary immunity. Government failure in this respect will reflect on its

strength following official announcement charging Baqai with com-

plicity murder police chief Afshartus. Government will also face stub-

born opposition in attempting obtain unqualified Majlis approval

Committee of Eight report substitute measure limiting Shah’s powers.

Fact that General Zahedi is being given in general sympathetic recep-

tion by mass Majlis during his present period of asylum there indicates

decline in prestige and authority Mosadeq in Majlis.

Security Information; Priority. Repeated to London. Received at 6: p.m. The telegram is

March–August 1953

4. During last six months there has been sharp shift in basis Mo-

sadeq support among political leaders. Most elements original Na-

tional movement now (repeat now) in open or tacit opposition. Indi-

cations friction appearing between him and Iran Party one of last

National movement elements which still supports him. Mosadeq’s sup-

port now (repeat now) appears largely to rest on security forces which

he tells me he does not (repeat not) trust, government bureaucracy in-

cluding newly appointed governors general whose loyalty untested,

government monopoly of radio and variety groups and individuals

with widely divergent interests such as Qashqai Khans and some

prominent Kajar and merchant families. When it serves party’s in-

terests Tudeh also rallies to his support in times of strain. His most im-

portant strength still is his great reputation as Nationalist leader strug-

gling free Iran from foreign control. Also fact that for two years he has

been Prime Minister gives him certain prestige among rank and file.

Nevertheless his failure solve oil problem by way economy advanta-

geous Iran, economic deterioration of country, his frequent use of mass

demonstrations in order bring pressure on opposition, his inability ob-

tain cooperation outstanding political leaders country, and his resort

military law maintain order have served weaken his popularity even

among masses.

5. Mosadeq still however, outstanding political figure Iran. His op-

ponents thus far have not (repeat not) shown courage and spirit unity

necessary seriously to threaten him. Most dangerous threat which we

can see at present moment is that coming from Amini group working

from within. This group would require exceptional skill however, if it

to succeed overthrow Mosadeq either by peaceful methods or by force.

Zahedi has to [some?] extent retrieved position taking refuge in Majlis

and by presenting his case individually to Majlis leaders and press.

Zahedi thus far however, has not (repeat not) been able obtain support

Shah which he has considered essential his success. Moazami only

deputy who in past has frequently contrived make himself middle of

road compromise candidate for office now being discussed certain

circles as possible successor Mosadeq who would be acceptable to Na-

tional movement as well as various opponents that movement. He may

eventually become real threat. Shah fears and respects him allegedly

because Shah considers him underground agent for Brit.

Henderson

204.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 953

Tehran, May 15, 1953.

SUBJECT

Embassy Conversation with Source Close to Shah

There is attached for the Department’s information a memo-

randum of a conversation which I recently had with a source2 close to

the Shah in the presence of two members of the Embassy. In this in-

stance it is believed that the memorandum is self-explanatory. It should

be noted that this emissary of the Shah expresses on behalf of the Shah

views which differ from those expressed by Acting Minister of the

Court Amini. The Acting Minister has taken the position that it would

be advantageous to Iran and to the Western world for the British to try

to come to an oil settlement regardless of whether the Government of

Iran is headed by Dr. Mosadeq or some other prime minister.

Loy W. Henderson

Ambassador

Attachment

Memorandum of Conversation

Tehran, May 14, 1953.

On the evening of May 13, the Ambassador had a conversation

with a person extremely close to the Shah. Commander Pollard, Em-

bassy Naval Attache´, and Mr. Melbourne, First Secretary of Embassy,

were present.

The emissary of the Shah stated he had a message from the Sover-

eign expressing strong appreciation for the efforts that the Ambassador

had made during the period when pressure was being applied to oblige

the Shah to leave the country. The Shah wished the Ambassador to

know that he believed if it had not been for the actions of the Ambas-

sador at that time the institution of monarchy in Iran would have been

cret; Security Information. Received May 22. A copy was pouched to London. Drafted by

Henderson; the attached memorandum of conversation was drafted by Melbourne.

March–August 1953

overthrown and the country would have been partitioned. Further, the

emissary wished the Ambassador to know that the Shah deeply appre-

ciated the continuing support for him which was being given by the

American Government.

The emissary wished to make clear to the Ambassador certain fun-

damental features of the Shah’s policy toward Dr. Mosadeq. The latter

had come to power as the result of careful planning over a period of

several years before actually assuming power. He had stirred the emo-

tions of the Iranian people when he took office, and he had had public

and Majlis support. The Shah had not willingly agreed to make Mo-

sadeq Prime Minister, but he had bowed to the forces behind him and

now believed that the only way to obtain Mosadeq’s eventual dismissal

from office was through the same parliamentary means which had

granted him the premiership. The Shah believed that time was dis-

crediting Mosadeq and that the Soviet menace to Iran had receded

since the death of Stalin so that Mosadeq’s removal in a legal way

would be achieved in the not too distant future. The Shah preferred this

method to others, such as a military coup, an arbitrary move of the

Shah removing Mosadeq and appointing another prime minister, the

imprisonment of Mosadeq, his exile, or even his death at the hands of a

Tehran mob. In all of these alternatives Mosadeq would be made a

martyr or a source of serious future trouble. It was the Shah’s policy

toward Dr. Mosadeq to bow slowly to Mosadeq’s pressure, but at the

same time to regain as much ground as possible through taking advan-

tage of shifting conditions. If the Shah had rigidly opposed Mosadeq,

the Shah would have been completely eliminated, like a tree which

would have crashed through the force of a violent wind. Such explana-

tions were made by the emissary to depict the Shah’s policy, which he

understood had caused a certain dissatisfaction on the part of Amer-

ican officials who wished the Shah to take a much stronger stand

toward Mosadeq.

In discussing various personalities, the emissary said that the Shah

did not extend confidence to the newly appointed Acting Minister of

Court, Mr. Abol Qasem Amini. However, Amini was important under

present circumstances and the Shah did not therefore wish to antago-

nize him. The emissary hoped that the Ambassador would keep the

Shah’s attitude toward Mr. Amini in mind in determining his own rela-

tions with Amini.

Turning to a discussion of the oil situation, the emissary said that

the Shah believed that it was in the real interest of Iran and of free

world unity for the Ambassador in the course of official meetings with

Dr. Mosadeq to discourage any attempts by the latter to discuss the oil

question and possible means of settling it. Dr. Mosadeq was not serious

in such talk. It would be possible to discuss oil matters, such as the

205.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 975

Tehran, May 19, 1953.

REF

SUBJECT

Further Conversation with Source Close to Shah

There is attached for the information of the Department a memo-

randum of a conversation which I had on May 17 with an emissary of

the Shah in the presence of several members of the Embassy. A pre-

vious talk with this same source was summarized in the above refer-

enced despatch.

Loy W. Henderson

Ambassador

cret; Security Information. Received May 27. A copy was pouched to London. Both the

despatch and the attached memorandum of conversation were drafted by Cunningham.

March–August 1953

Attachment

Memorandum of Conversation

Tehran, undated.

PARTICIPANTS

The Ambassador

Source

Commander Pollard, Naval Attache´

Mr. Melbourne, First Secretary of Embassy

Mr. Cunningham, Third Secretary of Embassy

At approximately 9 p.m. on the evening of May 17, an emissary of

the Shah met the Ambassador and the other officers listed above in

order to deliver a message from the Shah. He stated that the same mes-

sage would probably be repeated to the Ambassador the next day by

Mr. Amini, but that he, the source, was, in addition, bringing private

comments from the Shah which would not be entrusted to Amini. The

message was to the effect that:

a) The Mosadeq Government was prepared to support the West

surreptitiously, while pretending to be neutral, and would take firm

measures against communists in Iran if the Shah would agree to sup-

port the Government.

b) The Mosadeq Government would accept substantial financial or

economic aid from the United States Government, provided that the

United States Government did not insist that, in return for such aid,

Iran openly renounce its avowed policy of neutrality and indicate pub-

licly that it was a part of the free world.

c) The Shah had agreed to the condition of cooperation contained

in a) above.

The Shah’s private comments upon this message were that he

would cease giving apparent support to the Mosadeq Government if

Mosadeq undertook to undermine him, particularly his position with

regard to the Army. In fact, if Mosadeq insisted on relieving the Shah of

the latter’s responsibilities with regard to the Army, the Shah would

leave Iran.

The Shah expressed concern over the announcement appearing

currently in the Iranian press to the effect that the courts had decided

that the Tudeh Party (communist-front party) was not in any way

acting contrary to the Constitution and laws of Iran and that, therefore,

there was no case against Iranian subjects who were being prosecuted

as leaders of that party. The Shah said that if this announcement was

true, it would seem to him that Mosadeq had already forfeited any

claim he might have had to the Shah’s support.

The Sovereign felt that the United States should use its present bar-

gaining position, arising from Dr. Mosadeq’s great eagerness to obtain

United States support, to force a change in Mosadeq’s attitude towards

indigenous communist groups. Such a change could take the form of

strong measures against the Tudeh Party and would involve the dis-

missal of the fellow-traveler Minister of Justice on the pretext that he

acted without authority in liberating communist leaders. The Shah be-

lieved that Mosadeq was desperate enough to accept these terms as the

price of United States support.

The Ambassador pointed out to the source that such an approach

on the part of the United States would tend to under-emphasize the im-

portance of obtaining a settlement of the compensation problem. Mo-

sadeq might, therefore, gain the impression that, by making certain

concessions to the West, in the matter of dealing more firmly with Ira-

nian communists, he could obtain substantial economic aid from the

United States regardless of the fact that Iran had not agreed to pay com-

pensation for the losses resulting to the AIOC from the nationalization

of oil.

The source commented that Mosadeq, his supporters, and the Ira-

nian people generally were convinced that they could obtain American

aid without having arrived at any solution in the oil problem simply

because the United States could not permit the increase in communist

influence which would result from further economic deterioration of

the country. The Shah, he said, suggested the issuance of an official

statement by the United States, making it very clear to Iran and to the

world that there could be no further American aid until at least definite

willingness to achieve a solution of the oil problem had been demon-

strated. It was pointed out that, were such a declaration to be issued at

this time, Mosadeq could reply that he had offered to initiate conversa-

tions with the British regarding compensation for oil and had been

turned down. The source then suggested that attempts be made to in-

duce the British to begin conversations with Mosadeq, so that when

such conversations broke down, as they surely would, the United

States could issue the declaration in question without leaving itself

open to the Mosadeq rejoinder.

In the Shah’s opinion, said his emissary, no settlement of the oil

question was possible so long as Mosadeq remained Prime Minister.

The Shah was convinced that Mosadeq should be overthrown by action

of the Majlis, but felt that covert means must be employed to prevail

upon the Majlis to act. Specifically, such underground means would in-

clude material aid and encouragement from the United States to Gen-

eral Fazlollah Zahedi and Dr. Mozaffar Baqai. The Shah was sure that

March–August 1953

both of these men were upright, loyal, and sincere, and that the best

chance for Iran to find a way out of its difficulties was for General

Zahedi to become Prime Minister.

Although the Shah had given no outward sign of his advocacy of

Zahedi, it was merely because he realized that any such sign would

only serve to intensify the Mosadeq Government’s persecution of the

General. The emissary conceded that a few months ago the Shah might

not have been so favorably disposed toward Zahedi, but said that re-

cent developments had convinced him that Zahedi represented Iran’s

only chance out of its current dilemma.

One factor which retarded the Shah’s change of heart with regard

to Zahedi was the fact that Hosein Ala, when Minister of Court, was

quite suspicious of Zahedi and regarded him as just another ambitious

military man. The mention of Ala’s name introduced a digression con-

cerning his part in the crisis over the Shah’s intended departure and

subsequent decision to remain in Iran. The source maintained Ala was

initially in favor of the Shah’s leaving Iran, but that, after Ambassador

Henderson’s discussions with him, he changed his mind and exerted

all his influence to persuade the Shah to remain. (The Ambassador is

convinced that Ala was opposed to the Shah’s departure from the very

beginning.) Ala was dismissed as Minister of Court only because of

Mosadeq’s pressure, not because Ala had offended the Shah; Mosadeq

held Ala responsible for the blow to his political prestige resulting from

the February 28 crisis.

The Shah felt that Ala, though completely honest and loyal, was

nevertheless stupid; the emissary commented that one often has more

to fear from stupid friends than from intelligent enemies. When Ala

was Minister of Court, the Shah tended to open his heart to him, but

found that sometimes Ala innocently passed along the Shah’s confiden-

tial remarks to Dr. Mosadeq. As matters now stood, the Shah had no

confidence in Mr. Amini, told him nothing he did not want Dr. Mo-

sadeq to hear, and so could not be betrayed.

Returning to the question of support for General Zahedi, the

source outlined the Shah’s views regarding the present political align-

ment in Iran. On the one hand, there was a clique consisting of Moa-

zami, Fatemi, and the Amini family, with Maki on the fringe as op-

posed to Mosadeq’s policies, which was attempting to gain control of

the key positions in the Government. These men contemplated keeping

Dr. Mosadeq ostensibly in power, realizing that his day was done and

using him as a front for their own activities and as an ever-present

threat against the Shah. They realized that no one except, as the emis-

sary put it, a man as insane as Mosadeq would dare to flout the Shah’s

prestige as the present Prime Minister has done. On the other side,

there was a group led by General Zahedi and Dr. Baqai, who wished to

overthrow Mosadeq and bring a semblance of sanity and purpose to

the Iranian Government. The Ganjei faction and other independents

would throw in their lot with the stronger of these two parties when a

showdown occurred.

The Shah’s representative emphasized that Baqai was in no way

involved in the murder of General Afshartus. In fact, it was Baqai who

asked the generals now under arrest for the murder to involve his name

in their confessions in order that he might be able to reply to these accu-

sations and use the opportunity to lay many accusations of his own at

the door of Dr. Mosadeq. Baqai, being a courageous man and being en-

dowed with parliamentary immunity, was in a better position than

most to attack Mosadeq.

The source affirmed as a personal comment that the United States

Government must not conclude from the Shah’s inactivity that he was

weak. The Shah was merely being extremely cautious, having been be-

trayed so often in the past that he wished to take no chances now. How-

ever, the Shah recognized these most worthy of trust and had made the

obvious choice between the Moazami–Fatemi–Amini faction, which he

believed would be disloyal to him and would ruin Iran, and the

Zahedi–Baqai group, which would respect him and try to save the

country.

The Shah believes that financial aid from the United States to the

Zahedi faction could be transmitted through Ardeshir Zahedi, the Gen-

eral’s son, who was absolutely honest, and suggested that it could be

intimated to those who received it from Ardeshir that the money came

from the Shah. Since the Shah’s accounts were closely controlled and

supervised by Mosadeq partisans, he could give Zahedi no economic

support of any kind. In order to bring about the final collapse of the

Mosadeq Government, he suggested that the United States might in-

duce Mosadeq to turn against the Tudeh Party, as outlined earlier.

Once he had done this, Mosadeq would be forced to lean on the Court

and the Majlis for support. If his power in the Majlis had been under-

mined by covert support to Zahedi and Baqai and if the Court refused

to assist him in any way, Mosadeq would be doomed. The Shah wished

to initiate no domestic action himself against Mosadeq; he felt that,

having achieved power by parliamentary means, Mosadeq should fall

by similar means, without apparent royal intervention.

It was brought out that the Shah had been greatly distressed by

what he believed to be evidence of United States support of Mosadeq

and his partisans and of Maleki, a confirmed opponent of the Shah. The

emissary was assured that this was an erroneous impression; the

United States had not actively supported the Mosadeq faction in any

way, and had suspended assistance to Maleki as soon as it was realized

that he worked against the Shah. The source reaffirmed that the Shah

206.

Memorandum From the Counselor of Embassy (Mattison) to

the Ambassador to Iran (Henderson)

Tehran, May 19, 1953.

SUBJECT

Your Conversations with the Secretary

The following is an attempt to jot down some thoughts in connec-

tion with your conversations with the Secretary on present problems in

Iran.

1. Present situation in Iran

We have every evidence that the speed of Iran’s economic and political de-

cline has accelerated in recent months.

On the economic side some small sales of oil have had a temporary

propaganda affect, but there has been nothing which would affect the

basic economic picture. The need for foreign exchange has become

acute; the open market rate which a year ago stood around 75 is now

over 100. The urgent essential demands for foreign exchange have to a

certain extent been met by TCI assistance but that has not been enough

to counteract the overall down-hill trend, and the prospect of reduced

TCI aid in the 1954 fiscal year makes the picture even darker. Local cur-

rency needs have been met in the printing press route and there has

been a non-admitted increase in note circulation of perhaps three bil-

lion rials (official rate 32 rials to the dollar; “open market” rate 100 rials

to the dollar). The inflationary effect of this is only just beginning to be

felt.

On the political side we find that there has been a similar deteriora-

tion. The National Movement upon whom Mosadeq depends for sup-

port has split up into numerous factions. The Majlis has been unable to

cret; Security Information. The memorandum is attached to a May 21 letter from Mattison

to Richards which reads: “Before the Ambassador left I tried to jot down a few things

with regard to ‘our’ problem of Iran. The Ambassador, before leaving for Karachi, sug-

gested that we send this to you for your information. Needless to say, I don’t claim com-

plete pride of authorship as the Ambassador and Roy both had some suggestions for

changes which were incorporated in the memo. You will note that no recommendations

are contained in the document, primarily because we are not at all sure of what the best

course is. We hope that the Ambassador’s conversations with the Secretary may help to

firm up our ideas.”

Warne flew to Karachi on May 22 to brief Dulles on the current situation in Iran. In tele-

gram 4472 from Tehran, May 20, Henderson summarized the points that Mosadeq

wanted him to convey to Secretary Dulles. See Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran,

March–August 1953

conduct normal business for over a month. Mosadeq and the Shah have

come into conflict which has weakened both. This conflict has also had

the effect of increasing the Prime Minister’s reliance upon the Tudeh

Party as the only organization which can give him the kind of support

in the streets that he feels himself to need. To gain this support he has

had to tolerate further Tudeh penetration of the Government. Intrigue

and counter intrigue continue but there has yet not appeared on the

scene any political or military figure who has the ability to carry the

Shah with him in a decisive move against Mosadeq.

2. Problem created by the situation

This set of circumstances has produced problems which render the

determination of and operation of U.S. policy in Iran extremely diffi-

cult. The following are some of the major problems:

a. In the abscence of an oil settlements there is a possibility which

should not be over emphasized but which nevertheless exists that Iran

will fall behind the Iron Curtain.

b. An oil settlement seems remote as a result of the attitude of both

sides; one while Mosadeq is Prime Minister appears almost out of ques-

tion. Other factors sharpen the desirability that Mosadeq be replaced

by a more reasonable person. However, no opponent who had a rea-

sonable chance of succeeding in overthrowing Mosadeq has yet pre-

sented himself.

c. A greater degree of economic or financial assistance than we are

presently giving would strengthen the position of Mosadeq in his de-

termination not to reach a settlement. Withholding of such assistance

on the other hand strengthens the determination of the British for a

“tough” settlement.

d. Prompt financial assistance to a successor government without

an oil settlement as a condition precedent might well result in the new

government’s being equally stubborn on the question.

e. A demand on our part that a new government make an oil settle-

ment as a prerequisite of financial aid might if yielded to by the new

government result in its immediate overthrow. In other words there is

a possibility that no Iranian government in the foreseeable future

would be in a position to accept oil proposals which would be agree-

able to the British Government.

f. Any attempt by a coup or by foreign intrigue to bring about a

more “reasonable” government in Iran could be dangerous. If it should

fail it would probably hasten the country’s disappearance behind the

Iron Curtain.

g. The political and economic decline in Iran has produced factors

of unrest and distrust which have been exploited by extremist elements

against the United States and have made our operations in Iran increas-

ingly difficult. Americans and American installations have been at-

tacked. There have been no serious injuries to persons as yet but these

may occur any day.

h. The withdrawal or sharp curtailment of the number of Amer-

ican dependents in Iran would cripple the Technical Assistance pro-

gram in Iran, as the very nature of the program requires a compara-

tively large staff of technicians and most of these technicians will not

come to Iran or remain in Iran unless their dependents are with them.

3. Alternatives available to the U.S.

None of the alternatives is easy. Some of them are extremely diffi-

cult. The following represent a few of them with comment on the prob-

able effects.

Alternative A

We could inform the Iranians that under present conditions in Iran

it was impossible for our Technical and Military assistance programs to

operate, and that we were curtailing their number or if necessary with-

drawing all of them and reducing our diplomatic establishment to a

minimum type of operation.

Comment:

Favorable: This action might give the Iranians pause. Under condi-

tions in the foreseeable future the emphasis on the TCA and Military

approach requires the presence of large numbers of U.S. technicians

and their families, which is and will be a mounting irritant to the Ira-

nian public. The removal of a sizeable number of Americans would

lessen Iranian public irritation over the presence of Americans and also

indicate to the public that U.S. did not intend to maintain Americans

where they were not wanted.

Unfavorable: This might merely hasten chaos in Iran and speed up

the coming into power of a Tudeh or Tudeh controlled government. It

could be interpreted as a defeatist policy on our part at a time when

positive action is called for. It would discourage many of our friends

and encourage our enemies. Furthermore, the help which our aid mis-

sions render still contributes to Iranian stability in spite of the diffi-

culties which these missions are encountering.

Alternative B

We could inform the British that we considered the situation in

Iran so serious that we could no longer continue to refrain from pur-

chasing Iranian oil or from granting Iran financial or substantial eco-

nomic aid. This in effect would mean the adoption of a policy inde-

pendent of that of the British. Such a policy could take two forms.

March–August 1953

a. Outright substantial financial assistance to the present or a suc-

cessor Iranian Government in sufficient amount to permit it to survive

without an oil settlement.

Comment:

Favorable: Such a source of action, for a time at least, would un-

doubtedly be popular with the Iranian Government and public. Our

stock would soar and we could in all probability achieve most of our

policy aims in Iran.

Unfavorable: The effect of such action might be disastrous to our

overall world-wide relationships with the British. Such action might

also be regarded as flouting a recognized principle of international

economic relations through countenancing appropriation without

compensation.

b. An offer on a take it or leave it basis to the Iranian and British

Governments containing proposals which we considered fair for settle-

ment of the problem on a lump-sum compensation basis. This offer

would also include a statement of the maximum financial assistance

which we would make available to Iran to tide it over during the transi-

tion back to an oil economy.

Comment:

Favorable: If the Iranians should accept this proposal and the

British refuse, we could consider ourselves free to proceed with out-

right economic aid and purchase of oil. If neither side should accept we

would then be in a position to re-evaluate our policy and take decisions

with a free hand. Such a course would also force the Iranians to “put up

or shut up” insofar as their announced willingness to pay compensa-

tion goes.

Unfavorable: If the British should accept and the Iranians refuse, we

would be forced to wash our hands of the Iranian problem. Both parties

might well be resentful at U.S. interference. The British public, for in-

stance, might regard it at another illustration of the way the U.S. is

trying to dominate the U.K.

Alternative C

We could attempt to intervene by all practicable means in the in-

ternal affairs of Iran and endeavor to bring in a government that was

willing to reach an agreement on British terms.

Comment:

Favorable: On the theory that anything which would achieve our

ends would be good, this might sound like an excellent solution.

Unfavorable: This would probably take the form of a military dicta-

torship or a dictatorship supported by the military, as there is some

doubt that sufficient popular support could be obtained for a settle-

ment on present British terms.

It might be accomplished by “peculiar” pressure on the Chamber

of Deputies. However, no agreement would be of value or be enforce-

able for any substantial period of time unless it was reasonably accept-

able to the Iranian public. There is at present no Iranian on the political

scene who has displayed the necessary force and personality success-

fully to replace Mosadeq.

Alternative D

We could renew our pressure on both the British and Iranians to

come to a more reasonable attitude with regard to compensation. This

is essentially a policy of continuing our policies in Iran of using every

suitable occasion to impress upon Iranian leaders the necessity of

coming to an arrangement on this matter and of inaugurating a policy

with regard to the British of insisting that they do not remain passive in

this matter. The British should understand that sooner or later if they

maintain their present attitude (a) Iran will be lost to the free world or

(b) Iranian oil will find its way into the world markets in quantities and

in a manner which can create acute discomfort for the AIOC.

Comment:

Favorable: This alternative would seem to contain less immediate

hazards than those mentioned heretofore. It would be in keeping with

the practice which the U.S. customarily follows in trying to bring about

a solution of problems between its friends.

Unfavorable: There is a possibility despite all that we might do

along these lines, that Iran will drift into chaos and that we would be

open to the accusations of not taking sufficiently positive action.

message Dulles authorized him to convey to Mosadeq upon the Ambassador’s return

from meeting with the Secretary in Karachi. The Secretary wished to communicate to Mo-

sadeq that his trip to the Near East and Middle East had been a fact-finding trip and that

he was disappointed at not having been able to visit Iran. He nevertheless wished to ex-

press his regret “hear you apparently coming opinion it would serve no useful purpose

continue searching for solution problem compensation; and that therefore you thinking

of ignoring that problem in making plans restoration Iranian economy.” The Secretary

urged Mosadeq to continue to work with the British to find a solution to the oil dispute.

March–August 1953

207.

Memorandum From the Director of the U.S. Technical

Cooperation Administration Mission in Iran (Warne) to the

Ambassador to Iran (Henderson)

Tehran, May 20, 1953.

DISCUSSION WITH MINISTER AKHAVI

Dr. Ali Akbar Akhavi, Minister of National Economy, asked me to

call on him today. He had heard that I was to go with you to Karachi,

though I have not spread it around.

There were several things about Point 4 operations that he wished

to discuss, such as a request from him and the Prime Minister for an

208.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 982

Tehran, May 20, 1953.

SUBJECT

Informal Outline of General Zahedi’s Proposed Program for Iran

I have the honor to transmit a copy of a communication received

May 19 from a responsible Iranian who had seen General Zahedi and

who, after talking with him, outlined at the request of the General a ten-

tative program which he would try to follow in the event he became

Prime Minister.

It may be noted that General Zahedi proposes to take a strong

stand toward the communists and to restore order in the country, after

which he would turn to economic and social reforms that presumably

would require substantial economic and financial aid from abroad.

The General has a tentative suggestion upon the oil problem. He

also believes that it will be necessary for the United States Government

to intervene in Iranian affairs, asserting that it is impossible for Iranians

to remove the present Government by their own efforts. Lastly, the

General expresses willingness to collaborate with any other Iranian

who as Prime Minister can successfully implement the program he has

described.

Loy W. Henderson

Ambassador

cret; Security Information. Received May 27. Drafted by Melbourne.

March–August 1953

Attachment

Excellency:

General Zahedi asked me to meet him yesterday evening in the

Parliament Buildings.

He wanted me to deliver to Your Excellency a message stating

what would be his policy if and when he comes to power.

1. His first and most immediate order will be to restore order, dis-

cipline and security. From the first day, he will crush the Tudeh and

puppet communist organizations. He feels sure that after three months,

there will be no Tudeh in the streets of cities in Iran and as there are

no communists in the country (this means among the peasantry)

the present confused position will come to an end. Most of it comes

from Government presently encouraging and intriguing with the

communists.

2. Once the order restored and the communists completely

crushed, he will turn to economic and social reforms as follows:

a. Increase in agricultural production by small loans to peasants

(up to 5,000 rials per head); increase in the purchase price of wheat and

barley by bringing those in line with world prices (present internal

prices are 1/3 of world prices) by Government purchases and sale of

Iranian cereals to such countries as Pakistan, India, Japan, which are in

need of same.

This would increase the purchasing power of the peasantry which

represents 80% of the population of Iran.

b. Equalization of wealth, by imposing higher taxes on luxury

goods and property.

c. Land reform and improvement of bad or waterless lands.

d. Quick and massive program of public works—this will need fi-

nancial help from World Bank, Export-Import Bank or better U.S.

Government.

3. The oil problem will be solved by an international committee of

three Iranian members, three British, and two neutrals, one of which

will be chairman of the committee. The decision of such committee will

be approved by Parliament of Iran.

4. He will begin on the first day a ceaseless fight against bribery by

appointing Cabinet members well known for their integrity and a thor-

ough purge of bad public officers. Position of present Government—he

says that deputies are prepared to sign a non-confidence motion

bearing signatures of half plus one of the deputies; this may be done at

any moment now. Deputies are afraid Shah will not act on this motion

without strong pressure by U.S. and British. He feels that sooner or

later America will have to take action with Shah because Iranians

cannot save themselves. As the present position has arisen as a result of

foreign interference, it is impossible for Iranians to oust the present

Government by themselves.

The sooner this action is taken, the easier it will be to restore order

and start re-establishing the economic and social position. General

Zahedi adds that in case the U.S. Government does not trust him for

carrying out this program, he is ready to support and collaborate with

any other person who can carry out with success these reforms and

abandon his efforts to become Prime Minister in favor of the former.

209.

Briefing Notes Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

for Director of Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, undated.

IRANIAN TUDEH PARTY IS NO LONGER ILLEGAL

1. The Communist Tudeh party is no longer illegal, and can now

engage in overt activity, following an Iranian court ruling of 16 May.

a. Some imprisoned members have already been released.

b. It is not clear whether or not this action was approved or spon-

sored by Mossadeq’s government, which, however, has thus far per-

mitted the decision to stand.

c. A statement by Hossein Fatemi, the foreign minister, who on

Sunday said merely that the last word had not been spoken in the

matter, seemed to evade the issue of what the government would or

would not do.

NSC Briefing 20 May 53. Secret. Prepared for DCI Dulles for his briefing of the NSC on

May 20. The official minutes of the NSC meeting of May 20 record that DCI Dulles briefed

the National Security Council on Iran, and included a “reference to the legalizing of the

Tudeh Party in Iran. This development,” Dulles said, “indicated further deterioration for

the interests of the free world in Iran.” (National Archives, RG 273, Records of the Na-

March–August 1953

210.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, May 21, 1953.

Ambassador Henderson has recently been informed on a number

of occasions by close associates of the Shah that he is disturbed re-

garding British attitude toward himself. He has reportedly stated on

occasions, “The British threw out the Qajar dynasty; they brought in

my father; they threw out my father; and they can throw me out or keep

211.

Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Smith to

President Eisenhower

Washington, May 23, 1953.

Ambassador Henderson has personally written several despatches

giving his own analysis of trends in Iran and of recent conversations

with the Iranian Foreign Minister and other officials. I have made the

following extract of the most important paragraphs of these des-

patches. I believe they are a very accurate expression of the situation

and national state of mind in Iran, so accurate in fact that I suggest you

read them.

“On the one hand the Iranian press as well as most Iranians ca-

pable of expression condemn in principle foreign interference in Iran.

On the other hand relatively few politically conscious Iranians really

believe that it is possible for a power like the United States to refrain

from interference in Iran. Most Iranian politicians friendly to the West

would welcome secret American intervention which might assist them

in attaining their individual or group political ambitions and are in-

clined to believe in the absence of United States interference on their be-

half that the United States must be supporting rival politicians.

“Iranian distrust of foreigners is so intense that it is not difficult to

stimulate resentment against any foreigners engaged in activities in

Iran even though these activities are clearly beneficial to Iran. There-

fore, the more American nationals there are in Iran and the more energetic and

conspicuous these Americans are, the easier it is for various Iranian elements

who dislike the presence of Americans or who wish to create difficulties be-

tween the United States and Iran to incite Iranians to violence against United

States citizens in Iran. It is only fair to the Prime Minister to point out

that undoubtedly one of the reasons why he has been so anxious that a

minimum amount of publicity be given to activities, beneficial though

they may be to Iran, of the so-called American military advisers and of

TCI personnel is his awareness that the more attention that is attracted

to the activities of these American nationals the more susceptible the

Iranian people in general are likely to be to appeals to throw the Amer-

icans out of the country. It is difficult, of course, for the average Amer-

ican to understand the lack of appreciation of the Iranian public of dis-

interested efforts made by individual American nationals in Iran for the

benefit of Iran. There are historical and psychological reasons for this

phenomenon which I shall not attempt to set forth in this despatch.

Nevertheless those in the United States who are inclined to believe that

rity Information. There is no drafting information on the memorandum.

212.

Memorandum of Conversation

Tehran, May 30, 1953.

PARTICIPANTS

His Imperial Majesty the ShahinShah of Iran

Loy W. Henderson, American Ambassador

At a suggestion made by the Shah several days ago I had an audi-

ence with him this morning. In order to guarantee privacy he received

me in the Palace garden. Our conversation lasted about 80 minutes.

After the exchange of a few introductory remarks I told him that it

was my understanding that he was not certain regarding the British at-

titude towards himself. I therefore had taken the liberty of making an

inquiry in this respect and was in a position to inform him that Mr.

Churchill had authorized me to say that the British would be very sorry

cret; Security Information. Drafted by Henderson, who provided a summary of this con-

versation in telegram 4573 from Tehran, May 30, which is printed with redactions in For-

memorandum is attached to a covering letter to Byroade, May 30, in which Henderson

wrote that “the character of my conversation was so confidential that I do not wish to de-

scribe it either in a telegram or a despatch.”

to see him lose his powers or leave his post or be driven out. The Shah

seemed to be gratified at this statement. He said that his concern re-

garding the British attitude had been due primarily to the fact that cer-

tain members of the Majlis who were known to maintain close contacts

with the British were among those most active in endeavors to curtail

the Royal powers. In the past General Frazer had endeavored to per-

suade him that he should become merely a Constitutional Monarch in

the European sense. Ambassador Bullard had taken that position

shortly after the Shah had ascended the Throne and successive British

Chiefs of Mission including even Middleton had intimated on various

occasions that the Shah should keep himself “up in the clouds and

avoid taking any part in Iranian political life.” He said that judging

from the message from Mr. Churchill the British were changing their

attitude with respect to the powers of the Shah. He himself was con-

vinced that, Iran being what it is, the Shah must play a certain role in

the political and particularly the military life of the country. If the Shah

did not do so confusion and chaos would reign.

The Shah said he must frankly confess that he had not been able to

live up to his oath to enforce the Constitution. The Constitution had

been openly flouted by the present Government for over a year. Unfor-

tunately he was not in a position to interfere.

I told the Shah that I would like to have a frank statement from him

regarding his attitude towards the candidacy of General Zahedi for the

Prime Ministership. Was or was not General Zahedi acceptable to the

Shah? The Shah replied that he did not consider General Zahedi an in-

tellectual giant nevertheless the General would be acceptable to him as

Prime Minister on three conditions: (1) that he would come into power

through legal, parliamentary means—not through a coup; (2) that the

General would come in with a wide measure of political support—not

like Qavam who found himself quite isolated as Prime Minister; (3) that

the General would be acceptable to the United States and to the United

Kingdom and that either the United States or the United States and the

United Kingdom would be prepared almost immediately to give the

new government substantial financial and economic aid. If no plans

had been made in advance for emergency financial support and for

massive economic aid so that the people of the country would see hope

of a better life in the not too distant future it would be preferable that

there would be no change of government. Razmara had come into

power in the belief that he would obtain aid from the United States.

This had not materialized, and Razmara was headed for disaster at the

time of his assassination. Similarly, any change of government at the

March–August 1953

present time which was not followed by substantial foreign financial

and economic aid would merely be preparing Iran for its ruin.

In response to an inquiry of the Shah I said that I had the impres-

sion that the British would welcome a new government headed by

General Zahedi. I was also quite confident that the United States Gov-

ernment would welcome such a government provided it was sure that

His Majesty would give it his full and sustained support. It would be

disastrous for Iran if the United States and British Governments would

endeavor to help General Zahedi and then at the last moment would

find that the Shah had changed his mind with regard to the General

and did not want him to form a government.

The Shah said that he would not change his mind. It was impor-

tant, however, that the conditions which he had laid down above be

clearly understood. If General Zahedi should come in as a result of a

coup d’ e´tat he would hesitate to give the General support unless he

could become convinced that the General had behind him a strong

array of political leaders as well as a considerable popular support.

The Shah said that he did not in any event believe that General

Zahedi could come in through a coup. The key positions in the Army

were gradually being taken over by friends of Brigadier General Amini,

the brother of the Acting Minister of Court. Several months ago the

present Acting Minister of Court had endeavored to persuade the Shah

to come out openly in support of General Zahedi. Since Amini had be-

come Acting Minister of Court, however, his attitude had changed. He

was not maintaining that General Zahedi did not have the qualifica-

tions and experience to serve as Prime Minister and was suggesting

that it might be better in case the Prime Minister should resign to ap-

point a “stop-gap rather weak National Front Government” which

could later be followed by a strong government. The Shah asked me

what I would think of a “stop-gap” government.

I said that it seemed to me it would be extremely difficult to try to

ride two horses at the same time. If the present government was to be

overthrown its opponents should concentrate on a candidate to suc-

ceed Dr. Mosadeq and should not support a candidate half-heartedly

while looking around for some alternative weaker candidate to act as a

“stop-gap.” The Shah said that he thought there was some truth in my

remark nevertheless in view of their strength the Amini group might be

able to block General Zahedi.

I told the Shah that I would like for him to repeat for my benefit the

statement of his attitude toward General Zahedi since such a statement

was needed by the U.S. Government in connection with certain deci-

sions which it would have to make. His Majesty said I could tell the

U.S. Government that he would welcome General Zahedi as Prime

Minister subject to the conditions which he had already outlined to me.

I said that it might be extremely difficult for General Zahedi to be

brought into power by ordinary Parliamentary methods. For instance if

it should become apparent that a majority of the Majlis was opposed to

the retention of the present Government, the National Movement Frac-

tion might boycott the Majlis so that it would be impossible to obtain a

quorum. The Majlis might therefore be unable to function for an indefi-

nite period and could not vote lack of confidence in Dr. Mosadeq or

register inclination for General Zahedi. If, in such an event, a majority

of members of the Majlis should send a petition requesting the Majlis to

appoint General Zahedi as Prime Minister what would his Majesty do?

The Shah replied that he could not answer this question without ascer-

taining what his powers were under the Constitution. Even if he should

find that he had powers in such circumstances to appoint General

Zahedi, he would not wish to commit himself in advance since he must

make his final decision in the light of the situation of the moment.

The Shah asked me about my recent trip to Karachi to meet Mr.

Dulles and also inquired regarding my latest conversations with the

Prime Minister. Were there any serious conversations now going on

with regard to the oil dispute? Did I believe that the U.S. would pur-

chase any quantity of oil from Iran? Did I think that there was any pos-

sibility that the U.S. would extend substantial economic assistance to

Iran under a Mosadeq Government? I informed the Shah that the U.S.

was no longer acting as intermediary between the U.K. and Iran in the

matter of the oil dispute. So far as I knew no effort was being made at

the present time to effect a settlement of the oil problem. I did not be-

lieve in the foreseeable future, in the absence of a solution of the com-

pensation problem, that the U.S. would purchase any substantial quan-

tity of Iranian oil. I thought that it would be extremely difficult for the

U.S. to give substantial financial or economic assistance to the Mosadeq

Government in the absence of a solution of the compensation problem.

I asked the Shah whether in his opinion: (a) Further efforts should

be made to find a solution for the compensation problem while Dr. Mo-

sadeq remained as Prime Minister and (b) whether in the absence of

such a solution the U.S. should extend financial and economic assist-

ance to a Mosadeq Government?

The Shah replied that he was still of the opinion that it would be

easier to effect a settlement of the oil problem with Dr. Mosadeq than

with any successor to Dr. Mosadeq. He also thought that Dr. Mosadeq

could make a settlement more advantageous to the British than that

which any successor might make. He realized that it was extremely dif-

ficult to deal with Dr. Mosadeq. Nevertheless any avenue which might

lead towards a settlement of the oil dispute with Dr. Mosadeq should

not be ignored. Even if an attempt at such a settlement might result in

March–August 1953

Dr. Mosadeq’s remaining in power somewhat longer, it should be

made if there was any possibility whatsoever for success.

The Shah also said that the present economic position of Iran is so

dangerous that he would like to see the U.S. give financial and eco-

nomic assistance to the country even though Dr. Mosadeq was still in

power and even though the extension of that assistance might make it

appear that the U.S. was supporting Dr. Mosadeq.

The Shah asked me if I did not agree that it would be advantageous

to settle the oil dispute, if possible, with Dr. Mosadeq. I said that I had

always believed this to be true. I was beginning to feel, however, that

there was no chance of any oil settlement so long as Dr. Mosadeq was

Prime Minister. The British had come to the conclusion that it was

useless to deal with Dr. Mosadeq. If, therefore, the oil problem was to

be settled while Dr. Mosadeq was Prime Minister it seemed to me that

he must take the initiative in making concrete proposals of a character

which would cause the British to believe that he was serious. After the

experiences of the last two years it would not be easy for Dr. Mosadeq

to convince the British that he really wished to be a party to a fair and

reasonable settlement of the oil dispute.

The Shah said that he wished to be frank with me and with the U.S.

Government. The Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia was planning to visit

Iran in the early part of July. If the situation remained as it is at present,

it was the intention of the Shah to go abroad shortly after the departure

of the Crown Prince. It was too humiliating for him to remain in Iran in

present circumstances. He was referring particularly to his relationship

with the Army. He no longer was receiving reports with regard to what

was going on in the Army and Army officers no longer dared to visit

him. This was intolerable. He would prefer therefore not to be in Iran

under such conditions. He hoped that the U.S. Government would not

change its attitude with respect to him if he left the country for a period.

He was of the opinion that it would be better for him and better for Iran

for him to be abroad than for him to remain in the country in circum-

stances which were certain seriously to undermine his prestige and to

lower him in the esteem of the nation.

I told the Shah that in my opinion his departure from the country

would be interpreted as a sign of weakness and defeat. Nevertheless a

decision of this kind was one for him to make. I was confident that the

U.S. Government which regarded his presence in Iran as a factor of sta-

bility for the country would regret his departure. The Shah said that be-

fore he left the country he would let the U.S. Government know that he

had definitely decided to get out.

The Shah said that Mr. Amini, the Acting Minister of Court, would

be certain to question him regarding our conversation. It was probable

also that Mosadeq would try to obtain certain information from me in

this regard. His suggestion was that he inform Amini in the utmost

confidence that I had told him about my visit to Karachi and my con-

versation with Mr. Dulles and that I had indicated to him that there

seemed to be little chance in present circumstances of a settlement of

the compensation problem. He would go on to tell Amini that he had

said that, in his opinion, it would be much easier for a settlement of the

oil dispute to be effected with Dr. Mosadeq than with some subsequent

Prime Minister and that he had expressed to me the hope that if it

should prove impossible to achieve an oil settlement, the Government

of the United States would nevertheless give sufficient economic and fi-

nancial assistance to Iran to enable it to pass through its present eco-

nomic crisis.

Loy W. Henderson

213.

Monthly Report Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

IRAN

May 1953

A. General Developments

1. May was marked by relatively minor parliamentary skirmishes

between supporters and opponents of Mossadeq. The government’s

base of support in the Majlis is narrowing, but the opposition still lacks

the unity of leadership and design to challenge Mossadeq’s authority

effectively. While the Tudeh’s popular strength remains about the

same, its relative political position has grown relatively stronger as a

result of continuing penetration of government agencies and the dis-

ruptive effects of Mossadeq’s struggle with the opposition.

5, Monthly Report—May 1953—Country Summaries and Analyses. Top Secret.

March–August 1953

2. There has been considerable speculation over the reasons for

Secretary Dulles’ failure to visit Iran on his recent Middle Eastern tour

and for Ambassador Henderson’s return to the U.S. Opposition at-

tempts to describe these developments as manifestations of U.S. dissat-

isfaction with Mossadeq are being vitiated by reports of a probable in-

crease of Point IV aid in the near future.

B. Station Synopsis

[3 paragraphs (12 lines) not declassified]

C. Operational Summary

Political and Psychological Warfare

[1 paragraph (15 lines) not declassified]

Paramilitary Operations

[1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]

John H. Waller

Chief, NE–4 (Iran)

the field of political activism, groups under [text not declassified] sponsorship played an

important part in reducing Tudeh May Day activities to an unimpressive level. (Ibid.,

214.

Summary of Operational Plan

Nicosia, June 1, 1953.

215.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 2, 1953.

SUBJECT

Economic Aid to Iran

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Norman Paul, DMS

Mr. Robert Black, DMS

Mr. Arthur L. Richards, GTI

Mr. R. Bernard Crowl, GTI

Mr. John H. Stutesman, Jr., GTI

At their request, Mr. Paul and Mr. Black called on Mr. Richards fol-

lowing instructions from Mr. Stassen to open conversations with the

Department regarding increased economic aid to Iran.

Mr. Paul stated that he was informed that Secretary Dulles and Mr.

Stassen in Karachi had discussed the Iranian situation and had come to

the conclusion that it was not practical to press for a solution of the

Anglo-Iranian oil dispute at this time. They were of the opinion, how-

ever, that Iran’s agrarian economy should be kept afloat and that

perhaps $15 or $20 million should be added to the presently-proposed

TCA and economic aid programs for Iran in FY 1954. The thought was

that Iran’s essential foreign exchange requirements might be met in

some degree in ways such as purchasing vehicles, spare parts, and sim-

ilar commodity items for Iran. The conversations between DMS and

State should determine (1) a general level of the FY 1954 program, and

(2) the kind of items necessary to include in the program.

Mr. Richards stated that he expected Ambassador Henderson’s ar-

rival on consultation this week to give rise to high-level policy discus-

sions regarding Iran. He pointed out that it was still somewhat unclear

whether our government policy was to endeavor to keep Iran’s

economy afloat even though Dr. Mosadeq’s government might thereby

be strengthened. He pointed out that there was an influential body of

opinion that any assistance to Iran beyond the present level could only

serve to keep Mosadeq in power and remove certain pressures upon

the Iranians to come to an early settlement of the oil dispute.

Mr. Paul said that they have no intention of “running with the

Ball” but would appreciate being advised when a policy decision has

been taken in regard to increasing presently-proposed levels of eco-

nomic aid for Iran.

March–August 1953

216.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

General Cabell (DDCI); Ambassador Loy Henderson; Mr. Frank Wisner (DD/P);

Mr. Kermit Roosevelt (CNEA); Mr. John Waller (CNEA/4)

SUBJECT

Outline of Preliminary Operational Plan in Implementation of Project TPAJAX

PURPOSE OF CONVERSATION

Briefing of Ambassador Henderson With Regard to Subject in Order to Solicit

His Views Prior to Mr. Roosevelt’s Forthcoming Discussions [less than 1 line not

declassified] in London

Mr. Roosevelt reviewed the preliminary operational plan which

had been prepared by [cryptonym not declassified] officials and KUBARK

representative [less than 1 line not declassified]. A summary of the plan as

presented by Mr. Roosevelt is hereto attached. Ambassador Hen-

derson interjected his views and comments as Mr. Roosevelt described

specific aspects of the plan. Significant remarks made by Ambassador

Henderson during the course of the conversation are summarized

below:

1. With regard to the Plan’s basic premise that [cryptonym not declassi-

fied] will cooperate actively:

Ambassador Henderson stated categorically that this premise was

fallacious; that [cryptonym not declassified] could not be relied upon to

give the required backing to [cryptonym not declassified] when the time

for action comes unless extreme pressure were exerted on [cryptonym

not declassified]. The Ambassador suggested that such pressure might

even have to take the form of an actual or implied threat that ODYOKE

and [cryptonym not declassified] would consider replacing [cryptonym not

declassified] by one of his brothers if [cryptonym not declassified] did not

take the leadership in removing [cryptonym not declassified]. Ambas-

sador Henderson added that we had ample evidence of [cryptonym not

declassified] inherent weakness and reluctance to play a strong role in

Iran; and the time may have arrived when we should give serious con-

sideration to his replacement. In this connection, Prince Abdul Reza, as

possible successor to the throne, was discussed. The advisability of

feeling out [cryptonym not declassified] regarding the replacement of

TPAJAX Vol. I. Top Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Waller on June 8.

[cryptonym not declassified] with the best available successor, was also

discussed.

2. The Ambassador expressed concern that without [cryptonym not

declassified] active and energetic cooperation or possibly even with it

the Iranian Army could not be relied upon to play the major role as-

signed it by the preliminary plan. The Ambassador repeatedly and

forcefully made the point that it would be highly advisable to enlist in

some way the participation of the Amini brothers—(Brigadier General

Mahmud Amini, Gendarme´rie Chief and possible future Chief of Staff;

and Abul Ghassem Amini, Minister of Court) since the latter has a firm

hold on the Army. In this connection, the Ambassador recalled his own

reports from Tehran in which he described approaches made to him by

Minister of Court Amini [less than 1 line not declassified]. From this and

from available intelligence reports, the Ambassador felt that the

Aminis [less than 1 line not declassified] would be susceptible to an

ODYOKE approach despite their alleged loyalty to [cryptonym not de-

classified]. Ambassador Henderson felt that both the Aminis [cryptonym

not declassified] were wavering in their support of [cryptonym not declas-

sified] and would break completely if it were politically advantageous

for them to do so.

3. With regard to Stage 1 in Acquiring [cryptonym not declassified] Co-

operation in TPAJAX (I–B–1(a))

Ambassador Henderson stated that in a conversation with [cryp-

tonym not declassified] just prior to departing from his post he had told

[cryptonym not declassified] that ODYOKE and [cryptonym not declassi-

fied] were in agreement that [cryptonym not declassified] should not re-

main in office and that both ODYOKE and [cryptonym not declassified]

were supporting [cryptonym not declassified] solidly.

4. With regard to Stage 2 in acquiring [cryptonym not declassified] coop-

eration: Special U.S. representative to [cryptonym not declassified] (I–B–2):

A. Ambassador Henderson commented that it would be extremely

difficult for the special ODYOKE representative—whoever he may

be—to gain an audience with [cryptonym not declassified] as required by

the plan without others present.

B. Considerable discussion followed with regard to choice of a spe-

cial U.S. representative. Among those names mentioned in the conver-

sation were General Zimmerman, former Chief of the U.S. Military

Mission, Iran; General Schwartzkopf, former head of the U.S. Military

Mission to the Iranian Gendarme´rie; Ambassador George Allen; Mr.

George McGhee, former Assistant Secretary of State; [name not declassi-

March–August 1953

fied] and Mr. Kermit Roosevelt. No decisions were reached although

General Schwartzkopf’s name was given most favorable consideration.

Appropriate cover for General Schwartzkopf was also discussed and

the suggestion was made that he might visit other Middle Eastern

countries as well as Iran [1 line not declassified].

5. With regard to Stage 2: Statement to [cryptonym not declassified] that

no aid will be forthcoming so long as [cryptonym not declassified] remains in

power (I–B–2(d)):

Ambassador Henderson pointed out the inconsistency of our Point

Four program to Iran with our political objectives to remove [cryptonym

not declassified]. He recalled specifically that he had advised against

TCI’s $3,400,000 Village Council program but he added that it was too

late now to stop this program without risking possible serious retalia-

tory moves by [cryptonym not declassified].

6. Stage 2: Statement to [cryptonym not declassified] that ODYOKE

[cryptonym not declassified] financial aid would be forthcoming to a successor

government (I/B/2–(f)):

Ambassador Henderson stated that this was an extremely impor-

tant point and that ODYOKE must be fully prepared to render such aid.

He stated that ODACID should prepare itself immediately to make

specific financial commitments although he pointed out that such com-

mitments are difficult to make since congressional action would prob-

ably be necessary.

7. With regard to Stage 2: Statement to [cryptonym not declassified] re-

garding the head of a successor government (I–B–2 (d)):

Rather than request [cryptonym not declassified] to suggest the head

of a successor government as called for in the preliminary plan, Ambas-

sador Henderson urged that the special ODYOKE representative to

[cryptonym not declassified] should take the initiative in stating that

[cryptonym not declassified] ODYOKE desires [cryptonym not declassified].

Ambassador Henderson pointed out that otherwise [cryptonym not de-

classified] who basically fears a strong Prime Minister such as [cryp-

tonym not declassified] would name an individual like [cryptonym not de-

classified].

8. With regard to Stage 2: Statement to [cryptonym not declassified] that

an acceptable oil settlement must ultimately be offered by a successor gov-

ernment (I–B–2(g)):

Ambassador Henderson warned that the terms of such an oil set-

tlement must be clearly defined to us by [cryptonym not declassified]

prior to the advent of a new government and such terms must be at

least as favorable as those heretofore presented by [cryptonym not de-

classified]. Ambassador Henderson stated that [cryptonym not declassi-

fied] is mainly motivated by financial considerations and might well

seize the opportunity presented by [cryptonym not declassified] fall to

present an oil settlement unfavorable to Iran.

9. With regard to Stage 2: Warning to [cryptonym not declassified] not to

discuss the approach by the special ODYOKE representative with anyone.

Ambassador Henderson pointed out that [cryptonym not declassi-

fied] security is poor and that in all likelihood he could not refrain from

discussing ODYOKE’s approach with close advisors, most of whom are

untrustworthy from our point of view.

10. With regard to arrangement with [cryptonym not declassified]: Dis-

cussions with [cryptonym not declassified] concerning quasi-legal method of

succeeding to premiership (II–B–1).

Ambassador Henderson pointed out that [cryptonym not declassi-

fied] if he cooperated at all, would insist that [cryptonym not declassified]

replace [cryptonym not declassified] by legal procedures. Specifically, not

only would the Majlis have to give a vote of censure or non-confidence

to [cryptonym not declassified] but would have to grant a vote of inclina-

tion to [cryptonym not declassified] before [cryptonym not declassified]

would issue the royal firman naming him Prime Minister.

11. With regard to relations with religious leaders: Fedaian should be en-

couraged to threaten direct action against pro-[cryptonym not declassified]

deputies.

Ambassador Henderson urged that no assassination be included

in the [cryptonym not declassified]/ODYOKE plan.

12. With regard to Press and Propaganda program: Successor gov-

ernment Press Chief should be prepared to publicize ODYOKE and [cryp-

tonym not declassified] official statements on the new government. (IV–E).

Ambassador Henderson suggested that such statements should

not be made by [cryptonym not declassified] or ODYOKE too quickly

after the successor government takes over lest it reveal ODYOKE/

[cryptonym not declassified] implication in the plot.

13. With regard to relations with Tribes: Major problem is neutralization

of [less than 1 line not declassified] (VIII–B).

Ambassador Henderson felt that [less than 1 line not declassified]

who currently support [cryptonym not declassified] would present a se-

rious problem. He stated that the [less than 1 line not declassified] leaders,

who are closely allied with the Amini brothers (Brigadier Amini, pos-

sible new Chief of Staff and Minister of Court Amini) should be in-

cluded somehow in the plan or otherwise bought off, so that they

would contribute to the undermining of [cryptonym not declassified]

rather than the support of the latter. Ambassador Henderson pointed

out that the [less than 1 line not declassified] were already wavering in

their support of [cryptonym not declassified] and could probably be ma-

noeuvered into the opposition ranks providing they felt [cryptonym not

217.

Memorandum Prepared by the Naval Attache´ in Iran

(Pollard)

Tehran, June 11, 1953.

I met Ardeshir at his request at 9: p.m. last night as arranged,

and cleared through you yesterday. He had just left a meeting of the

opposition deputies which included Makki, Baghai, Mir Ashrafi, Mos-

tafa Kashani and others.

The opposition is now concentrating on organizing the deputies in

order that Kashani be re-elected as “Speaker” of the Majlis. He then

stated that at this moment the opposition is guaranteed of 42 votes for

Kashani in these elections. I expressed surprise and Ardeshir explained

that by law this election must be secret, and that by extensive campaign

“methods” the opposition group, now openly led by Zahedi, had per-

suaded enough deputies to vote for Kashani to make up a total of 42.

These he said would be identified by distinguishing marks on their

ballots so that it could be determined which deputy, if any, had failed

to keep his bargain. This he said must be kept strictly secret in order to

TPAJAX. Top Secret; Security Information. On the covering sheet to this memorandum is

a handwritten note, apparently from Waller to [name not declassified], which reads: “A

cable went out to Station complaining that Pollard is crossing wires with us.”

avoid counter-action by Mossadegh, and by covert methods available

to the Soviet Embassy.

He requested that because of the extreme sensitivity of this that I

retain it for my own information and not transmit it to the Embassy. I

agreed, but have quoted all that he said on this subject. In this case, I do

not believe that any useful purpose would be served by referring this to

the various members of the Political Section of the Embassy for possible

compromise by attempts to confirm.

The opposition feels that this election will be the turning point, if

not the crucial point, in the drive to oust the Mossadegh government

for a Zahedi government. He explained this by saying that until the

election the opposition will conduct a concentrated campaign of propa-

ganda through their new newspapers, and the present opposition

newspapers, but would conduct their campaign for votes for Kashani

covertly. The deputies, in addition to the opposition’s original 25, are

only willing to vote for Kashani in a secret ballot, and if not identified.

This, at present, seems assured. The result, however, if Kashani is re-

elected over the express opposition of Mossadegh, is close to a vote of

no confidence. The opposition feels that if Kashani’s reelection is fol-

lowed by intense campaigning that many more deputies will be en-

couraged to come out openly for Zahedi, in a sort of “get on the

band-wagon” movement. Indeed 42 votes for a candidate not favored

by Mossadegh would certainly be an accomplishment and would indi-

cate that there is an opposition to Mossadegh which is strong, contrary

to the views of many foreign observers.

In addition, the opposition is attempting to change the political

orientation of Ghashghai and Abol Amini. Previously both of these

characters were firmly behind Zahedi and it is felt that with the proper

persuasion that they can again become supporters of an opposition

government. Ardeshir stated that one of the secret ballots in favor of Kashani

would be that of Khosrow Ghashghai.

General Zahedi, in addition, feels that General Riahi requires some

attention. Through a number of Army officers his exact orientation is

being determined along with estimates of the possibility of a change. In

his position, the opposition feels that this must change or there are

plans for his assassination (ugh!). Particularly repulsive to the opposi-

tion are his intense political activities in attempting to organize the

Army as a political party in favor of Mossadegh.

Ardeshir is certain that most of the police officers in police head-

quarters will be replaced by Army officers. However, he stated that this

would not be more than a nuisance as most of the Army officers in-

volved are great admirers of General Zahedi. That the present police

leadership is at least secretly behind Zahedi can easily be proven. There

March–August 1953

are many examples of this—one of interest refers to the fact that Arde-

shir is a fugitive and that twice now official announcements have been

made demanding that he present himself to police headquarters. Per-

taining to this, when the Ambassador asked me if I could contact

Ardeshir, I stated that I could, and proceeded to contact the man that

Ardeshir had indicated—this man is the Chief of Detectives, Imperial

Iranian Police Force.

Ardeshir is aware that Mossadegh is planning to try to force the

Shah to sign a Firman to close the Majlis and is fearful that by some

means he might come close to success in this. However, in the mean-

time, intense campaigning revealing Mossadegh’s plan is now being

planned and will be evident in a day or two in the newspapers and in

the Majlis. If Mossadegh ever attempts to close the Majlis without a

Firman from the Shah, Ardeshir feels that this would be Mossadegh’s

greatest mistake and with the present strength of the opposition would

be almost, literally, fatal to him.

He also mentioned that in the voting for “Speaker” of the Majlis

the opposition papers are encouraging the present internal quar-

relling within the National Front. At present a bitter struggle is being

carried on between Shayegan, Moazami and Razavi to be the National

Front candidate for Speaker; this could weaken the National Front

considerably.

Ardeshir stated that it is evident to most Iranian observers that the

British aim in Iran is as follows: To officially agree that Mossadegh

should go, but not to actively, covertly, work to this end, feeling that

the strength of the opposition itself will work this out and that there re-

mains a possibility that by a weak change in government the British

might be able to control the next government. The number one aim of

the British, however, is to weaken the Shah’s powers to intervene in

time of crises to the point that at some time in the future when a

pro-British Prime Minister appears the most can be made of it. He feels

that in spite of the weak character of the Shah such a curtailment of

powers would be disastrous to the country and would place the

country at the mercy of whatever adventurers might temporarily be in

position of political power, and that the country is not yet ready for

this. In addition, the only symbol which holds the diverse elements of

Iran together is the Shah himself.

He asked me if it was not a sign of the strength of the opposition

that in the Majlis which was practically handpicked by Mossadegh

there were men who realized that his course led only to Communism

and who had the courage in the face of serious intimidation to oppose

him and that among these men were the organizers of Mossadegh’s

strength—Kashani, Makki, Baghai, etc.

218.

Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State

for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Jernegan)

to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Matthews)

Washington, June 15, 1953.

SUBJECT

Need for Certain Policy Decisions on the Iranian Problem

There is some urgency that the Department’s position be clarified

on several matters concerning Iran. Advantage may be taken of the

presence in the Department of Ambassador Loy Henderson from June

18 to about June 28 to obtain his views. Meetings will be set up of all in-

terested persons after Ambassador Henderson arrives in Washington,

but it is suggested that some preliminary thinking be done on the sub-

jects listed below prior to his arrival:

(A) What reply, if any, is to be given Dr. Mosadeq’s request that

President Eisenhower act as an arbitrator in the oil dispute?2

It is GTI’s recommendation that no reply be given Dr. Mosadeq on

this matter, unless he raises the question again.

(B) What guidance should be given the prominent oil consultant,

Mr. Walter Levy, who has suggested that he send, as a private citizen, a

cret; Security Information. Drafted by Stutesman and Richards. Copies of the memo-

randum were sent to Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Merchant, Assistant Secre-

tary for Economic Affairs Waugh, and Robert Bowie, Chairman of the Policy Planning

Staff.

March–August 1953

suggestion to Dr. Mosadeq of a figure which would be a basis for a

lump sum settlement of the compensation question in the oil dispute?4

It is GTI’s recommendation that the U.S. Government avoid any

unwanted interference in the oil dispute, while at the same time per-

mitting Mr. Levy, as a private citizen, to request by letter Dr. Mosadeq’s

reaction to his suggestion for an equitable lump sum settlement.

(C) What reply should TCA make to the National Iranian Oil Com-

pany’s request to have 100 employees trained in the United States?6

It is GTI’s recommendation that TCA be informed that there is no

policy objection to acceptance of the Iranian request.

(D) What reply should President Eisenhower make to Dr. Mo-

sadeq’s letter of May 28 requesting increased U.S. aid to Iran?8

It is GTI’s recommendation that the President inform Dr. Mosadeq

that the present level of economic aid to Iran will be increased in FY

(E) What reply will be made to Mr. Stassen who has instructed

DMS to open conversations with the Department on the basis of his un-

derstanding that U.S. economic aid to Iran is to be increased by approx-

imately $15,000,000 in FY 1954?

It is GTI’s recommendation that DMS be informed that we con-

sider U.S. policy objectives would be furthered through an increase in

Iran.

(G) What funds can the U.S. Government use to subsidize an

American airline in affiliation with Iranian Airways, which is at present

bankrupt and in great danger of falling under the control of persons fa-

vorably inclined toward the Soviet Union?12

It is GTI’s recommendation that a policy decision be taken that it is

in the U.S. national interest to subsidize a U.S. airline in affiliation with

Iranian Airways (Transocean Airlines has already made the agreement

but will need assurances of financial support this month) in order to

prevent communist entry into Middle East airlines and to support the

Iranian economy without directly strengthening Dr. Mosadeq.

March–August 1953

(H) What action, if any, should the U.S. Government take to

increase Iran’s diplomatic and commercial relations with West

Germany?14

It is GTI’s recommendation that the Bonn Government be encour-

aged to establish diplomatic and commercial offices in Iran?15

(I) Should additional efforts be made to strengthen Iran’s military

establishment with the objective of increasing its political importance

and position in the national economy?16

It is GTI’s recommendation that the present objectives of our mili-

tary aid program in Iran, aiming at technical standards of equipment

and training for the Iranian army, should be broadened to allow our

military aid to seek to increase the political importance of Iran’s armed

forces and their position in the national economy.

219.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, June 19, 1953, noon.

4684. Last night Dr. Gholam Mosadeq, son Prime Minister, told

First Secretary Melbourne that week ago his father had received con-

firmatory evidence that large sum of money, some 400,000 rials, was

being expended by opposition elements led by Kashani. This sum had

been used to establish group new opposition newspapers and for other

activities. Government had traced source of funds to Shah and court

circles thus giving Prime Minister impression Shah’s duplicity. Shah

while asserting his full support for Mosadeq and non-involvement in

politics by prolonging his stay in Rmamsar, was in actuality subsi-

dizing opposition.

Government taking steps counter such opposition moves and had

already arrested one Abdol Eqbal (otherwise unidentifiable, no (repeat

no) record Embassy files) who Mosadeq alleged was a leading pay-off

man for opposition activities. Evidence was accumulating concerning

others. Likewise in Isfahan area Askar Masud, son Sarem-E-Dowleh,

who considered by government as British agent, had been arrested for

alleged complicity in Bakhtiari tribal agitation sponsored by Abol

Qasom Bakhtiar. Mosadeq claimed to have seen numerous letters be-

tween them. Mosadeq asserted that government-sponsored demon-

stration today, June 19, was designed counteract opposition propa-

ganda typified by “unrepresentative” activity in Majlis and press and

to give public, which was ardent supporter Prime Minister opportunity

to show that support. He further claimed that demonstration would be

carefully controlled and that government had no (repeat no) intention

permit Tudeh adherents organize separate demonstrations or to allow

any acts violence.

Mattison

dential; Security Information; Priority. Also sent to London. Received at 8: a.m.

220.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Certain Decisions on the Iranian Problem

PARTICIPANTS

G—Mr. Matthews

S/P—Mr. Bowie

E—Messrs. Waugh and Schaetzel

BNA—Mr. Raynor

NEA—Mr. Jernegan

Ambassador Henderson

GTI—Messrs. Richards and Stutesman

thews’ office to discuss a memorandum from Mr. Jernegan to Mr. Mat-

thews dated June 15, listing nine problems related to Iran which re-

quired consideration in order to clarify the Department’s position.

Mr. Jernegan opened the discussion by stating that these problems

should be viewed in the light of three alternative approaches: 1) an as-

sumption that Mosadeq is going to stay in power; 2) an assumption that

it is not to the advantage of the U.S. to take any measures which would

assist Mosadeq to remain in power; 3) an assumption that the situation

in Iran has changed drastically and a non-communist successor to Mo-

sadeq has arisen. The problems raised in Mr. Jernegan’s memorandum

of June 15 were then studied in order.

A) What reply, if any, is to be given Dr. Mosadeq’s request that

President Eisenhower act as an arbitrator in the oil dispute?

It was agreed that no reply should be given Dr. Mosadeq on this

matter, unless he raises the question again.

B) What guidance should be given Walter Levy who has suggested

that he send, as a private citizen, a suggestion to Dr. Mosadeq of a

figure which would be a basis for a lump sum settlement of the com-

pensation question in the oil dispute?

It was agreed that the U.S. Government would avoid any un-

wanted interference in the oil dispute and would urge Mr. Levy, at

least for the present, to postpone any trip to Iran or communication

with Dr. Mosadeq on the subject of a lump sum settlement.

cret; Security Information. Drafted by Stutesman on June 20 and approved by Jernegan

and Richards.

C) What reply should TCA make to the National Iranian Oil Com-

pany’s request to have 100 employees trained in the U.S.?

It was agreed that no reply should be given the Iranians on this

matter for the present. If they press us for a reply, however, they may

be informed that we have the matter under study.

D) What reply should President Eisenhower make to Dr. Mo-

sadeq’s letter of May 28 requesting increased U.S. aid to Iran?

It was agreed that a reply should be drafted for the President to

send Dr. Mosadeq politely refusing his request for immediate in-

creased economic aid but not burning any bridges in case at some later

date we might wish to make budgetary and economic aid available to

an Iranian Government.

In the discussion of this matter it was agreed that it would be un-

fortunate at this time to give Mosadeq any ammunition which would

strengthen his political position. In view of the unlikelihood that Mo-

sadeq will ever come to a reasonable settlement of the oil dispute with

the British, it seems that keeping Mosadeq afloat will serve only to

perpetuate the present frustrating situation. Ambassador Henderson

stated that the chances of getting a successor better than Mosadeq are

better now than the chances of getting someone worse. However he

emphasized most firmly that we must be prepared to give any

non-communist successor to Mosadeq immediate budgetary and eco-

nomic support in substantial quantities. Without that, we would surely

lose Iran.

E) What reply will be made to Mr. Stassen who has instructed

DMS to open conversations with the Department on the basis of his un-

derstanding that U.S. economic aid to Iran is to be increased by approx-

imately $15,000,000 in FY ’54?

It was agreed that confidential conversations could be held with

DMS to prepare a position, on a contingency basis, to give budgetary

and economic support to a non-communist successor to Mosadeq if one

should arise.

F) Should the Department remove policy objections to the Export-

Import Bank’s consideration of a $25,000,000 loan to Iran for agricul-

tural and road-building machinery?

It was agreed that this matter would not be raised with the Export-

Import Bank for the present.

G) What funds can the U.S. Government use to subsidize an Amer-

ican airline in affiliation with Iranian Airways?

It was agreed that it is in our national interest to support the affilia-

tion of an American airline with Iranian Airways and that we may so

inform Mr. Nelson, President of Transocean Airlines who is interested

March–August 1953

in making such an arrangement. However, it was agreed that he should

be asked not to consummate any agreement for the moment.

As to the source of funds to subsidize Transocean Airlines affilia-

tion with Iranian Airways, Mr. Matthews stated that efforts to find such

funds could be made on the basis that it is the Department’s position

that it is in our national interest to make such a subsidization and other

agencies of the Government can be so informed.

H) What action, if any, should the U.S. Government take to in-

crease Iran’s diplomatic and commercial relations with West Germany?

It was agreed, barring some objection by GER, that the Bonn Gov-

ernment should be encouraged to establish diplomatic and commercial

offices in Iran.

I) Should efforts be made to strengthen Iran’s military establish-

ment with the objective of increasing its political importance and posi-

tion in the national economy?

It was agreed that, so long as there would be no substantial in-

crease in the cost of military aid to Iran, we could request the views of

DMS, Defense, and the Embassy and Military Missions in Iran upon

measures which might be taken to broaden present objectives for our

military aid program in Iran, probably involving some increased flexi-

bility in the types of aid and expenditures presently envisaged.

During the meeting an additional question was raised which had

not appeared on Mr. Jernegan’s memorandum of June 15.

Should MSA purchase asphalt from Iran at a 50% discount from

prevailing market prices for use in Indo-China?

It was agreed that under present circumstances MSA should not

make such purchases.

221.

Draft Operational Plan

undated.

222.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Iran Branch, Near East

and Africa Division (Waller) to the Chief of the Near East

and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)

Washington, June 24, 1953.

223.

Memorandum Prepared in the Bureau of Near Eastern, South

Asian, and African Affairs

Washington, undated.

Preliminary to any joint US–UK move to inspire the Iranians to re-

place Mosadeq, there should be prior understanding with the British

that:

1. Our common primary objective is to encourage the establish-

ment of a more stable government in Iran, which government would be

oriented toward the West.

2. Although it is earnestly hoped that an equitable solution of the

oil problem will eventually be possible with the new government—

such a solution would in fact be necessary if Iran is to achieve sta-

bility—it must be recognized that any successor government would be

unlikely to survive if it were to indicate early willingness to accept pro-

posals previously rejected by Mosadeq, including the proposals of Feb-

ruary 20, 1953, or probably even were it to indicate an early willingness

to reopen negotiations on any basis which might be acceptable to the

British.

3. The object being to get a stable government, and it being agreed

that the new government would find it difficult, if not impossible, to ac-

cept proposals previously rejected, maximum ingenuity and flexibility

should be demonstrated in coming forward at the proper time with

new proposals.

TPAJAX Vol. I. Top Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Richards on June 25. Printed

from an uninitialed copy.

March–August 1953

4. To be acceptable to the Iranian public opinion and thus to the

Iranian government, such proposals should:

(a) Recognize nationalization.

(b) Provide that the Iranians should have complete control of all

property, installations and production in Iran.

(c) Allow the Iranian Government complete freedom of choice of

technical and managerial personnel.

(d) Beyond such specific sales contracts as may be worked out in

connection with a settlement, allow the Iranians complete freedom of

sales of oil and oil products.

(e) Dispose of the problem of compensation within the framework

of the Nine-Point Law and on a basis which would show that Iran is not

being saddled with excessive indebtedness to the AIOC.

5. No commercial concessions or special political privileges should

be asked of Iran.

6. While the US agrees with the UK that it would be desirable for

the amount of compensation to be determined by impartial interna-

tional arbitration or adjudication, other methods of determination (or

possibly even a moratorium) should not be excluded on principle.

7. Recognizing that the economic and political stability of Iran is to

a large degree dependent on the revival of its chief industry, both the

US and the UK will take appropriate steps to encourage and facilitate

the resumption of large-scale exports of Iranian oil.

224.

Notes on the Remarks of the Ambassador to Iran

(Henderson) to the National Security Council Planning

Board

Washington, June 25, 1953.

In March 1952 we didn’t see how the Mossadegh Government

could last out the summer. It had great financial problems. It appar-

ently could not expand its currency and it was without the heavy rev-

enues from oil. As a matter of fact, the government did fall in July and

Qavam became Prime Minister. But the Shah did not back Qavam and

the mobs forced him out in two days. The Shah apparently withheld his

support because he hoped for a leader better from his point of view

than either Mossadegh or Qavam. Mossadegh came back to power and

was very much stronger than before. He was granted full powers for

six months by the Majlis, the legislative assembly. Mossadegh, in order

to finance the government, started issuing currency. We estimate that

so far he has issued about 3,500,000 rials.

When I (Mr. Henderson) spoke to the Planning Board last No-

vember, I was hopeful that an oil agreement would be achieved which

would preserve the basic existing principles of international commer-

cial intercourse. The U.S. favored a lump-sum settlement which would

not detail reasons, to avoid the argument of whether compensation

should be made for loss of future profits. By mid-January of this year

Mossadegh’s statements gave us some hope, but then he and his three

advisers, all of whom are unfriendly to the West and very nationalistic,

considered the plan and rejected it. They offered counter-proposals. On

February 20 we presented the most liberal proposal so far. On March 20

it was rejected.

Mossadegh did not listen to the other political leaders in Iran, and

this alienated them, including Kashani. Mossadegh came to believe

that the Shah was backing these oppositional elements. In January,

therefore, he began making demands on the Shah. First, he demanded

that the Shah give up his role as commander-in-chief of the armed

forces. Secondly, he attacked the use the Shah was making of Crown

lands. The Shah was using the funds from these lands for charity in the

name of the Crown, and giving the lands away gradually in a land re-

form movement. Mossadegh, a big landowner himself, believes in the

traditional landowning institutions and didn’t like this royal example.

He demanded that the Crown lands be turned over to the nation, and

that the profits be given to charity in the name of the nation rather than

in the name of the Crown. Thirdly, he demanded that certain religious

shrines in the custody of the Shah, from which considerable funds are

derived, be turned over to an appointee of the Prime Minister. A man

named Ala is one of our best friends in Iran. He was at one time the Ira-

nian Ambassador to the U.S. and for many years Court Minister (ad-

viser to the Shah), but has now been forced out of power. This man ad-

vised the Shah not to give way to Mossadegh’s demands. The Shah was

March–August 1953

unwilling to accede to Mossadegh, and yet was unwilling to test his

own power. He planned to leave the country on February 28. The Com-

munists (Tudeh Party) put out anti-Shah leaflets. We believe that the

Shah, despite his weaknesses, is a factor for Iranian stability. And so, as

the hour for his scheduled departure came closer, I telephoned the

Shah. He said he expected to leave in two hours. Then I called Mos-

sadegh, and asked him to remove the pressure on the Shah to leave.

Mossadegh charged me with interfering with Iranian internal affairs,

but we both understood each other. Mossadegh did not budge. A large

mob, favorable to the Shah, surrounded his palace, kept him from

leaving, and then attacked Mossadegh’s residence. Mossadegh went to

the Shah and asked him what they should do. The Shah decided to

leave the question up to the Majlis and his indecision again cost him the

situation. Mossadegh told me later that there had been an attempt on

his life, but I don’t take this seriously as the Shah has “old-fashioned

ideas against assassination”. After this crisis blew over, Mossadegh

presented a memorandum to the Majlis transferring the powers of the

Shah to him. It still has not been acted upon.

An important time for Iran is near. Next month a new president of

the Majlis is due to be elected. The incumbent president, Kashani, is op-

posed by Mossadegh. Having only 30 votes out of 80 in the Majlis,

Mossadegh’s National Front is going to prevent a quorum by absenting

themselves.

I saw Premier Mossadegh the day I left and was asked for U.S. aid.

This despite his previous declaration that he would never ask the U.S.

for aid. The reason for this change of heart is that, while the internal sit-

uation in Iran is satisfactory, the foreign exchange balance is critical.

Last year a good crop helped this foreign exchange picture. And Point

Four has been very helpful to Iran, giving it sugar which otherwise

would cost scarce dollars.

It is impossible for the U.S. to give further aid to Iran at this time

because of what it would do to our relations with the British. A real

crisis again is impending. But it is hard to say what will happen, be-

cause the Iranians are very lucky. For the last hundred years they have

made out somehow, despite their own ineptness. Right now the Com-

munist “peace offensive” is helping them, since it is relaxing the pres-

sure from the Tudeh Party.

It is my opinion that there is no hope of settling the oil problem so

long as Mossadegh is in power.

[This concluded the statement by Mr. Henderson.]

225.

Editorial Note

Kermit Roosevelt’s memoir of Operation TPAJAX, Countercoup:

226.

Editorial Note

In a letter to Sir James Bowker of the British Foreign Office, June 26,

1953, Sir Roger Makins, British Ambassador to the United States, de-

scribed his conversation with Ambassador Henderson on June 25 in

Washington. Henderson said that he had concluded that one could not

deal with Mosadeq and added that only the emergency powers ac-

corded Mossadeq after the July 1952 political crisis had enabled him to

survive. Makins and Henderson then discussed alternatives to Mo-

sadeq. This section of Makins’ letter reads as follows:

March–August 1953

“An alternative solution might be found through the Amini broth-

ers who, he said, were growing rapidly in authority and ambition. He

personally did not trust the brother who was Minister of Court. The

brothers were trying to work in both with the Shah and Mussadeq.

They were in touch through Qashquais [sic] with Kazemi. Henderson

thought they would not hesitate to doublecross both the Shah and

Mussadeq.

“Asked what the Aminis might do, Henderson tentatively sug-

gested that they might get rid of the present Shah and put in his place

the young son of the Shah’s third brother who, I understand, is the only

member of the family with Kajar blood in him. They would then set up

a regency and hope to enjoy power for many years until the boy grew

up, when they could decide what to do with him. Henderson repeated

that he did not like this solution very much owing to his distrust of the

Amini. While the brothers were at present pretending to be on the

Western side, he thought the family were just as likely to doublecross

us as the Shah and Mussadeq.” The full text of this letter is in the British

National Archives, Files of the Ministry of Fuel and Power, POWE 33/

2087.

227.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 26, 1953.

Memorandum of Conversation Between

Brigadier General H. Norman Schwarzkopf, Administrative Di-

rector, Department of Law and Public Safety for the State of New

Jersey, and Mr. John H. Waller, CNEA/4

I. Without revealing any specifics of TPAJAX, Mr. Waller outlined

to General Schwarzkopf latter’s proposed role with [cryptonym not

declassified].

II. General Schwarzkopf indicated complete willingness to coop-

erate in any way with the U.S. Government. Specifically, he explained

his willingness to undertake the sort of mission outlined in TPAJAX.

He requested the following in the event the proposed trip to Iran

materialized:

TPAJAX Vol. I. Top Secret; Security Information.

A. That he be fully briefed on the political situation and the specific

plan of which he is a part.

B. That he be allowed to represent himself notionally to [cryptonym

not declassified] as Major General instead of his actual rank of Brigadier

General. He explained that this request was motivated by prestige

reasons and explained that the Iranians, including [cryptonym not de-

classified], who are exceedingly rank conscious, would attach a dispro-

portionate degree of importance to this point.

C. That he be allowed to offer some explanation of his trip to Gov-

ernor Driscoll of New Jersey and the Attorney General for the State of

New Jersey for whom he presently works. At Mr. Waller’s request, he

promised to say nothing at this time to either of the above officials but

wanted to give them as much advance notice as possible before his

departure.

III. [1 paragraph (2 lines) not declassified]

A. It be arranged that the Pakistan Government invite him to Ka-

rachi for the purpose of giving advice on police and security matters.

B. He visit the Sheikh of Kuwait as notional representative of a po-

lice equipment corporation and attempt to negotiate a substantial sale

of police equipment to the Sheikh of Kuwait.

IV. General Schwarzkopf was amenable to either of the above sug-

gestions or a combination of both. He had no alternative suggestions to

make at this time.

Drafting Officer’s Note: Since General Schwarzkopf must make

some explanation to Governor Driscoll and the Attorney General for

New Jersey, suggestion (A) above would appear preferable because

sales representative cover, which ostensibly represents private enter-

prise, would make it more difficult for General Schwarzkopf to justify

an absence from work.

V. General Schwarzkopf wanted KUBARK to know the following

as it might have a bearing on his mission:

A. Prior to General Schwarzkopf’s departure, then Chief of Staff

Razmara, who was jealous of General Schwarzkopf’s command power

over the Persian Gendarme´rie and who desired that the Gendarme´rie

be largely absorbed by the Army, to some degree poisoned [cryptonym

not declassified] mind against General Schwarzkopf. The result of this

was that General Schwarzkopf’s relations with [cryptonym not declassi-

fied] were slightly strained at the time of former’s departure. Further-

more, while [cryptonym not declassified] was visiting the U.S. in 1949,

General Schwarzkopf attempted to see him but was unsuccessful. This

could be attributed to the tight schedule which [cryptonym not declas-

228.

Letter From the Chief of the Near East and Africa Division,

Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)

to the Chief of Station in Iran ([name not declassified])

[text not declassified] 804

Washington, June 29, 1953.

Dear [name not declassified],

It appears to be more or less decided that I shall proceed to Tehran

for the culminating phases of TPAJAX. Ascham has made the reserva-

tion that if my presence should arouse undesirable publicity prior to

culmination, I could still be withdrawn. Presumably [cryptonym not de-

classified] will agree to this.

It seems to me that I should arrive at about the same time that

Roach2 does, since the course of his conversation with [cryptonym not

declassified] is likely to present us with the necessity for making most

crucial decisions. There should be time to consult headquarters about

such decisions, but I would like to be able myself to receive a detailed

first hand account of the conversation or conversations. According to

present estimates, that would mean that I should be present in Tehran

for something approximating three weeks. (My hope is that if all goes

well, the time table could be speeded up, but obviously we cannot

count on this.)

I have been giving considerable thought to the ways in which my

visit might be handled and I would very much appreciate any views

that you and others would care to offer. Perhaps you could send me a

note [less than 1 line not declassified] giving any suggestions that you

have. I will of course keep you fully informed on the timing of my

movements.

It seems to me that we must decide at the beginning whether we

are going to try to keep the visit more or less secret or, if that is consid-

ered to be a hopeless undertaking, whether we should not aim for the

casual note from the very beginning. If the latter course is to be fol-

TPAJAX Vol. I. Secret. Sent by air as [text not declassified] on June 29.

lowed, I do not think that I should start out by staying with KUCLUB

personnel in the Compound. I should think it might be more logical for

me to spend a little while visiting someone in Shimran and then

perhaps move down to the Compound as a matter of convenience. I

quite agree that I should not stay [less than 1 line not declassified]. I think

it would be better if I did not stay in any one place too long and as long

as I have only casual infrequent meetings with other than station per-

sonnel, there would be no reason for any one person to realize the

length of my stay. A cultivated air of boondoggling might also help.

Perhaps I should go, or at least appear to go, for a few days shooting.

Perhaps illness would be the best arrangement for at least part of the

time. I could arrive for a few days visit and then have to stay on because

of sickness. I do think that, if we put our minds to this, between us we

should be able to work out something that can make my stay relatively

inconspicuous.

I believe that there is a slight and so far unacknowledged differ-

ence of opinion as to whether or not I am to be in direct contact with

any principals during my visit. The request from [cryptonym not declas-

sified] that I be made available for this assignment mentioned the desir-

ability of having someone on the spot who could stiffen any characters

who begin to waiver at the last minute. My own feeling and that of

Ascham is that I should not see any of the locals, except in case of emer-

gency where I felt that my own appearance in the picture could make a

sufficient difference to warrant the risk. I would appreciate your views

on this point also. Presumably we will overlap for a few days in Tehran

and can discuss this matter then. Incidentally your departure could

provide a perfectly plausible reason for my initial visit.

I trust you have come up with some constructive ideas as to how

we can get rid of [cryptonym not declassified]. Head [less than 1 line not de-

classified] feels that this can be left to [cryptonym not declassified] but I

think that [less than 1 line not declassified] may need some assistance. I

feel also that if we could arrange for [less than 1 line not declassified] to be

away during the days of decision, it would be most helpful. During our

discussions [less than 1 line not declassified] we had not anticipated that

[less than 1 line not declassified] would be present and I must admit that

[less than 1 line not declassified] return came as an unexpected blow to

me. We should also be giving some advance thought to [cryptonym not

declassified] further travels. [2½ lines not declassified]

With best regards,

Kermit Roosevelt

March–August 1953

229.

Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Dulles to the

Administrative Director of the Department of Law and

Public Safety in New Jersey (Schwarzkopf)

Washington, June 30, 1953.

230.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

Iran

3295. Following is message from President to Mosadeq:

“Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

cret; Security Information. Drafted by Richards; cleared in draft in E, BNA, G, and S; and

approved by the President.

I have received your letter of May 282 in which you described the

present difficult situation in Iran and expressed the hope that the

United States might be able to assist Iran in overcoming some of its dif-

ficulties. In writing my reply which has been delayed until I could have

an opportunity to consult with Mr. Dulles and Ambassador Hen-

derson, I am motivated by the same spirit of friendly frankness as that

which I find reflected in your letter.

The Government and people of the United States historically have

cherished and still have deep feelings of friendliness for Iran and the

Iranian people. They sincerely hope that Iran will be able to maintain its

independence and that the Iranian people will be successful in realizing

their national aspirations and in developing a contented and free na-

tion which will contribute to world prosperity and peace.

It was primarily because of that hope that the United States Gov-

ernment during the last two years has made earnest efforts to assist in

eliminating certain differences between Iran and the United Kingdom

which have arisen as a result of the nationalization of the Iranian oil in-

dustry. It has been the belief of the United States that the reaching of an

agreement in the matter of compensation would strengthen confidence

throughout the world in the determination of Iran fully to adhere to the

principles which render possible a harmonious community of free na-

tions; that it would contribute to the strengthening of the international

credit standing of Iran; and that it would lead to the solution of some of

the financial and economic problems at present facing Iran.

The failure of Iran and of the United Kingdom to reach an agree-

ment with regard to compensation has handicapped the Government

of the United States in its efforts to help Iran. There is a strong feeling in

the United States, even among American citizens most sympathetic to

Iran and friendly to the Iranian people, that it would not be fair to the

American taxpayers for the United States Government to extend any

considerable amount of economic aid to Iran so long as Iran could have

access to funds derived from the sale of its oil and oil products if a

reasonable agreement were reached with regard to compensation

whereby the large-scale marketing of Iranian oil would be resumed.

Similarly, many American citizens would be deeply opposed to the

purchase by the United States Government of Iranian oil in the absence

of an oil settlement.

There is also considerable sentiment in the United States to the ef-

fect that a settlement based on the payment of compensation merely for

losses of the physical assets of a firm which has been nationalized

would not be what might be called a reasonable settlement and that an

March–August 1953

agreement to such a settlement might tend to weaken mutual trust be-

tween free nations engaged in friendly economic intercourse. Further-

more, many of my countrymen who have kept themselves informed re-

garding developments in this unfortunate dispute believe that, in view

of the emotions which have been aroused both in Iran and the United

Kingdom, efforts to determine by direct negotiation the amount of

compensation due are more likely to increase friction than to promote

understanding. They continue to adhere to the opinion that the most

practicable and the fairest means of settling the question of compensa-

tion would be for that question to be referred to some neutral interna-

tional body which could consider on the basis of merit all claims and

counter-claims.

I fully understand that the Government of Iran must determine for

itself which foreign and domestic policies are likely to be most advanta-

geous to Iran and to the Iranian people. In what I have written, I am not

trying to advise the Iranian Government on its best interests. I am

merely trying to explain why, in the circumstances, the Government of

the United States is not presently in a position to extend more aid to

Iran or to purchase Iranian oil.

In case Iran should so desire, the United States Government hopes

to be able to continue to extend technical assistance and military aid on

a basis comparable to that given during the past year.

I note the concern reflected in your letter at the present dangerous

situation in Iran and sincerely hope that before it is too late, the Govern-

ment of Iran will take such steps as are in its power to prevent a further

deterioration of that situation.

Please accept, Mr. Prime Minister, the renewed assurances of my

highest consideration.”

Foregoing should be delivered to Prime Minister soonest with oral

explanation telegraphic transmission used in view fact Ambassador

Henderson not returning Iran immediately.

Unless released by Prime Minister existence and substance this

message should be held secret.

Dulles

231.

Monthly Report Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

IRAN

June 1953

A. General Developments

1. On the surface the internal political situation showed little

change and relative quiet prevailed during the month. In the Majlis

where neither Mossadeq supporters nor opposition elements were able

to exert control, both elements concerned themselves largely with the

imminent election of a Majlis President. Kashani, who is seeking re-

election, Qanatabadi, a leading Kashani supporter, made violent at-

tacks on the Mossadeq government.

2. While the relative strengths of the Mossadeq supporters and the

opposition showed no positive change, new cracks in Mossadeq’s polit-

ical armor were, however, indicated. The Qashqai Khans, staunch

backers of Mossadeq, intimated a willingness to throw their support

against the Prime Minister under certain conditions.

3. The Tudeh Party, whose immediate Iranian target is the Shah,

continued to throw its support to Mossadeq. On the occasion of a Mos-

sadeq inspired pro-government mass meeting, the Party demonstrated

its ability to assemble and control its followers. The Tudeh assembled

12,000 well disciplined adherents as against 3000 produced by the gov-

ernment. Mossadeq moved to win the support of retired army officers

by issuing orders to government departments to give them employ-

ment. He has also reportedly improved his relations with the Shah by

granting permission for the return of the Queen and other members of

the royal family to Iran.

4. Much speculation has been devoted to recent negotiations be-

tween Mossadeq and Soviet Ambassador Sadchikov. It has been sug-

gested that these talks concern revision of the 1921 Irano-Soviet agree-

ment, the return of Iranian gold held in the USSR, regulation of

disputed boundaries, further increasing of Soviet-Iranian trade, and a

general rapprochement between the two countries.

5. No serious internal disturbances occurred during the month, in-

dicating continued effective control by the government security forces,

Folder 1, Monthly Report—June 1953—Country Summaries and Analyses. Top Secret;

Security Information.

232.

Editorial Note

On July 1, 1953, Kermit Roosevelt received a communication that

stated that the British Prime Minister “has approved the plan. The Em-

bassy will be informed by the Foreign Office who will also give the Am-

bassador their views on an ‘acceptable oil settlement’.” The communi-

cation then inquired into the status of the detailed plans yet to be

completed by officials of the Central Intelligence Agency. (Central In-

Vol. 1)

233.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 337

Tehran, July 1, 1953.

SUBJECT

Popularity and Prestige of Prime Minister Mohammed Mosadeq

234.

Memorandum Prepared by the Chief of the Near East and

Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence

Agency (Roosevelt)

Washington, July 2, 1953.

235.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

42. Had hour’s conversation with Amini, Acting Minister Court,

this morning covering wide range subjects. He talked very frankly. Fol-

lowing are highlights:

Security Information. Received at 11: a.m.

March–August 1953

1. With postponement Emir Saud’s visit, Shah again anxious take

suade. Stated that Shah suspicious by nature was apt to see changes

which did not (repeat not) exist and needed reassurance. Could he,

Amini, tell Shah that Embassy still felt trip at this juncture a mistake? I

told him that my personal opinion was that trip at present juncture

would be misconstrued both in Iran and abroad.

2. Time was approaching when he felt that his brother, Mahmud

Amini, should be made chief of staff. Present incumbent, Riahi, was too

close to Iran party and its leftish sympathies. I observed that this

seemed purely internal Iranian affair. Without passing on relative

merits of officers wished state that ARMISH had reported increased co-

operation since Riahi made chief of staff. Similarly GENMISH had

found Brigadier Amini most cooperative. Minister Court then stated

perhaps change not (repeat not) necessary.

3. Amini then stated he thought that US promise of say 100 million

dollars (even though that amount not (repeat not) forthcoming) could

move Mosadeq to get rid of extremist advisers and to save country

from plight which faced it. I explained in some detail why, in absence of

oil settlement, substantial US aid impracticable. Said that while not (re-

peat not) familiar with details Ambassador Henderson’s consultations

Washington, I had no (repeat no) reason be optimistic anything more

than present scale aid envisaged. Amini said that in these circum-

stances perhaps time had come to overthrow Mosadeq. I replied this

again internal matter but my understanding was that Shah insistent

that any change be by constitutional methods and that recent parlia-

mentary elections seemed to have strengthened Mosadeq’s hold on

Parliament. Amini concurred. I also added that disturbances attendant

upon non-parliamentary changes might be seized upon by Tudeh with

results chaotic for Iran.

4. Amini said that if there was no (repeat no) solution to Iran

problems other than eventual control by Tudeh, perhaps it was time to

lay plans for “armies of the south”. I said this new subject to me. He

generalized that he envisaged cooperation between army and tribes in

south to secure area in Iran where constitutional monarchy could exist

if worst happened.

Amini’s attempt to enlist U.S. financial and economic support should he persuade Mo-

sadeq to (a) settle his differences with the Shah, (b) allow Amini and his friends to gain

control of the security forces, and (c) distance himself from the Iran Party. Henderson

commented that Amini’s statements “tend confirm Embassy’s suspicion the family asso-

ciates engaged in what appears to be superior type Persian intrigue.” (Ibid., 788.00/

236.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt) to Mitchell

Washington, July 8, 1953.

1. In response to [cryptonym not declassified] query regarding our

ability to neutralize Qashqai support of Mossadeq, we have on this date

received the following assessment from Tehran. This assessment was

arrived at after conversations with Qashqai leaders. Although the

Qashqai position as described below may be subject to change in the fu-

ture it is believed to be accurate at this time.

A. The Qashqai principal political assets at this time are repre-

sented by:

Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret. The recipient is referred to as “Mr. Mitchell” in

the original and is not further identified.

237.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

74. Belgian Minister who had audience with Shah yesterday tells

me in strict confidence that Shah still very strongly desires to take trip

Security Information. Received at 7: a.m.

238.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt) to Mitchell

Washington, July 14, 1953.

1. Following received 13 July:

March–August 1953

said ‘if situation so bad’ they willing ‘get rid’ of Mossadeq but they

would insist Mossadeq be replaced by some member Natl. Front.

Makki urged that decision be delayed until after 30 Tir (21 July) anni-

versary Qavams effort overthrow Mossadeq.

C. At private interview with Mossadeq 12 July, latter told Mas-

soudi, the publisher of Ettelaat:

(1) ‘very angrily’ that Eisenhower letter ‘did not hurt Iran, but it

did hurt American prestige in Iran, very much.’

(2) The govt. ‘is prepared’ for mass demonstrations expected 30 Tir

(3) That Mossadeq has no intentions of going to Majlis 14 July

for scheduled interpellation because ‘they (the opposition) want to

kill me.’ Instead Mossadeq plans close Majlis and call for public

referendum.

Source commented: Eisenhower letter has had tremendous impact

and Parliament press people and foreign policy now turning against

Mossadeq. His position is most critical of career. Only weapon left to

him is power of arrest. I expect mass arrests of opposition to begin from

people.

5. Press calling for expulsion Point Four Director Warne and Em-

bassy Press Attache´ Bruce, closing U.S. Embassy and other U.S. instal-

lations and charging U.S. has joined British against Iran.

6. Tudeh sponsored Youth Festival of several thousand which con-

vened July 9 still in session.

7. Tudeh has set up ‘Board of July 21 Anniversary’ resolved to or-

ganize a common demonstration.”

to station:

“A. Opposition greatly encouraged by Eisenhower letter.

B. Independent Deputy Fakhr attempting establish contact Za-

hedi’s son who expected meet Fakhr night of 13 or 14 July.

C. Zahedi has had attack rheumatism and gout with which he

plagued for number years but now in good health and spirits.

D. Mossadeq 11 July sent ‘urgent secret instructions’ to Minister Fi-

nance to pay Ministry Interior rials two hundred thousand (Dollars two

thousand) ‘for printing the papers.’ Opposition believes this refers to

forms for referendum which Mossadeq believed planning to hold in ef-

fort gain expression popular backing.”

4. Following report received, dated 12 July, from source believed

reliable:

“1. Station representative asked whether any basis to rumor Shah

intends go abroad. Source stated Shah very much encouraged by Eisen-

hower letter, believes his absence from Iran at this time not advisable

and is even supported in this view by Queen who now recognizes her

own recent trip Spain grave mistake. If Mossadeq renews pressure

Shah would merely return Caspian until storm over.

2. Should Mossadeq request Shah take initiative dissolve Majlis

Shah would refuse. It is however doubted very much whether Mos-

sadeq would present such request to Shah as this would be recognizing

Shah has authority ‘rule’ rather than ‘reign’.”

“1. Pro-govt. officials in Tehran post office department destroying

all copies opposition newspapers mailed to provinces.

2. Opposition in Majlis now consists 20 deputies firmly committed

to and 11 deputies cooperating with Zahedi.

3. Independent Deputy Fakhr and National Movement Deputy

Khosrow Qashqai now ‘wavering’ toward opposition.”

239.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt) to Mitchell

Washington, July 15, 1953.

1. Mossadeq’s reason for resignation of National Movement frac-

tion from Majlis:2

Felt he could not control Majlis much longer and felt it focal point

mounting criticism his government.

2. Opposition reaction must be:

Stress every way point that what is left of Majlis is legal gov-

ernment of country, its democratic center as opposed Mossadeq’s

illegal dictatorship.

3. All points which follow should have some bearing on Item 2

above.

4. What is present status of Majlis?

We think a fairly good case can be made out for considering re-

maining members to be a Majlis in fact, or at least in legal theory.

The Majlis should have 136 members. This time Mossadeq stopped

in Tehran had session opened by Shah, named temporary officers and

started approving credentials of each other. When ¾ of deputies cre-

dentials approved then permanent officers (for one year) elected and

committees chosen. At that time no one challenged legality of session

on basis that it did not have 136 members or any proportion of 136.

Since that time it has been meeting on the 80 basis as follows:

¾ of 80, or 60, must be present to take a vote on a motion or a bill

A majority (½ plus 1), or 41, may pass bills or motions.

5. Mossadeq and his supporters will probably say that the Majlis is

finished because it does not have enough members for a quorum.

6. Mossadeq may want to legally dissolve the Majlis to support

Item 5 above. According to Article 48 (as amended) only the Shah has

authority to dissolve the Majlis. Mossadeq may claim that his full

powers bill gives him this authority, but if he does so he is sure to lose

many supporters.

Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret. The recipient is referred to as “Mr. Mitchell” in

the original and is not further identified.

7. Our program should be as follows:

a. Arrange that as many as possible of the opposition deputies take

bast3 in the Majlis.

b. Have as many as possible of the opposition deputies declare that

the Majlis is still alive and will carry on its business.

8. To implement this program we must be prepared to carry out

the following actions:

a. The Shah must not be allowed to dissolve the Majlis by decree.

b. According to Supplementary Article 69, the Majlis has the duty

of denouncing to the Supreme Court offenses committed by Ministers.

According to Supplementary Article 60 the Ministers must appear be-

fore the Majlis every time they are summoned to do so. Thus the re-

maining Majlis should summon Dr. Mossadeq and when he refuses to

come should denounce this offence, and others, to the Supreme Court.

b [c]. According to Supplementary Article 67 when the full ma-

jority of the Majlis is dissatisfied with a cabinet or a minister, the cab-

inet or minister is considered as dismissed. The remaining element of

the Majlis should be prepared to take this vote when so instructed.

d. According to Supplementary Article 54, the Shah may order an

extra ordinary meeting of the Majlis. We must be prepared to have him

order such a meeting, to which all those deputies who have illegally re-

signed would be invited.

e. It is probable that the resignation of the National Movement

fraction will not have been done in a legal fashion since such resigna-

tions have to be properly referred to a committee and then passed on by

the body of the Majlis. Thus, we should emphasize that they are still

members. Here a formula might be for the remaining elements of the

Majlis to meet, elect permanent officers, and then declare that all dep-

uties not attending sessions were legally excused from such attend-

ance. This should solve the problem of a quorum, since the quorum of

the Majlis is based upon the number of deputies, minus those whose

absence has been excused by the Majlis.

240.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt) to Mitchell

Washington, July 16, 1953.

The following was received 15 July:

1. Zahedi claims to have following military assets, and has fol-

lowing plan of action:

2. Military figures to take active part:

A. Col. Timur Bakhtiar, temporary milgov Isfahan and Khuzistan.

B. Col. H. Akhavi, Chief Army Transport.

C. Gen. Derakshan, Asst. Chief Police.

D. Gen. Daftari, Commander Customs Guards.

E. Col. Nasiri of Imperial Guard.

3. Plan action (assuming Shah’s cooperation).

A. Since Zahedi unwilling “political suicide” by extra-legal move,

he expects gain legal status for move in one of following ways:

(1) Shah to appoint Zahedi Prime Minister on grounds that Mos-

sadeq forfeited office by “unconstitutional acts”.

(2) Shah to dismiss Mossadeq without appointing successor;

Zahedi temporary Military Governor “pending selection of Prime Min-

ister by Majlis”.

(3) Shah appointment Zahedi to replace Riahi as Chief Staff; imme-

diate arrest Riahi by Zahedi.

(4) Shah’s appointment Zahedi Minister Court; immediate isola-

tion Amini, present Min Court.

B. Implementation of one of above would trigger following series

operations:

(1) Two gordons (battalions) Shah’s Imperial Guard (ie apparently

the entire Guard) under Col. Nasiri, secure area around Royal Court

and Prime Minister’s home, arrest Mossadeq and entourage.

(2) Transportation units under Col. Akhavi take over radio Tehran

and Army radio.

(3) Imperial Guards, police under Derakshan, and Customs

Guards (station note: very small group) control streets overnight.

(4) Next morning, 10 battalions troops from provinces (station

note: presumably under Col. Bakhtiar) arrive in Tehran to support new

govt.

Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret. The recipient is referred to as “Mr. Mitchell” in

the original and is not further identified.

241.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt) to Mitchell

Washington, July 16, 1953.

Following was received 15 July:

1. Tehran Station proposes holding off until after 21 July active

campaign build up Zahedi as logical Mossadeq successor. This decision

based on possibility that show of hands before scheduled demonstra-

tions inspire Mossadeq use street mobs to destroy or intimidate Zahedi

followers.

2. In attempt limit size demonstration Station intends:

A. Instruct opposition forces [less than 1 line not declassified] remain

in homes 21 July in protest Tudeh participation in mourning for Na-

tionalist martyrs of Qavam incident year ago.

B. Plant in controlled press of 19 and 20 July announcements that

observance ceremony to be at martyrs gravesides in Rey—not in down-

town Tehran. This should appeal Iranian sense of dramatic and Station

Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret. The recipient is referred to as “Mr. Mitchell” in

the original and is not further identified.

242.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt) to Mitchell

Washington, July 17, 1953.

Following received from station 16 July:

1. According one Opposition deputy “resignation” of independent

and Opposition deputies 15 July—following similar action by members

pro-Mossadeq National Movement Fraction—was “considered” act of

strategy aimed at heading off public referendum by Mossadeq.

2. Opposition deputy explained thinking behind maneuver in this

manner:

A. Objective of National Front “resignation” was to close Majlis

and thus eliminate influence of Opposition in that body.

B. Mossadeq intended gain Opposition’s unconditional surrender

by “rigged” referendum which would have resulted in his becoming

complete dictator.

C. In announcing “resignation,” other deputies, “many of whom

fighting secretly against dictatorship”, ostensibly removed necessity

for Mossadeq to go through with referendum plans.

D. Opposition’s “ace in hole”, according to source, is that resigna-

tions are not legal unless brought up in Majlis session and accepted by

assembled deputies. Thus, under present situation, no one has in fact

resigned and Majlis sessions may reconvene at any time action is

needed—for example: to take Parliamentary action to name new Prime

Minister.

3. Opposition deputy explained that Opposition “hard core” of 15

deputies agreed enter Majlis that hour to take bast “until Mossadeq is

replaced”. He said Opposition agreed this strategy earlier in evening at

meeting with Kashani. This is plan:

A. Deputies will remain in Parliament building.

Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret. The recipient is referred to as “Mr. Mitchell” in

the original and is not further identified.

243.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans (Roosevelt) to Director of

Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, July 17, 1953.

SUBJECT

[Omission in the original]

1. Tehran Station reports state that TCI Director, Mr. William

Warne’s presence in Iran and his numerous contacts with high ranking

Iranian Government officials are being successfully exploited by Prime

Minister Mossadeq in such a way as to dishearten the opposition and

strengthen the Mossadeq administration. It has been reported that

TPAJAX Vol. II. Eyes Only.

March–August 1953

Prime Minister Mossadeq is interpreting Ambassador Henderson’s ab-

sence as lack of U.S. support for his policies and is concerned by the fact

that Henderson’s absence detracts from the strength of his (Mos-

sadeq’s) government. This is the desirable effect from our point of

view. To overcome this Mossadeq is attempting with some success to

minimize the effects of Henderson’s absence by exploiting to the ut-

most Mr. Warne’s continuing contacts and cordiality with important

government leaders.

2. The opposition leaders with whom we are dealing have ex-

pressed concern since they feel the favorable effects of President Eisen-

hower’s letter and Ambassador Henderson’s absence have to some de-

gree been counteracted by Mr. Warne’s activities.

3. As you know most Iranians have interpreted continuing Point

Four aid as a tangible sign of U.S. support of Mossadeq. To the degree

that Mr. Warne is synonymous with Point Four his temporary absence

from the country would help to disabuse the Iranians of this miscon-

ception, even if it is undesirable to reduce Point Four aid at this time.

4. It would not be advisable for Mr. Warne to be recalled to the

United States for consultation as this could be exploited by Mossadeq

to mean Warne was negotiating increased U.S. aid to Iran. It has been

suggested by our Station that Mr. Warne leave Iran temporarily on the

excuse he was vacationing in Europe.

5. Recommendation: It is recommended that you discuss this matter

with Under Secretary of State Bedell Smith and with him attempt to ar-

rive at some solution which would keep Minister Warne away from his

post (but not in the U.S.) for approximately one month without re-

vealing to latter the existence of TPAJAX and without provoking too

great a storm of protest from Point Four and Minister Warne. I am sorry

not to be able to make specific suggestions at this time, though I would

express the pious hope that a suitable conference requiring his presence

in Europe might be found. I have requested John Waller and Donald

Wilber to explore possibilities with Jernegan and Richards of State

Department.

Kermit Roosevelt

244.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

116. Estimate Embassy and CAS present political trends follows.

Immediate reason Mosadeq’s precipitate move eliminate present

Majlis as opposition center was mounting effectiveness anti-government

activity such as Zohari interpellation and election Maki as controller

BMI. Opposition was also successfully gaining control key Majlis com-

mittees. Serving accelerate these events and impel Mosadeq consoli-

date his position urgently was Eisenhower letter clarifying US policy

toward Mosadeq Government. Letter served belie carefully nursed

“myth” US supporting Mosadeq at same time USSR “friendship” over-

tures appear to be for moment at least nothing more than willingness

adjust frontier problems. With bankruptcy foreign policy thus exposed

Prime Minister faced Majlis interpellation this subject and exposure

government’s unauthorized increase note issue by Maki. Unable or dis-

inclined resort to Shah’s power dissolve Majlis Mosadeq struck upon

expedient of mass resignation NMF [NF] deputies and announcement

referendum. Latter not provided for in constitution.

Despite Prime Minister’s decreased popularity he still controls

principal propaganda media including Radio Tehran as well as gov-

ernment apparatus and funds with which maneuver balloting or dem-

onstrations his favor. Timing also important factor. By invoking

memory July 21 uprising Prime Minister can play upon emotions his

followers and upon fear his enemies. While opposition continues dis-

play courageous facade it appears incapable combatting Mosadeq in

showdown struggle. It furthermore lacks leadership while Shah con-

tinues docile in hands Prime Minister.

Thus despite almost hopeless financial and economic situation and

lack tangible prospects resolving country’s problems in foreseeable fu-

ture Mosadeq again demonstrating willingness disregard legalities and

determination remain in power regardless of consequences. If he suc-

ceeds confirming dissolution Majlis through referendum as now seems

probable establishment dictatorship will be complete with little re-

maining of outward democratic forms. Prime Minister will then be in

Security Information. Repeated to London and to Geneva for Henderson. Received at

March–August 1953

position destroy remaining opposition leaving him in unchallenged

and absolute control.

Mattison

245.

Memorandum From the Acting Chief of the Near East and

Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence

Agency ([name not declassified]) to Mitchell

Washington, July 22, 1953.

Following received 22 July:

1. In agreement with Speaker Moazami and to avoid incident

during 21 July demonstration Zahedi left Majlis 20 July. Was to return

there 22 July. Moazami gave assurance govt. would not attempt arrest.

2. While out of Majlis Zahedi [less than 1 line not declassified] gave

following information:

A. Arrest list

(1) To be arrested night of coup: Mossadeq, Riahi, Ashrafi, Mo-

daber Rasavi, Hassibi, Shayegan, Zirakzadeh, Sanjabi, Khalil Maleki,

Forouar of Pan Iran, Amini of Gendarme´rie, Sareshteh of M.P.

(2) Sixty members Tudeh

(3) Eventually if disturbances occur 300 other individuals may

have to be jailed or placed under house arrest.

(4) Note: though Ashrafi and Modaber in contact with Zahedi and

may switch over to him at decisive moment they still uncertain ele-

ments and as precaution included arrest list.

B. Re arrest Mossadeq: Zahedi plan as follows:

(1) Block where his house located to be surrounded by Palace

Guard.

(2) Col Daftari and Capt. Davar Panah who in charge Mossadeq

person guard are “in hand” Zahedi and at his bidding will apprehend

Mossadeq and deliver him to Zahedi.

(3) Mossadeq will then be taken custody in village outside Tehe,

(4) Rumor will be circulated Mossadeq dead. This for purpose

causing followers lose hope and rally other banner presumably Zahedi.

Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret. The recipient is referred to as “Mr. Mitchell” in

the original and is not further identified.

246.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, July 22, 1953.

142. As yet too early draw conclusion regarding significance yes-

terday’s demonstrations or determine what likely be Mosadeq’s next

moves in consequence.

Embassy and CAS however believe Tudeh afternoon gathering

their largest and best organized since being declared illegal and

perhaps in party’s history. Crowd displayed high degree discipline.

While slogans attacking Shah absent those directed against US most

frequent forming dominant note of demonstration.

Tudeh’s display for point of force comes in wake publication June

20 of open letter to Mosadeq from Tudeh Central Committee in which

legalization Tudeh party appeared primary immediate objective.

Mattison

gram is the Embassy’s copy as approved and has no time of transmission.

March–August 1953

247.

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, July 22, 1953.

SOVIET UNION OFFERS TO SETTLE IRANIAN

FINANCIAL CLAIMS

[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

Iran has tried unsuccessfully several times to obtain this gold

owed by the USSR under the terms of a 1942 financial agreement, as

well as to get the dollars which are in payment for Iranian goods and

services provided during World War II. Soviet refusal to discuss this

issue has been a major cause of friction between the two countries.

Late last month the Soviet Union proposed that some of the out-

standing border disputes between Iran and the USSR should be settled.

Iran, [less than 1 line not declassified] insisted that all disputes be settled,

particularly the question of the gold.

The Soviet Union’s apparent concession to Iran’s urgent request

for return of the gold, the conclusion of the 10 June barter trade agree-

ment, and the appointment of a top-level Soviet diplomat, Lavrentiev

as ambassador to Iran, all suggest that the Soviet Union may be inaugu-

rating a new policy toward Iran. These moves may be designed to show

Prime Minister Mossadeq that an alternative exists to economic and po-

litical ties with the West.

248.

Memorandum From the Acting Chief of the Near East and

Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence

Agency ([name not declassified]) to Mitchell

Washington, July 23, 1953.

1. At a July 21 meeting Zahedi stated following:

A. He, Zahedi, is meeting Majlis Speaker Moazami 22 July to

discuss whether he return to his Majlis bast or remain in hiding outside.

Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret. The recipient is referred to as “Mr. Mitchell” in

the original and is not further identified.

March–August 1953

Station advised Zahedi to return to the Majlis and resume bast. Zahedi

contended that such a move would:

(1) Limit his freedom of contact with [less than 1 line not declassified]

his potential and actual followers.

(2) Possibly make it more difficult to reach the palace at D hour.

B. Decision on above deferred pending Zahedi–Moazami meeting.

C. Zahedi agreed to designate on 22 July a trustworthy [less than 1

line not declassified] follower to establish contact with Station for plan-

ning and staff work in military aspects of the plan.

2. On the basis of the above described meeting Station formed fol-

lowing opinion:

A. Zahedi appears to lack forceful leadership quality and plans

may have to be perfected through his followers. Despite apparent

“vagueness” of Zahedi’s thinking he apparently only effective “ral-

lying point” for opposition and for that reason he must be supported

and encouraged to maximum against Mossadeq.

B. Zahedi does have sufficient stature and “guts” to continue along

path he entered.

C. Every effort should be made to stimulate Zahedi’s ambition and

maintain his morale.

249.

Memorandum From the Acting Chief of the Near East and

Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence

Agency ([name not declassified]) to Mitchell

250.

Paper Given by the British Ambassador (Makins) to the

Under Secretary of State (Smith)

Washington, July 23, 1953.

“Her Majesty’s Government have noted the State Department’s

views as got out in a report on the conversation between Mr. Byroade

and Mr. Beeley on 7 July, and have much sympathy for them.

“The overriding consideration is that the whole question of com-

pensation must be left to the impartial arbitration of an international

tribunal. Furthermore the terms of any future arrangements must be

such as not to appear to provide a reward for the tearing up of contrac-

tual obligations or to disturb the pattern of world oil prices. Subject to

this Her Majesty’s Government are prepared to go to the utmost to help

‘ . . . with the problem of presenting an agreement to the public’ locally.

251.

Editorial Note

On July 24, 1953, Secretary of State Dulles spoke to Director of Cen-

tral Intelligence Dulles over the telephone. The transcript of their con-

versation reads: “The Secy called and said in your talk about Iran yes-

terday at the meeting you did not mention the other matter, is it off?

AWD said he doesn’t talk about it, it was cleared directly with the Pres-

ident, and is still active.

“The Secy asked if that relieved us of trying anything else, or if

there was any alternative. AWD is getting up a paper, a hint from the

Department that we are deeply disturbed at the apparent acquiescence,

etc. might help, there is sufficient evidence on the thing, he quoted a

statement about the riots in which Mossadegh said you cannot crush

the will of the people, look what happened in China.

“His paper will be an outline of things that have happened and it

would benefit the project if we express apprehension because he is

leaning more and more on Tudeh. The Secretary remarked that he

hasn’t any other place to lean. AWD said it is moving along reasonably

252.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Iran Branch, Near East

and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans (Waller) to Director

of Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, July 27, 1953.

SUBJECT

Results of conversation with Mr. Jernegan re statement to be made by The

Secretary of State at latter’s Press Conference July 28

1. Mr. Jernegan stated that the wording given below would repre-

sent an effective and appropriate answer by The Secretary of State to a

planted query during the Secretary’s July 28 Press Conference:

“Recent developments in Iran, especially the growing activity of

the supposedly illegal Communist Party which appears to be tolerated

by the Iranian government, have caused us concern. These develop-

ments make it even more difficult for the United States to consider any

increase in assistance to Iran.

2. Mr. Jernegan stated that he and/or Assistant Secretary Byroade

would discuss the above proposed statement with the Secretary of

State. They would also discuss the mechanics by which the proposed

newsman’s query can best be planted prior to the Secretary’s news

conference.

3. I stated that final planting of the query should await word from

me since we were momentarily expecting Teheran’s reaction to the pro-

TPAJAX Vol. II. Top Secret.

253.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans (Wisner)

to the Chief of the Near East and Africa Division, Directorate

of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)

Washington, July 28, 1953.

SUBJECT

Draft of proposed message to Teheran station

1. Following conversations which the Director has had within the

past couple of days with high-ranking State Department officials con-

cerning the Warne situation, the Director requested that a cable be sent

to our Teheran station along the following lines. The purpose of the

cable is to obtain an answer to the indicated question which will enable

us to follow up this matter further with the State Department.

2. The following is the outline of the proposed cable which I should

appreciate your getting off as soon as possible:

“In further discussions with high level officials of ODACID con-

cerning the difficulties and complications arising from the (Warne) sit-

uation, the opinion has been expressed that it would be most difficult

for ODACID to propose to (Warne) that he depart from Iran for a pe-

riod of time in such a way as to satisfactorily mask the intent of the in-

struction. In other words no device or pretext has yet been hit upon

which would satisfy (Warne) and guarantee against his asking ques-

tions which might provide further complications and prove a source of

additional embarrassment.

“Accordingly will you please advise whether in light of all present

circumstances you still feel it desirable for (Warne) to be absent from

TPAJAX Vol. II. Top Secret.

254.

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, July 29, 1953.

POLITICAL PROSPECTS IN IRAN

Prime Minister Mossadeq’s cabinet decree of 25 July provides for a

popular vote on whether or not the present Majlis, the Iranian parlia-

ment, is to be dissolved. In his nationwide radio address on 27 July, the

prime minister told the people that they must choose between him and

the moribund Majlis. According to intelligence reports from Tehran,

the referendum is to be held soon, possibly as early as 5 August.

In taking this proposed action, which is illegal since only the shah

has the constitutional right to dissolve the Majlis, the prime minister

will have the full support of the Iranian Communists, the Tudeh party,

and its apparatus. The Tudeh has campaigned against the present

Majlis and accuses it of being a tool of the imperialistic West. Thus, the

prime minister is assured of its support on this issue.

NSC Briefing 30 July 53. Secret; Security Information. This paper was apparently pre-

pared for DCI Dulles’ briefing of the NSC on July 30. In the top right-hand corner of the

paper is a handwritten note that reads: “used.” The minutes of the July 30 NSC meeting

record that the DCI briefed the NSC on significant world developments, including “de-

velopments in Iran.” (National Archives, RG 273, Records of the National Security

randum of discussion at the July 30 NSC meeting, prepared by Deputy Executive Secre-

tary Gleason, notes that “Mr. Dulles stated that in Iran another crisis was approaching. A

plebiscite was due to be held on August 5 to give Mossadegh the right to get rid of Parlia-

ment. The Shah had locked himself in his palace, and the Tudeh Party was supporting

Mossadegh. Recent statements by the Secretary of State had caused a rise in U.S. stock in

Iran, but the situation remained serious.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC

Series, Box 4, 157th Meeting of the National Security Council)

March–August 1953

By conducting the nonsecret ballot provided for in Mossadeq’s de-

cree, his henchmen, supported by the security forces, will be in a posi-

tion to exert direct influence on the voters. Accordingly, there is little

doubt that such a referendum will approve the dissolution of the

present Majlis.

What may be expected thereafter? Since Mossadeq is currently op-

erating under virtual dictatorial powers voted him by the Majlis last

spring—powers which will not expire until January 1954—he is in a po-

sition to rule alone. He has, however, so far apparently been suffi-

ciently unsure of himself to desire that the Majlis share the responsi-

bility for his decisions. New elections can accordingly be anticipated.

Rigged elections are traditionally standard practice in Iran, and

normally several months are needed to conduct the actual ballot-

ing. During the last elections for Majlis seats, the Mossadeq govern-

ment used both legal and illegal means to ensure the election of its

candidates.

The present situation offers unique angles, however, and Mos-

sadeq may not be able to secure a new Majlis which will be more ame-

nable than the present one. While the Communists will support him in

the referendum, in a Majlis election it will probably put up its own can-

didates. In view of the overwhelming Tudeh demonstration in Tehran

on 21 July, some of its candidates would be successful there. In other

cities, such as Isfahan, it might also be successful. Tudeh candidates

would probably represent Communist-front groups; they might even

be disguised and run under Mossadeq’s banner. In districts where

Tudeh strength is weak, its support would be thrown directly to Mos-

sadeq in order to defeat his opposition.

The prime minister also faces considerable moderate and rightist

opposition grouped loosely around the shah and the royal court. Tribal

chiefs, army officers, the landed gentry, and religious fanatics under

the control of Mullah Kashani might, if they were united, defeat Mos-

sadeq. In the rural districts they can hardly be denied, and their candi-

dates can only be defeated through wholesale terrorism.

Under any circumstances, several months will elapse before a

Majlis can be returned to office. During this time the prime minister

must carry on alone.

The next Majlis, if and when it is ultimately assembled, gives no

promise of solving Mossadeq’s problems. He may manipulate a some-

what larger group, but will have difficulty in eliminating his conserva-

tive and rightist opposition. He will probably find a compact and deter-

mined Tudeh bloc facing him, ready to support his anti-Western

policies, prodding him on to more extremist action, and awaiting the

day when they can take over. Tudeh representation in a Mossadeq cab-

inet is not an impossibility.

255.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Iran Branch, Near East

and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans (Waller) to the

Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Wisner)

Washington, July 30, 1953.

SUBJECT

Problem of Neutralizing Qashqai/Amini Threat to TPAJAX

I. Problem

The Qashqais, particularly Khosrow Qashqai, and their allies, the

Aminis, represent a serious potential menace to TPAJAX. Ideally they

should be brought to the point of cooperating with TPAJAX. Failing

this, they should be neutralized.

II. Background

A. The Qashqais and the Aminis have entered into political alli-

ance. Ostensibly they represent Mossadeq’s most loyal supporters. Ac-

tually they are using their position as loyal supporters of Mossadeq to

build their own political power for the purpose of eventually taking

over the government from Mossadeq.

B. Station has been in contact with both Qashqais and Aminis since

the inception of TPAJAX, realizing they represented a powerful polit-

ical/military/tribal force which must be won over or neutralized.

TPAJAX. Top Secret; Security Information; Eyes Only.

March–August 1953

C. The major and perhaps insurmountable obstacle to winning

them over is their refusal to be associated in any way with a plot in-

volving the British. No mention of TPAJAX has ever been made or

inferred but recent developments show the Qashqais suspect U.S.

implication in what they believe is a British sponsored plot to oust

Mossadeq.

III. Qashqai/Amini Position as Stated by Khosrow Qashqai—27 July

A. Khosrow Qashqai is suspicious of possible Anglo-American co-

operation in plan to oust Mossadeq.

B. Qashqai/Amini clique fully agreed to “take orders from U.S. in

any American backed plan” but would “fight to finish” any plot in

which British or British agents involved.

C. Qashqais and Aminis willing to produce blueprint for action

and discuss with KUBARK. Their cost estimates are high ($5,000,000

plus $250,000,000 economic aid by loan or grant upon completion of

successful action).

IV. Station/Roosevelt Estimate of Qashqai/Amini Position and Proposal

A. Genuineness:

Offer made with Qashqais retaining in their own mind initiative to

follow through if we agree—or later betray if it to their advantage.

B. Validity their claims

1. Political support based on their alliance Mossadeq and would

materially be reduced if they broke with him. Major political asset their

current freedom from British taint.

2. Military support largely valid, although some exaggeration

should be anticipated.

3. Tribes. Probably valid.

C. Firmness of Position per III above

1. Threats. Threats to oppose British or British/American plot prob-

ably real and they could cause extremely serious trouble. Qashqai deci-

sion would await last moment and be determined by Qashqai best in-

terest as latter sees it.

2. Budget. Figures given not necessarily firm (and probably based

on ignorance) but we could expect price tag for Qashqai/Amini affilia-

tion to be higher than with TPAJAX.

V. Roosevelt/Station Recommendation to Solve Qashqai/Amini Problem

Proceed with TPAJAX and attempt to enlist under most favorable

circumstances cooperation of certain elements of Qashqais/Aminis. If

cooperation cannot be gained they should be neutralized. This should

be done in such a way as to eliminate danger premature exposure of

TPAJAX.

[2 paragraphs (16 lines) not declassified]

VIII. NE/4 Estimate

With reference to heading IV, Station/Roosevelt Estimate of Qashqai/

Amini Position and Proposal, NE–4 is in general agreement, with the fol-

lowing comments:

A. Qashqais cannot be expected to be won over to cooperation in

TPAJAX if they aware of British participation. If they appear to be won

over it would only mean they planning doublecross at crucial point.

B. While the Qashqai state their freedom from British taint is a

major political asset, we believe this is not local Iranian opinion.

D [sic]. The Qashqais have cooperated with the British in the past.

At the present time, however, it is political suicide to appear to be any-

thing but anti-British and this attitude will continue until such time as

Mossadeq falls.

E. We should stick firmly with TPAJAX through period of discus-

sions with Shah.

F. Only if we discard TPAJAX or it fails in execution should we

swing to concrete planning with Qashqai/Amini.

IX. NE/4 Recommended Action

[2 paragraphs (12 lines) not declassified]

C. Discussions in the U.S. with the Qashqais should achieve the

following:

1. Remove them from Iran and hence a part of the danger to

TPAJAX.

2. Inform them that U.S. finally resolved to save Iran from Mos-

sadeq and Communism. However, no mention will be made to them

regarding our present implication in a plot to overthrow Mossadeq.

3. If their stay should overlap the abandonment of TPAJAX then

negotiations could be switched to a discussion of their own blueprint.

John H. Waller

256.

Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Iranian Affairs,

Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Stutesman) to

the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian

Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African

Affairs (Richards)

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Measures which the United States Government Might Take in Support of a

Successor Government to Mosadeq

Assumption—a coup against Mosadeq has firmly established a suc-

cessor government we wish to support.

Problem—What measures might the United States Government

take to support the successor government?

I. Psychological Measures

Public

1. It would be literally fatal to any non-communist successor to

Mosadeq if the Iranian public gained an impression that the new pre-

mier was a “foreign tool”. The U.S. Government should confine any

comment upon a change in government in Iran to a repetition of our

traditional unwillingness to interfere in the internal affairs of a free

country and our willingness to work with the government in power.

The U.K. Government should give no indication that it considers a suc-

cessor to Mosadeq to be ready to serve U.K. interests or that the British

had a hand in bringing him to power. Naturally, there should be no ex-

pression of regret that Mosadeq has departed from the political scene.

2. The U.S. Government should avoid any statement that the oil

question is involved in a change of government in Iran. It is important

that neither the U.S. nor U.K. Governments should rejoice publicly over

expectations of a more reasonable Iranian attitude towards solution of

the oil problem.

3. To show that the U.S. is not antagonistic to the successor gov-

ernment, an official comment could be made that we are, as always, in-

terested in helping any free country to build its strength against com-

munist subversion and will work with the present government of Iran

to that end, if so requested by the Iranians.

TPAJAX Vol. II. Top Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Stutesman. Printed from an

uninitialed copy. A handwritten note in the upper right-hand corner of the memo-

randum reads: “late July?”

4. It is important that U.S. Embassy officials be most circumspect in

initial contacts with members of a new Iranian Government.

5. A visit to Tehran by the Secretary of State, should he be passing

through the Middle East at a time when a new Iranian Government has

become firmly established, would have important effect and he might

wish to consider such a visit in the light of the situation existing at the

time.

Private

1. Concealing the foreign hand to the maximum extent possible,

both the Shah and the successor to Mosadeq should be informed at an

early date that the U.S. is eager to assist in any way feasible the success

of the new government.

2. Both the Shah and the new premier should be informed through

private non-American channels that the U.S. and U.K. realize that for

the new government to raise the question of an oil settlement before it

is firmly established is far too dangerous a matter to be considered.

Naturally, private assurances that the oil dispute will be settled on rea-

sonable terms may be sought, but it would be disastrous for a new gov-

ernment to be forced immediately and publicly to attend to the oil dis-

pute which engenders such fanatic emotions in Iran.

3. Recognizing the importance of a propaganda machine in sup-

porting the new government and repressing opposition, the U.S. might

covertly assist in subsidizing some pro-government newspapers and

could openly make radio equipment and technical advice available to a

new government’s effective operation of Radio Tehran.

II. Military Measures

Public

1. Any ostentatious increase in U.S. military aid to a new Iranian

Government would be likely to create public antagonism in Iran both

to the U.S. and the new government, since Iranians are so sensitive to

fears that their country is being prepared to serve as a foreign military

base. Certainly any displays of foreign armed might, such as a visit by a

foreign naval force or flights of foreign aircraft, would be disastrous to

the establishment of a new government.

2. In consultation with a new government, arrangements might be

made for the U.S. Government to pay the costs of U.S. military advisory

missions presently representing a financial burden to the Iranian

Government.

Private

1. Privately the new government could be assured of U.S. will-

ingness to provide military aid to any reasonable extent desired. A par-

March–August 1953

ticular point might be made of providing military items such as trucks

and communication equipment which have civilian uses.

2. Since it is quite likely that a coup against the Mosadeq Govern-

ment will result in serious urban disturbances and possibly outbreaks

resembling civil war in the provinces, the new government will prob-

ably face an initial problem of restoring order. Riot-quelling weapons,

small arms, and money should be available in case the U.S. Govern-

ment desires to furnish such equipment clandestinely to any Iranian

forces.

III. Economic Measures

1. Budgetary support will be an important and immediate need of

any successor to Mosadeq. At first, foreign budgetary aid should be

given as privately as possible without requiring public agreements or

commitments on the part of a new Iranian Government. A covert oper-

ation might meet this problem for the first month particularly in pay-

ment of security forces, a maximum figure (based on last year’s Iranian

budget) of $5 million a month. Grant budgetary aid should not be

forced upon a new Iranian Government with requirements for formal

commitments or acceptance of a large community of Americans to su-

pervise disbursements.

Appendix I describes in detail Iran’s yearly budgetary deficit ($45

million if the NIOC sells enough oil to cover its own expenses). A basic

assumption to this estimate is that a new government will not be in a

position to continue Mosadeq’s clandestine printing of new currency.

2. Note cover is an explosive political problem in Iran. Mosadeq has

officially denied the fact known to the Embassy that his Government

has printed 1. billion rials illegally. A new government, exposing this

fact, could brand Mosadeq as a liar and malefactor. It would not be dif-

ficult in Iran to add a rumor that Mosadeq and his associates had pro-

fited personally from the illegal and secretive expansion of the note

issue. Such an exposure might, however, create panic in Iranian finan-

cial circles and would effectively prevent the new government from

taking Mosadeq’s course of inflation.

A public offer by the U.S. Government to make up the illegally dis-

sipated Iranian gold reserves would have a dramatic and extremely

useful political, financial and psychological impact in Iran. Perhaps no

other move could so effectively and immediately demonstrate U.S.

support of the new government. It would allow full play of the new

government’s propaganda to show up Mosadeq as a liar, cheat and

thief. It is a step which would require no expenditure of money by the

Iranians and no foreign supervision of disposition of the funds. At the

same time, in the peculiar atmosphere of Iran it would be considered an

important and beneficial type of foreign aid.

Privately in this maneuver it might be agreed that the gold offered

by the U.S. Government would remain in the U.S. as backing for Ira-

nian currency to be used at some appropriate later date for economic

development in Iran, since 100 percent backing of Iran’s currency is not

a fiscal necessity.

3. Lend-lease and Surplus Property deliveries to Iran created a debt of

nearly $30 million. It is obvious that the Iranians cannot pay this

without oil income and there is serious question as to their intention

ever to pay. A gesture of goodwill towards a new government could in-

clude an announcement that Iran’s debt would be written off either

completely or perhaps against some expenditures in Iran, i.e, economic

development, student exchange, etc.

4. Trade, except for oil exports, naturally moves from Iran toward

the Soviet bloc. This movement is accelerated when non-communist

nations are unable to offer equivalent trade opportunities. For example,

the communist system of state trade permits the conclusion of trade ar-

rangements for political rather than commercial reasons and also

permits barter trade which meets Iran’s foreign exchange problems.

Both the Japanese and the Germans can have profitable and volu-

minous trade relations with Iran. This trade could also be on barter

basis. The establishment of German and Japanese diplomatic and eco-

nomic missions in Iran would help a great deal in this regard. Further

encouragement for trade between Iran and other Western nations, in-

cluding the U.S., might result from a minimum of temporary technical

and financial assistance. For example, a market for caviar might be

found in the U.S. if this government were prepared to make small in-

vestment to get it started.

5. Oil income is normally the largest source of revenue for Iran. Al-

though the oil dispute should not be thrust upon the new government

in its infancy, the British might be encouraged to allow certain meas-

ures to be taken to keep the Iranian oil industry in some minimum op-

eration on the presumption that the new Iranian Government would

reach some mutually satisfactory settlement of the dispute with the

British.

6. TCA. Present plans call for reducing the TCA Program in Iran to

$10 million. The present level of expenditures, which involves both FY

lion a year. TCA hopes that its reduced program will be supplemented

March–August 1953

by an [illegible—TCA?] request for material aid in an amount sufficient

to bring the ’54 program up to the current level of expenditures. If the

Point Four Program were reduced without additional material aid at a

time when a new government is struggling for position in Iran, it

would be considered evidence of U.S. disinterest which might not only

weaken the new government but could quite possibly lead to the can-

cellation of the Point Four Agreement and expulsion of that source of

U.S. influence.

7. Economic Development. Any new government of Iran must lay

claim to a program to develop the country economically. To support

such a program the U.S. should be in a position to offer immediately at

least $15 million to help the Iranians complete dams or other projects of

a long list of worthy subjects developed by American and other ad-

visers since the War. Appendix II5 describes three separate irrigation

projects, each of which could be developed with $45 million over a

three-year period.

The Export-Import Bank has long had earmarked a $25 million

loan for economic development in Iran, and it is probable that this loan

could be advanced quickly with Departmental encouragement. It must

be frankly admitted, however, that Iran’s ability to repay any such loan

or provide the rial costs of the projects involved without oil income is

limited.

Iranian Airways. The Iranian Airways which at present is faltering

for lack of money and equipment and which is dominated by a known

Soviet agent could be restored to effective operation by a U.S. private

concern supported unobtrusively by the U.S. Government.

IV. Relations With the United Kingdom

1. Any British statements welcoming a successor to Mosadeq or

otherwise indicating that the successor will serve U.K. interests, will

probably serve as death warrants for the new premier.

2. If the U.K. restricts U.S. action vis-a`-vis a new Iranian Govern-

ment on the plea that the oil dispute must first be settled on terms satis-

factory to the British, the problem of supporting a new government will

become almost insurmountable.

3. Neither the U.S. nor the U.K. can hope to obtain public economic

concessions or political rights in Iran, and this fact should be mutually

understood between the U.S. and U.K. before embarking upon any ad-

ventures in internal Iranian politics.

V. Relations With the USSR

1. The Soviets would undoubtedly use all means at their disposal

to oppose any government which promised to rule Iran with a firmer

hand than Mosadeq has used. The latter’s opposition has constantly ac-

cused him of softness toward the Tudeh, which organization has re-

cently devoted much effort to explaining to its members why Mosadeq

should be supported in his feud with the Shah, obviously fearing se-

vere restrictive measures against it should a new Prime Minister

appear.

2. Once he was out of office, Mosadeq would automatically be-

come a Tudeh martyr and the party would throw its full weight behind

those elements seeking his restoration. Should Mosadeq himself disap-

pear from the scene, the Tudeh could conceivably seize control of the

nationalist movement in his name and make a concerted drive to seize

power for itself.

3. It is to be expected that Soviet agents would actively aid the

Tudeh, including furnishing of arms clandestinely, but that Russian

armed forces would not enter Iran because of the danger of a resultant

all-out war. For the same reason Western forces could not be used on

Iranian soil to aid the new government without running the danger

that the Soviets would then invoke the 1921 treaty allowing for the in-

troduction of Soviet troops into Iran under certain conditions. That

these conditions as stipulated would not exist, would obviously not

delay Soviet action.

4. Aside from providing covert assistance to government forces,

the U.S. approach would consist of a vigorous propaganda offensive

pointing up a) the well-known and easily documented Russian orienta-

tion of Tudeh policy, b) the ways in which the Russian lend assistance

to Tudeh, and c) the complete opportunities of communist policy as ev-

idenced by its former violent attacks on Mosadeq as an imperalist

agent.

APPENDIX I

Iran’s gross budget is estimated to be running a deficit at the rate of

about 6 billion rials ($120 million) per year. On the optimistic assump-

tion that the National Iranian Oil Co. (NIOC) will export sufficient oil to

be self-supporting from oil revenues, and assuming further budgetary

rials per dollar this is the equivalent of $20 million. After allowing for

the increased rial revenues from customs receipts because of the greater

volume of imports resulting from an aid program, this would be re-

March–August 1953

duced to some $65 million. In a background where the United States

was taking positive action to prevent the loss of Iran, it is estimated that

the Government could finance by loans from the Central Bank, the sum

million for aid from abroad, a figure which will keep pressure on Iran

to conduct its finances prudently. This assumes that the dollar ex-

change is readily salable to importers at a rate of 507 rials to the dollar.

On the less optimistic assumption that the Government will (as at

present) have to bear the costs of the oil industry, budgetary require-

ments would increase by about $25 million and aggregate $70 million

($45 million plus $25 million for the expenses of the oil industry loss

less $12 million representing the increased rial revenue from customs

receipts). If at the time budgetary assistance is made available, a rate of

60 rials to the dollar instead of 50 rials to the dollar can feasibly be

maintained, the $70 million estimate would reduce to about $58

million.

As to the techniques of administration, dollars could be made

available to Iran to be converted into rials through their sale to im-

porters of authorized goods. This would be done through the licensing

mechanism already in existence and being carried out by the Bank

Melli (National Bank of Iran). The rials generated could be employed to

meet the expenses of the Ministry of War, Gendarme´rie, and Police De-

partment. In the last year the Iranian budget allocated 2,500,000,000

rials for the Ministry of War, 475,000,000 rials for the Gendarme´rie and

546,750,000 for the Police Department. Taken together the total require-

ment of these security forces amounts to 3,271,250,000 rials ($67

million).

258.

Memorandum From the Director of the U.S. Technical

Cooperation Administration Mission in Iran (Warne) to the

Charge´ d’Affaires in Iran (Mattison)

Tehran, August 6, 1953.

Conference With Dr. Akhavi and Mr. Zanganeh

Regarding Tudeh Party

At a meeting called this morning for the purpose of discussing the

location of the wool scouring plant of one of our project agreements,

the Minister of National Economy, A.A. Akhavi, and Eng. Ahmad Zan-

ganeh of Plan Organization, in grave mien, discussed with me for 40

minutes the problem Iran faces as a result of the statements issued in

Washington by Secretary Dulles and President Eisenhower regarding

communist influence here. Others present were Eng. Radjy who took

little part in the conversation and, for a few minutes near the end of this

part of the discussion, Mr. Stanley Drake of the Point 4 staff, the expert

on the wool scouring plant.

Mr. Akhavi said that the Propaganda Minister had informed him

of the receipt of a Reuters despatch from Washington describing a

public statement made by President Eisenhower in which he said “we

will have to stop” the communist infiltration in Indonesia and in Iran.

Mr. Akhavi said the President was talking principally about Indonesia

but that he also discussed Iran. He and Mr. Zanganeh obviously were

gravely concerned.

Mr. Akhavi and Mr. Zanganeh said that these statements being

made by the highest officials in the United States, they feared, would

prejudice the American public against Iran. They said that obviously

someone was misreporting the situation in Iran to have so alarmed the

Secretary of State and the President. They denied any communist infil-

tration and, while admitting that the Tudeh Party was organized here,

said it was of two branches, one supported by the Soviet Union and the

other by the ex-AIOC. They said that the Government had at every turn

opposed the Tudeh Party and that the Tudeh Party was not supporting

the Government. They pointed to the recent strife at Masjid-i-Suliman

and at Khorramshahr as proof of this. Mr. Akhavi said that the Tudeh

had endeavored to organize the laborers at Masjid-i-Suliman and the

Government resisted and in the fracas several were killed. He said that

the Government endeavored to ship 10,000 tons of rice from Khorram-

shahr and that Tudeh elements, definitely traced to AIOC support, had

blocked the shipment through raising trouble on the docks with porters

and longshoremen and, in the town, with the people to the point that

the shipment was delayed until the letter of credit expired. He said the

propaganda was “why permit the Government to ship rice when we

are hungry?”

They asked what occurrences there had been in Iran to lead to the

conclusion in Washington of the rise of the Tudeh. I said that I did not

know but that certainly what occurred on July 21 might have had some

influence. They said that the Government could not fight on two fronts

at once, and was fighting now against the British and would against the

Tudeh as soon as it had eliminated the British influence, which was

being done through the plebiscite. They said that the Tudeh had

nothing to do with the result of the elections here; that, in fact, Tudeh

elements actually tried to thwart pro-Mossadegh votes, and that the

marchers to the polls were organized by pro-Mossadegh parties not in-

cluding the Tudehs.

In apparent utter sincerity they asked for advice on how to over-

come what they considered the false reporting that has led to the

change of attitude in the United States on the part of the highest offi-

cials. Dr. Akhavi suggested that special representatives of the President

or the Secretary should come to Iran and investigate the situation here

themselves and make reports.

Dr. Akhavi said that there was no desire to have any relations with

the neighbor to the north, including commercial relations, but that Iran

was being forced to deal with Russia by reason of the fact that the

United States and most of the free world would not buy its products.

He cited a public adjudication for the sale of their surplus wool which,

he said, resulted just this week in not a single bid. He said the sugar sit-

March–August 1953

uation was extremely difficult and in the end they might have to send

produce to Russia in exchange for sugar.

“What are we to do?” both Dr. Akhavi and Mr. Zanganeh repeat-

edly asked. I made no effort to respond.

“Where are the reports coming from that are misleading the offi-

cials in the United States?” they repeatedly asked. I made no effort to

respond.

“What can have led to the assumptions that the Government is

condoning Tudeh activities?” they asked. I said at that point that what

occurred on July 21 I knew had been a source of concern and that the

afternoon meeting had been seized upon by some for rather flagrant

anti-American and anti-Point 4 agitation. I said that difficulties in Is-

fahan with the Governor General were a source of great concern to me

and might be to others.

They asked me whether I thought Point 4 was being successful and

I said that I thought it was, that in every village I had been to, and they

are many, I had found the people earnestly appreciative and definitely

in support of the self-improvement programs.

My appraisal of this conference, which certainly was not sought by

me but which grew out of the evident and apparent deep concern of

these two high officials, is that they, at least, and probably many others

in the highest official circles of the present Government are deeply agi-

tated, puzzled and concerned by what they interpret as a sharp deterio-

ration in the relationships with the United States. They earnestly be-

lieve this has come about through false reporting and I cannot doubt

the sincerity of these two gentlemen in their assertions that there has

been no wooing of the Tudeh by the Mossadegh regime. They may not

know, but they think they do. Dr. Akhavi said if Point 4 should move

out, then Russia would move. Mr. Zanganeh said, very earnestly, that

is “what they want you to do” and that is why they cry “Yankee Go

Home.”

William E. Warne

259.

Draft National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, August 12, 1953.

SUBJECT

The Current Outlook in Iran (Staff Draft for Board Consideration)

The Problem

To re-assess the outlook in Iran in the light of developments since

publication of NIE–75/1, “Probable Future Developments in Iran

through 1953.”

Estimate

260.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

TEHE 686. 1. Al Homdulillah.

2. Late last night, accompanied by kisses (literally) from Iranian

source, we informed papers brought by [name not declassified]. They

now in possession Zahedi. Evidently pressure finally effective and we

feel much credit must go to [name not declassified]. Action scheduled

midnight tonight.

3. Earlier meeting with Zahedi showed him firm of purpose but in-

habiting dream world so far as his subsequent program concerned.

March–August 1953

261.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

333. Embassy received unconfirmed report from good source Shah

in dismissing Mosadeq issued royal decree appointing General Zahedi

Prime Minister. Reports also received Acting Minister Court Amini and

other court officials arrested this morning.

Up to 9: a.m. city appears calm, extra police on duty, with tanks

and truck loads security forces around royal palaces and Prime Min-

ister’s residence. Embassy eyewitness reports seeing orderly crowd ap-

proximately 200 proceeding toward Baharestan Square waving Iranian

flags.

Prime Minister’s office phoned Embassy 8: a.m. advising Em-

bassy and Point IV close as trouble expected. Appropriate instructions

issued.

Rumors now prevalent and received by varied Embassy sources to

effect alleged coup inspired by government. Reasoning behind this

general impression is this action necessary give Mosadeq excuse move

against Shah.

Mattison

Iran 1951–1953. Restricted; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London NIACT

and to Beirut NIACT for Ambassador Henderson. Received at 4: a.m.

262.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

337. Significance placed here upon fact Shojat, principal Tudeh

newspaper, only one to have account alleged coup d’e´tat this morning

and that same paper had proclaimed imminence coup since August 13.

Aside minor hint in Mard Asia, anti-Mosadeq paper, August 16,

that government apprehensive about coup, apparently only Commu-

nists had idea of purported coup.

Shojat on August 13 called upon government to forestall coup,

naming many alleged plotters in armed forces. On August 14 same

paper said certain army commanders in league with Shah and arrange-

ments coup all set. Claimed Kashani also in plot.

August 16 Shojat said Mosadeq tipped off to plot Friday afternoon

and plotters, learning this, later sent white flare into sky to notify con-

spirators delay action. “Coup was to come off last night. Following

meeting General Schwarzkopf and Shah August 9, necessary prepara-

tions made. Monday Shah left for Caspian and Colonel Nasari in ci-

vilian clothes held meetings in Tehran. Friday Colonel Nasari ordered

Imperial Guards hold selves readiness assignment.

“Plans called for mountain brigade of Colonel Montaz and units

armored brigade of Colonel Shahrokh to attack Tehran 1 a.m. Saturday.

Were to occupy government centers, radio station, arrest Prime Min-

ister, ministers. Execute some at once. Plot discovered, tipped off.

White flare sent up.

“American imperialists sent Schwarzkopf as spy to court after

Dulles and Eisenhower statements with instructions present gov-

ernment must be ousted by military action and replaced by gov-

ernment headed by men like Alayar Saleh, General Zahedi, Hakimi, Dr.

Amini.”

Mattison

Iran 1951–1953. Restricted. Repeated to London and to Beirut for Ambassador Hen-

derson. Received at 7: a.m.

March–August 1953

263.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, August 16, 1953.

TEHE 704. A. From Mattison.

264.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, August 16, 1953.

TEHE 707. Suggest pass [less than 1 line not declassified] soonest:

1. Request you inform Shah that U.S. Govt has taken following

steps to support him:

A. Arranged world press interview to establish fact Shah has acted

legally in interest his country.

B. Supported his new Prime Minister by bringing his credentials

(firmans) to attention of Iran and whole world.

C. Brought heavy pressure upon Chief of Staff Gen Riahi to arrest

Mossadeq.

D. Protected safety of Gen Zahedi.

E. Arranged to bring Shah’s case to country. Army is still his and

looking for his orders.

F. Religious leaders go to country tomorrow in Shah’s behalf.

G. Make it clear to country Shah forced by Mossadeq temporarily

to leave.

2. If Shah has not already done so desire he reaffirm Zahedi’s posi-

tion as acting constitutionally. Must save lives and inspire those who

now know first time what their King wants. Situation bad but may

improve.

3. Zahedi plans to issue appeal to country. He has not given up and

will do best carry out orders Shah. Great strength remains army and

church Zahedi now plans utilize.

End of message.

265.

Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency [text not

declassified]

Washington, August 16, 1953.

DIR 16044. Re: [less than 1 line not declassified] (CIA officer).

1. Request you report immediately info re: whereabouts Shah, fea-

sibility establishing covert contact; surveillance and protection by Iraq

Govt.

2. Send info copies all messages to STEHE and [less than 1 line not

declassified] (CIA officer) and use indicator.

March–August 1953

3. Above info should be acquired in such a way as not reveal our

intention contact Shah. Security of paramount importance as Iran situa-

tion most explosive. Do not make any effort to contact Shah.

End of message.

266.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

342. Late morning August 16, correspondents Donald Schwind,

Associated Press, and Kennett Love, New York Times, went to hills north

of Tehran at request son of General Zahedi for conference. Zahedi not

present, but son showed signed decree from Shah and gave photostats

of it to newsmen.

Decree, signed by Shah, dated Thursday, August 13, 1953, said:

“View of fact situation of nation necessitates appointment of an in-

formed and experienced man who can grasp affairs of country readily,

I therefore, with knowledge I have of your ability and merit, appoint

you with this letter Prime Minister. We give into your hands duty to

improve affairs of the nation and remove present crisis and raise living

standard of people.”

Zahedi’s son said father naturally in hiding; that coup not in-

tended; that Colonel Nasari went to Prime Minister’s home this

morning with soldiers to present this decree to Mosadeq and was ar-

rested by guards.

Translator US Embassy, well acquainted with Shah’s signature be-

cause previous employment, saw photostat and declared belief Shah’s

signature genuine.

Mattison

Iran 1951–1953. Restricted; NIACT. Repeated to London NIACT and to Beirut for Ambas-

sador Henderson. Received at 10 a.m.

267.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

with Chief of Staff Riahi lasting forty minutes.

McClure stated he gravely concerned at reports he received and

radio news broadcast re coup d’e´tat. Stated had information from Em-

bassy and other sources that Shah issued decree dismissing Mosadeq

and appointing new Prime Minister.

He also had information from Mohanna, Deputy Minister of De-

fense, that there was no such decree.

McClure stated his mission was accredited to legal and constitu-

tional government and that two conflicting reports of existence of

Shah’s decree made his official position an uncertain one in relation to

army.

Was army to support Shah and carry out his orders or support an

ousted Prime Minister (granting that decree was authentic)?

Riahi replied that mission relationship remained unchanged; that

few officers and civilians had attempted overthrow Mosadeq and had

not succeeded; that he knew of plot six hours beforehand and had

taken appropriate steps. He denied, without apparent conviction that a

decree had been authentically signed. He stated that Iran and its people

came before Shah or any particular government and that army was of

people. Army would support people. He said Iran had adopted policy

of long range benefit to its people; that Iran wanted and needed sympa-

thetic help of free world particularly US but that she would not deviate

from that policy even though it meant loss of aid and even friendship of

US. He repeated his desire for continued help.

McClure replied he did not know what our government’s policy

would be in support an illegal government if it were determined that

Shah had signed a decree setting up a new government.

Riahi stated cordial personal and official relationship between

them had been based on frank and honest expression of views and that

he hoped that relationship would continue. He added footnote that it

unfortunate that US had been taken in by British propaganda and poor

reporting; while blood ties of Britain and US caused close collaboration,

Iran 1951–1953. Secret; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London NIACT and to

Beirut for Ambassador Henderson. Sent with an instruction to pass to the Defense De-

partment. Received at 12: p.m.

268.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

348. Flight by Shah and uncertainty Zahedi actions presumably

leave Mosadeq victor in protracted and Persian-mannered campaign

eliminate Shah as political force in country. Embassy considers quite

possible Mosadeq may establish regency to provide needed interim be-

fore eventual proclamation Iranian republic.

Believe under circumstances and pending Department decisions

upon varied policy matters apparent as result new situation that Am-

bassador’s immediate return desirable. However, as situation may be

still fluid suggest Ambassador return prepared to continue be unwell

in order avoid any official interviews if situation warrants. Attitude,

statements and actions Mosadeq government in next few days likewise

will assist Department in determining lines to be followed.

Mattison

Repeated NIACT to London and to Beirut for Ambassador Henderson. Received at 1:09

p.m.

that day at 6 p.m. (Ibid.)

269.

Telegram From the Station in Iran [text not declassified]

Tehran, August 16, 1953.

TEHE 705. Foll is message Shah should broadcast ad infinitum,

by voice and recording. Suggest he be urged quickest do so in name

270.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, August 17, 1953.

aration by Batmangeliche and Zahedi.

B. Farzanegan was told night 14 August he was not Deputy Chief

Staff. Once Batmangeliche took over control of situation lost.

C. On 14 Aug 53 Zahedi (as recd) made decision to cut in Gen Daf-

tari on final plan to act. This may have been fatal. Riahi was informed

D. Riahi used 7 hours warning to advantage. By 2300 hours his

commanding officers Parsa, Momtaz, Ashrafi, Sharokh, and Novanry

were all on spot and waiting arrival Zahedi emissaries.

E. Despite that fact Momtaz, Sharokh, Kiani were arrested when

Col Nassiri went into action.

F. Belief that Mossadeq would not accept firman unless forcefully

presented to him proved by events. Nassiri was correct in going di-

rectly to Prime Minister with firman for that is normal channel. But

Nassiri walked into superior force and was arrested after notifying

Mossadeq servant he had personal message for Mossadeq. Firman dis-

missing Mossadeq now probably in Mossadeq’s hands.

G. Meantime Batmangeliche refused to attempt Chief of Staff’s of-

fice when he saw tanks and troops waiting for him at door. Without his

presence in Chief of Staff’s office command radio net could not be used.

H. Zahedi waited for 2 jeeps of troops to escort him to officers club

but of course troops firmly under Riahi’s commanders. Zahedi look for

escort then returned Farzanegan brothers house in Shimran at 0035

August.

I. Troops moving down at 0120 hours from Shimran to Teheran

sounded to Zahedi like Nassiri’s. Troops sent to arrest the alerted Riahi.

This sounded like plan being attempted despite now overwhelming

odds.

J. At that time Zahedi sent Navabi to reconnoitre. Navabi returned

0210 hours. Police and troops stopping all vehicles. Mossadeq’s house

protected from 1130 hours by infantry and tanks.

K. At 0230 hours Gen Guilanshah took Batmangelich on tour of

city. At 0309 hours Guilanshah reported to Zahedi that Nassiri had

been arrested at 1150 and obviously someone was a traitor.

L. Consensus was that Daftari had given game away.

271.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iraq to the Department of

State

92. For Under Secretary—No (repeat no) Distribution. Shah of Iran

expressed to Iraqi Government desire to meet me. In order to provide

Department with first hand account of recent Iranian events as Shah

sees them, and recalling his basic pro-western attitude and Depart-

ment’s policy of supporting him, I called quietly at 9: last evening at

Iraqi official guest house where he is staying. I found Shah worn from

three sleepless nights, puzzled by turn of events, but with no (repeat

no) bitterness toward Americans who had urged and planned action. I

suggested for his prestige in Iran he never indicate that any foreigner

had had a part in recent events. He agreed.

Shah stated that in recent weeks he had felt increasingly that he

would have to take action against Mosadeq as the latter became bolder

in flouting Iranian Constitution. Therefore, when a fortnight ago it was

cret; Security Information; Priority. Repeated to Tehran. Received at 7: a.m. This tele-

March–August 1953

suggested that he sponsor a military coup he accepted the idea. How-

ever, in giving it more thought he decided that such action as he took

must be within the framework of his constitutional power, hence, not

(repeat not) a coup. Thus, after consultation with an American, not (re-

peat not) an official of the State Department, decided to appoint Gen-

eral Zahedi as Prime Minister in place of Mosadeq. After being assured

that everything was arranged and that there was no (repeat no) possi-

bility of failure, he left Tehran for his Caspian Palace in order to put

Mosadeq off guard and from there three days ago sent letter of appoint-

ment of General Zahedi to Tehran with a trusted Iranian Colonel. The

letter was delivered to General Zahedi and he was to choose the timing

and method for informing Mosadeq. The Shah expected action would

take place that very day. But no (repeat no) action took place, appar-

ently because message arrived too late in day, and no (repeat no) action

took place the following day, apparently because it was a holiday. On

the third day Mosadeq by some means had been alerted and had had

the time to take successful countermeasures so that when the Colonel

arrived at Mosadeq’s house he was himself arrested.

This morning the Shah left his Caspian Palace in a Beechcraft with

a pilot, one Palace official and his Queen and landed in Baghdad at

Shah called upon King Faisal and King Faisal returned the call, offering

hospitality, but lacking the supporting presence of his uncle who is in

Cairo, seemed somewhat overpowered by events.

The Shah said that he will have to issue a statement very soon and

possibly tomorrow. He needs, however, to be informed of the situation

in Tehran and to have advice from his American friend. He will try to

hold off giving out a statement until he gets advice, but the pressure to

issue is great and mounting. He is thinking of saying in his statement

that three days ago he dismissed Prime Minister Mosadeq and ap-

pointed General Zahedi as Prime Minister, taking his action because

Mosadeq had continually violated the constitution. As he himself had

sworn, upon ascending the throne, to respect and uphold the constitu-

tion, he had no (repeat no) choice, but to remove the Prime Minister of a

government acting unconstitutionally. When it was apparent that his

orders were not (repeat not) being followed, he left the country to pre-

vent bloodshed and further damage. He is ready to return when he can

serve the Iranian people and in the meantime prays for the independ-

ence and safety of Iran and that all true Iranians will never allow their

country to fall under the control of the illegal Tudeh Party.

The Shah said that he is utterly at loss to understand why the plan

failed. Trusted Palace officials were completely sure of its succeeding.

The American friend was absolutely confident of its success. When he

had said to the American if it should fail what should he do, the Amer-

272.

Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency [text not

declassified]

Washington, August 17, 1953.

view extra sensitivity this matter we have been requested by State to

convey [1½ lines not declassified].

March–August 1953

2. State considers your handling of situation exemplary under cir-

cumstances and requests that if in your judgment the situation permits

you should contact Shah again at earliest opportunity and suggest to

him that he issue clear and definitive statement explaining his actions

and

the

along lines of his statement to you yesterday,

viz: “In recent weeks Shah had felt increasingly that he would have to

take action against Mossadeq as the latter became bolder in flouting the

constitution. Therefore he decided to take action within the framework

of his constitutional power

taken not in any sense a coup

d’e´tat. He decided to appoint Zahedi in place of Mossadeq. Three days

ago he sent letter of appointment to Zahedi to capital city with a trusted

emissary. The letter was delivered to Zahedi which empowered him to

take office. When the messenger arrived at Mossadeq’s house to deliver

Shah’s communication he was arrested while trying to carry out Shah’s

order. Shah took this action dismissing Mossadeq and appointing

Zahedi in his place because Mossadeq had continually violated the con-

stitution and because Shah himself had sworn upon ascending the

throne to respect and uphold the constitution. Shah had no choice but

to remove the head of a government acting unconstitutionally. When it

became apparent that Shah’s orders were not being followed he left the

country but he stands ready to return when he can to serve the people

and in the meantime prays for the independence and safety of the

country and that all the patriots will never allow their country to fall

under the control of the illegal identity E. Finally Shah might usefully

give public expression to his view that Mossadeq thinks that he can

form a partnership with Tudeh Party and then outwit it, but in so doing

Mossadeq will become the Doctor Benes of the country.

3. For your information State has seen Arab news agency report of

Shah’s statements which considered helpful but deficient in many re-

spects and inferior to summary statements summarized by you. His

statement intention move to Europe in near future is unfortunate as re-

vealing lack seriousness of purpose.

4. For your further guidance State unwilling in absence of more

hopeful indications as to possible results to authorize you to press Shah

issue an appeal to the army to rise. Shah has not said anything on his

own initiative this regard and State does not wish assume responsi-

bility for urging upon Shah course of action which might well prove

useless and even reckless.

5. For guidance [less than 1 line not declassified] you are not to take

any action with respect to Shah without specific authorization HQS.

Please lend all possible support and assistance to Berry particularly

with respect to prompt servicing his communications.

7. Explanation genesis of above follows immediately.

End of message.

request be sent to Ambassador Berry in Baghdad: “I urge you to send strongly worded

message encouragement to the Shah of Iran who is now in Baghdad. According my infor-

mation he has latent support majority of Iranian population including its most eminent

clerics, including, of course, Borujerdi. However his presence needed Iran to successfully

rally populace against tyranny of Mossadeq. In exercising his constitutional prerogatives

of dismissing one Prime Minister and appointing another he has placed himself in posi-

tion having fight to finish. Please have my personal assurances that he issued firman for

dismissal of Mossadeq and appointment Zahedi. It is my belief that a word from one so

renowned as yourself will encourage Shah return to his country and carry on struggle

which rapidly becoming symbol constitution vs. unconstitutional methods.” (Central In-

telligence Agency. Transcribed specifically for the Foreign Relations series from microfilm

in the Central Intelligence Agency that no longer exists. See “Sources” chapter.)

273.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, August 17, 1953.

TEHE 717. 1. While initial attempt failed several significant facts

remain:

A. Firmans established new govt and dismissed old. They are in ef-

fect. Mossadeq has actually conducted a revolution. Legally Ambas-

sador is not accredited to him but to Shah who has dismissed him.

B. Economic situation will continue to worsen.

C. Mossadeq strengthened at moment. Period probably last two

months.

D. Army still basically Shah.

E. Tudeh will occupy more important position than ever.

F. Impossible to woo Mossadeq toward U.S. COL will remain in

ground and Tudeh will thrive.

March–August 1953

G. Army will be in turmoil. Riahi will attempt throw out all pos-

sible rivals. Army will steadily resent constant reshuffling which now

greatly intensified.

H. Religious leaders now desperate. Will attempt anything. Will

try save Islam and Shah of Iran.

I. People apathetic toward Mossadeq call for mob reaction. Fear

loss of Shah and Tudeh takeover.

274.

Memorandum Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, August 17, 1953.

Messages need to be sent to the following places and persons con-

taining in each case the various points indicated:

a. A message via [less than 1 line not declassified] to Burton Berry in

Baghdad providing State Department guidance to him along agreed

lines [1½ lines not declassified]. This message should indicate that the De-

partment considers that he handled situation in exemplary fashion

under the circumstances and should make it clear that at least for the

present, and in absence of any satisfactory indications of possible

success, the U.S. wishes to avoid assuming responsibility for urging

statements upon the Shah beyond what he himself has indicated his

disposition to be. This message might be from Whiting to Berry. We

should indicate that State has seen the Arab News Agency report on the

Shah’s statement which is considered helpful but deficient in many re-

spects—e.g., it is not nearly as good or as full as his oral statements to

Berry. Also, his statement of intention to take off for Europe in the near

future is regarded as unfortunate.

b. [2 lines not declassified] The message to Berry will be [1½ lines not

declassified] that Berry will handle any contact with the Shah.

c. The substance of the message to Berry, including the text of the

statement (to be drawn from Berry’s cable as indicated by under-

scoring), should be repeated to Roosevelt together with the additional

explanation that State has gone part of the way in the direction appar-

ently desired by Roosevelt but has been unwilling to authorize Berry to

press the Shah to make an appeal to the armed services of Iran to arise

in support of him—as a matter of U.S. initiative. In this regard, the De-

partment feels that, lacking more satisfactory indications than it has

been able to draw from Roosevelt’s messages, that there is a real and

significant possibility of decisive action in Iran, the Department does

not wish to become associated with a reckless backing of a hopeless

cause. The possibility of a more affirmative State Department position

in this regard would depend upon Roosevelt’s ability to provide more

satisfactory evidence of the possibility of significant resistance. (State is

not sure whether Roosevelt’s language intended to buck up Shah or

whether all of it is really meant at full strength.) Reference should also

TPAJAX. Secret; Eyes Only.

275.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,

Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, August 17, 1953.

SUBJECT

The Iranian Situation

1. The unsuccessful attempt to remove Mossadeq from power this

weekend, culminating in the flight of the Shah to Iraq, greatly advances

the progressive deterioration of political stability in Iran.

2. On the one hand, Mossadeq’s numerous non-Communist oppo-

nents have been dealt an almost crippling blow and may never again be

in a position to make a serious attempt to overthrow him. The chief

figures in the attempt to oust Mossadeq are already in jail or in hiding,

thus at least temporarily eliminating or neutralizing the most vigorous

Staff Memoranda—1953 Substantive. Secret; Security Information.

of these opponents. Even more important, the Shah’s flight—a move

which may well be followed by the appointment of a regency council

and may even lead to designation of a new Shah or abolition of the

monarchy—greatly weakens the ability of Mossadeq’s opponents to

combine against him in the future. The withdrawal of the Shah from

Iranian soil not only deprives the opposition of a central figure about

which it could rally but also eliminates virtually all hope that the con-

siderable prestige and authority of the monarchy could be used to se-

cure the necessary cooperation of the security forces and reassure the

public in any future effort to oust Mossadeq. Except in the unlikely

event that a strong and resolute opposition majority develops in some

future Majlis, any future attempt to unseat Mossadeq will necessarily

be an out-and-out coup, without legal sanction.

3. On the other hand, Mossadeq’s position will remain basically

precarious, despite the temporary advantages which he will obtain

from the failure of the attempt to unseat him and from the repressive

measures he is likely to undertake to consolidate his victory. The events

of the weekend are unlikely to provoke any great revival of enthusiasm

for Mossadeq himself, and in any event his probable continued failure

to solve the basic economic and social problems facing Iran will result

in a slow but steady drain on his popular support. While Mossadeq will

probably make greater use of authoritarian methods, he shows little

promise of being able to eliminate all opposition. If Mossadeq goes

through with new Majlis elections, as appears likely, his prestige plus

his ability to rig the balloting will probably enable him to obtain a ma-

jority. However, he is likely to be little more successful than in the past

in finding men who will stand by him once they are elected.

4. Thus the ultimate beneficiary of the failure to unseat Mossadeq

is most likely to be the Tudeh Party which has regarded the neutraliza-

tion of the “counterrevolutionary” forces around the Shah as a primary

objective and which has also capitalized on the widening popular un-

rest and insecurity which has been developing under Mossadeq. Al-

though Mossadeq’s reassertion of his authority makes it less likely that

he will have to make important concessions to Tudeh to stay in office,

Tudeh is not yet ready to seize control and will probably feel compelled

to confine itself to pressure group tactics for the next few months. Nev-

ertheless, Tudeh is at present the only remaining major contender for

Mossadeq’s power, and as the deterioration of the political and eco-

nomic situation in Iran progresses its capabilities for an eventual show-

down with Mossadeq will continue to grow. In the event of Mossadeq’s

death, Tudeh might well be able to capitalize on the confusion which

would probably result and to gain control at least in Tehran.

5. Mossadeq’s innate suspiciousness, which has probably been re-

inforced by the events of the weekend, may lead him to link the attempt

March–August 1953

to unseat him with the recent hardening of US policy toward him and

to represent the attempt as an “imperialist” plot engineered by the US

and UK. Even if Mossadeq convinces himself that the US is involved,

however, we believe that he is likely to stop short of provoking an open

break with the US. He will probably still feel the need of the US as a

counterweight to the USSR, with which an attempt to settle out-

standing problems is now under way. Moreover, he has long believed

that if he held on long enough and thus proved that he was the man to

deal with, fear of Communism would eventually force the US to come

to his help. With his control newly reconfirmed and the opposition seri-

ously weakened, Mossadeq probably believes that this concept is more

valid than ever. Although he will probably criticize and seek to em-

barrass the US, his main object will probably be that of forcing the US to

assist him on his terms.

276.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

TEHE 724. Source [less than 1 line not declassified].

1. At extraordinary party contact evening 16 August Tudeh issued

foll instruction:

A. Members possessing firearms must inform party. Also anyone

knowing where firearms can be bought must report. If necessary party

will get arms by disarming police.

B. All members who have completed military service must inform

party.

C. All members having houses with direct access to streets must

report.

D. Party needs all money members can give. Personal possessions

must be sold if necessary to get money.

E. Now is sensitive and critical time for party. Time for talking has

ended. Party must be prepared to act.

F. Foregoing instructions must be regarded as most secret.

2. Wash only: [less than 1 line not declassified].

End of message.

277.

Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency [text not

declassified]

Washington, August 18, 1953.

DIR 16225. 1. The following represents instructions from State with

which we concur.

2. [less than 1 line not declassified] officer should take up directly and

personally with Ambassador the subject matter of this message.

3. Ambassador should know that DCI requests her to determine

soonest the securest and least ostentatious means of establishing con-

tact with Shah now in Rome, for purpose of urging him to issue clear

and definitive public statement explaining his actions and reasons

along lines similar his conversation with U.S. Ambassador to Iraq,

278.

Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency to the

Station in Iran

Washington, August 18, 1953.

1. In view Ambassador Henderson’s return and in light of indica-

tions contained in ref, State Dept and ourselves most anxious receive

benefit your views after full discussion which we assume already

taking place between you and Ambassador Henderson.

2. State Dept has indicated following tentative stand:

This view on basis evidence available to it is that operation has

been tried and failed and we should not participate in any operation

against Mossadegh which could be traced back to US and further com-

promise future relations with him which may become only course of

action left open to US.

3. British position which we understand should shortly reach you

in more detail via CIA official summarized below:

We must regret we cannot consider going on fighting with pros-

pects as stated by US official (“operation not quite dead”) and with no

fresh supporting evidence.

4. In view foregoing and in absence strong contrary recommenda-

tions from you and Ambassador Henderson, operations against Mos-

sadegh should be discontinued.

5. Questions re details liquidation, possible future action and ful-

fillment commitments will follow your answer to this message. One

such question which you might be able answer soon is: What kind of

activity do you consider essential to protection of security of preceding

actions, including key personalities having knowledge of most details,

and also for preservation of such assets as can be saved for future use.

End of message.

279.

Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of

State

571. Shah arrived Rome early this afternoon (reference Baghdad’s

bassy following on what it believes exclusive interview with Shah:

Asked about Iranian Foreign Minister’s demand that he abdicate,

he said “I am not (repeat not) going to abdicate now”; asked if he had

fled, he said “It is not (repeat not) true—I have not (repeat not) fled

from my country”; asked if he would return, he said “Probably, but not

(repeat not) in immediate future”; Shah added he and Queen had not

dential; Security Information; Priority. Repeated Priority to Tehran and Baghdad. Re-

ceived at 6: p.m.

280.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

384. 1. My talk with Mosadeq this evening lasted one hour. He re-

ceived me fully dressed (not pajama clad) as though for ceremonial oc-

casion. He was as usual courteous but I could detect in attitude certain

amount smoldering resentment. Usual exchange amenities after which

I expressed sorrow at chain events since my departure over two

months ago, adding I sorry see Iran apparently even worse off politic-

ally and economically than it was then. He acknowledged my state-

ment with sarcastic smile and there lull in conversation.

2. I remarked I particularly concerned increasing number attacks

on American citizens. After Shiraz incident he had issued instructions

to law enforcement agencies which had afforded high degree protec-

tion to American nationals. Unfortunately law enforcement agencies

appeared again to be becoming lax. Every hour or two I receiving addi-

Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 6: p.m. Also printed in

tional reports attacks on American citizens not only in Tehran but also

other localities.

3. He said these attacks almost inevitable. Iranian people thought

Americans were disagreeing with them and, therefore, were attacking

Americans. I said disagreements no reason for attacks. He replied Iran

in throes revolution and in revolutionary stress and strain it would re-

quire three times as many police as exist to afford full protection to

American citizens. I should remember that in American Revolutionary

times when Americans wanted British out, many Britishers in US were

attacked. I said if Iranians wanted Americans out individual attacks not

necessary. We would go en masse. He said Iranian Government did not

want Americans leave but some individual Iranians did and, therefore,

were attacking them. I replied Chiefs of American military mission,

American gendarme´rie mission, and TCI had informed me today that

Iranian officials with whom they dealt had assured them they were

anxious that these missions continue to function in Iran. These missions

could be assured of maximum cooperation from Iranian authorities.

These chiefs had also told me that at no time had they been receiving

more full and effective cooperation from Iranian authorities than at

present. I had refrained from informing Washington of this situation

until I could talk with him. I wanted to know what his present attitude

was re these American aid missions and also re giving adequate protec-

tion to members these missions. It did not make sense for certain Ira-

nian authorities to insist that these missions remain in Iran while

members of these missions were subject to insults and attacks from

gangs of hoodlums.

4. Prime Minister said he sure law enforcement agencies doing all

possible give protection. I disagreed and read to him excerpts various

memoranda which I had received from members American aid mis-

sions during course of day, some of which indicated that police were

passive while they were being attacked. He said he wished assure me

that he desired aid missions to stay. He thought they were performing

valuable services and would look further into matter protection of their

members.

5. After another lull I told him I would be grateful if he would tell

me confidentially for use my government, just what had happened

during recent days. US Government interested with respect both

events and legal situation. He chose interpret my remarks as reference

to President’s letter to him last July. He reminded me that we had had

agreement to effect existence these letters would be confidential and ex-

change would not be published unless US reply would be favorable.

March–August 1953

He maintained American officials either in Washington or in Tehran

had directly or indirectly deliberately leaked information to pro-British

Iranian press re this exchange and against his will US had insisted on

publishing notes. He said he had actually never consented to their pub-

lication and was astonished receive letter from Embassy expressing ap-

preciation his willingness that exchange be published. When he saw US

Government was determined to publish, he had finally insisted pre-

vious messages exchanged last January between him and President-

elect be also published. I told him it had been my understanding leak

had occurred in his office and in view distorted public version of Presi-

dent’s letter unfavorable to US, US Government had thereupon insisted

exchange be published. He denied heatedly Iranians had been guilty of

leaks. No Iranian except himself and Saleh, US Embassy Iranian as-

sistant and interpretor, had been aware of existence these letters. He

had kept them among his own private papers, not in office files. I inti-

mated I not sure his private papers were kept in manner which would

prevent clever agents having access to them. I also pointed out there

were certain modern hearing devices which might result in knowledge

this kind falling into possession of agents parties hostile both to Iran

and US. He continued insist certain Americans had deliberately leaked

in order that public knowledge of contents of President’s letter might

weaken his government. I told him that I knew that exchange had been

handled in US and Tehran in most discreet manner by trusted officials

and I sure no US leak.

6. Mosadeq then outlined events which led to dissolution Majlis.

His narrative in general in line with information already furnished De-

partment by Embassy. He maintained however that 30 members Majlis

had been bought outright by British. Only 40 votes had not been

bought. Ten of these 40 votes could easily have been purchased for

100,000 tomans and when he learned that negotiations were in progress

to complete such purchasing operation he decided that British pur-

chased Majlis was unworthy of Iranian people and should be elimi-

nated. He asked me if I had any comments to make regarding his disso-

lution Majlis.

7. I reminded him he inviting me comment on Iran internal affairs.

I realized it not usual for comments of this kind to be offered by foreign

diplomat. Nevertheless he would recall that during some of our past

conversations I had overcome my scruples in this respect. I said only

comment which I wished to offer at this point was that it seemed to me

unfortunate for Iran and no compliment Iranian people that gov-

ernment of Iran apparently could not be based on a Parliament. Iran

was in most dangerous international position and I thought it would be

more secure if all organs provided for in Iranian constitution could be

functioning with at least certain degree of harmony.

8. I told him I particularly interested in events recent days. I would

like to know more about effort replace him by General Zahedi. He said

on evening of 15th Col. Nasiri had approached his house apparently to

arrest him. Col. Nasiri himself, however, had been arrested and

number other arrests followed. He had taken oath not try to oust Shah

and would have lived up this oath if Shah had not engaged in venture

this kind. Clear Nasiri had been sent by Shah arrest him and Shah had

been prompted by British.

9. I asked Mosadeq if he had reason believe it true Shah had issued

firman (decree) removing him as Prime Minister and appointing

Zahedi in his place. Mosadeq said he had never seen such decree and if

he had it would have made no (repeat no) difference. His position for

some time had been that Shah’s powers were only of ceremonial char-

acter; that Shah had no (repeat no) right on his personal responsibility

issue firman calling for change in government. I said I particularly in-

terested in this point, and I would like to report it carefully to United

States Government. Was I to understand (a) he had no (repeat no) offi-

cial knowledge that Shah had issued firman removing him as Prime

Minister, and (b) even if he should find that Shah had issued such

firman in present circumstances he would consider it to be invalid? He

replied “precisely”.

10. Before departing I told Mosadeq that during 24 hours since my

return Tehran, members American official family here had received in-

timations from various Iranian authorities which caused me believe

some Iranian officials suspected Embassy harboring Iranian political

refugees. I would like tell him point blank this untrue. My present

policy in this respect was as follows: (a) if political refugees should en-

deavor to enter Embassy, efforts would be made to stop them; (b) if

they should succeed in entering compound, efforts would be made to

persuade them to leave voluntarily; (c) if they should refuse to leave

voluntarily, it my intention to notify Iranian authorities that persons

had taken refuge in Embassy and that I was telegraphing my gov-

ernment for instructions.

11. Mosadeq thanked me for my statement and said he would like

add statement of his own. In case any Iranian political fugitives would

take refuge in Embassy, he would like Embassy keep them there. I

asked if in such event Iranian Government prepared defray expenses

for lodging and food or whether he would expect this to come out of

Point IV funds. He said Iranian Government would be glad, despite

limited budget, pay expenses those refugees.

Henderson

281.

Memorandum for the Record

Tehran, August 19, 1953.

Ambassador Henderson saw Prime Minister Mossedeq by ap-

pointment for an hour yesterday evening. He reported that Mossedeq

was as usual courteous but the Ambassador detected in his attitude a

certain amount of smoldering resentment.

The Ambassador told Mossedeq that he was particularly con-

cerned at the laxity of the Iranian law enforcement agencies in permit-

ting the increasing number of attacks on American citizens both in

Tehran and other localities. Dr. Mossedeq replied that these attacks

were almost inevitable as the Iranian people thought the Americans

were disagreeing with them. The Ambassador replied that disagree-

ments were no reason for attacks, and that if the Iranians really wanted

the Americans out individual attacks were not necessary, as the Amer-

icans would go en masse. After stating that the law enforcement

agencies were doing everything possible to give Americans protection,

the Prime Minister assured Ambassador Henderson that he wanted the

Aid Missions to remain in Iran. He thought they were performing valu-

able services and said he would look further into the matter of the pro-

tection of members of the Missions.

Mossedeq then outlined events which led to the departure of the

Majlis along much the same lines as reported in previous telegrams. He

did maintain, however, that certain members of the Majlis had been

bought outright by the British. He said only 40 votes had not been

tomans. When he learned that the negotiations were progressing to

complete the purchasing operation, he decided that a British-

purchased Majlis was unworthy of the Iranian people and should be

eliminated. Mossedeq then asked for Henderson’s comments con-

cerning the dissolution of the Majlis. Henderson replied that although

he was reluctant as a foreign diplomat to comment on Iranian internal

affaires, it did seem to him unfortunate for Iran and no [comfort(?)] to

the Iranian people that the Government of Iran apparently could not be

based on a Parliament. Iran was in a most dangerous international po-

sition and Ambassador Henderson thought that it would be much

The memorandum is attached to a covering note from R.J. Bowker, a Foreign Office offi-

cial, indicating that the memorandum was handed to him by Joseph Palmer of the U.S.

Embassy in London.

the conversation is “compliment.”

more secure if all organs provided for in the Iranian constitution func-

tions with at least a certain degree of harmony.

As to the events of recent days, Mossedeq explained that on the

evening of August 15, Colonel Nasiri had approached his house with

the apparent intention of arresting him. Colonel Nasiri himself, how-

ever, had been arrested and a number of other arrests followed. The

Prime Minister said he had sworn not to try to oust the Shah and that he

would have honored this oath had the Shah not engaged in a venture of

this kind. It was clear that Colonel Nasiri had been sent by the Shah to

arrest him and that the Shah had been prompted by the British.

In reply to a question by Ambassador Henderson as to whether he

had reason to believe that it is true that the Shah had expected a firman

removing Mossedeq and appointing General Zahedi as Prime Minister,

Dr. Mossedeq said that he had never seen such a firman and that if he

had, it would have made no difference. His position for some time had

been that the Shah’s powers were of a ceremonial nature and that the

Shah had no right on his personal responsibility to issue a firman

calling for a change in government. When Ambassador Henderson

pointed out that he was particularly interested in this point and that he

would like to report it carefully to the United States Government, Mos-

sedeq affirmed that: (a) he had no official knowledge that the Shah had

issued a firman removing him as Prime Minister, and (b) even if he

should find that the Shah had issued such a firman, he would consider

it invalid in present circumstances.

Ambassador Henderson reported that Mossedeq appeared in a

much better frame of mind at the end of the talk but that nevertheless,

from his unusual reserve, the Ambassador was inclined to believe that

Mossedeq was suspicious that the United States Government or at least

United States officials were either implicated in the effort to oust him or

were sympathetically aware of such an effort in advance. His remarks

were interspersed with a number of little jibes which although

semi-jocular in character were nonetheless barbed. In general the jibes

hinted that the United States was conniving with the British to remove

him as Prime Minister.

Ambassador Henderson requested that the above be treated as

highly classified information.

282.

Memorandum for the Record by the Deputy Director for

Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner)

Washington, August 19, 1953.

SUBJECT

Conversation with Governor Stassen August 19, 1953, concerning FOA support

for Zahedi regime

1. Colonel White and the undersigned called upon Governor

Stassen at his office this afternoon in order to follow up on earlier con-

versations between Governor Stassen and the Director in which Gov-

ernor Stassen had indicated that his agency would be in a position to

move promptly to the support of the new regime with new or stepped-

up programs of economic assistance. (I had learned from General Smith

just prior to the meeting with Governor Stassen that the two of them

had discussed this matter at some length and were in agreement that

FOA should move in with substantial economic assistance at the right

moment.)

2. I explained the current situation to Governor Stassen, who ap-

peared to be fully aware and appreciative of the significance of the

entire matter. He approved of our sending to the Embassy by our com-

munications a statement confirming the readiness of FOA to give im-

mediate and favorable consideration to new programs of financial and

economic assistance and requesting advice as to the types and kinds of

programs most urgently needed and best calculated to have the desired

effect. He enlarged upon this with a recommendation to the effect that

the most appropriate way of launching this aspect of the matter would

be for the Embassy to suggest to Prime Minister Zahedi and/or the

Shah that he (they) should address a communication to the President

requesting economic aid. Governor Stassen said that it would look very

strange and would not be at all appropriate for the US Government to

rush forward with a volunteering of aid and that it would be such more

logical and reasonable for the President to reply to an appropriate re-

quest. The Embassy should make sure that the request is couched in the

proper language which should be somewhat as follows:

Iran 1951–1953. Secret; Security Information.

The Prime Minister should state that Iran has been through a most

difficult and exhausting period of economic and financial chaos; that

the new government has definite plans and programs for the financial

and economic rehabilitation of the country and proposes to move as

rapidly as possible to get the country on a sound footing; but that there

is the greatest need for immediate assistance to tide the country over

during the short-range period and also to enable the programs of agri-

cultural and economic improvement, that the new administration has

in mind, to be launched.

The President could reply to such a request stating that he was

most sympathetic to the trials and problems of the country of Iran and

its people, that he had taken note of the determination of the new gov-

ernment to do everything within its own possibilities to help itself, and

that he understood the need for immediate assistance to tide over, etc.

He could also say that accordingly he had directed the Foreign Opera-

tions Administration to proceed immediately with the development of

appropriate programs of support.

3. Governor Stassen thought that we should get off this additional

guidance to the field in very short order, but he wished to have us

check it with General Smith before doing so. He was particularly

anxious to be sure that General Smith would approve of this approach,

as being the right one.

4. Governor Stassen also recommended that the Ambassador take

up this matter at the earliest feasible moment with Mr. Warne and ob-

tain his assistance and guidance. He explained that Mr. Warne is a very

able and energetic representative of FOA who should be brought into

the act and who should be able to make a substantial contribution—

and also since Mr. Warne will have to assume responsibility for the ad-

ministration of any new programs that may be developed.

5. I pointed out to Governor Stassen the fact that our repre-

sentatives had put us on notice of the fact that Zahedi’s appreciation of

the financial situation was unrealistic and that he had some very fan-

ciful notions concerning the feasibility of certain programs for social

and economic betterment. Our information further indicated that

Zahedi would require some very firm and realistic guidance, and that

he had been warned against making impossible promises in his early

speeches. (I showed Governor Stassen the reports of the early speeches

which indicate that Zahedi has not been too mindful of this advice to

date.)

6. Concerning the possibility of our receiving help from FOA on

the $5 million immediate requirement, Governor Stassen said that he

did not think that FOA could very easily do this. He did not believe that

it was appropriate for him to provide cash to us for secret payments,

and he said that he thought this was “exactly the kind of thing we (CIA)

have our reserves for—and that we (CIA) should draw upon our re-

283.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, August 20, 1953, noon.

419. 1. Too early as yet to furnish precise detailed report of events

last 36 hours. Nevertheless we shall attempt herein give preliminary

outline assessing flow of events in light such knowledge at present

available to us.

dential; Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London, Rome, Dhahran, and

2. Evening August 18 break appeared to take place between

Communist-controlled Tudeh and

Mosadeq

regime.

Apparently

Tudeh partisans began demonstrating on streets without having ob-

tained usual appropriate clearance from Mosadeq and engaged in acts

violence. Mosadeq ordered streets cleared and cessation of demonstra-

tions. For first time in several months serious fighting took place be-

tween security forces and Tudeh.

3. Morning August 19 supporters Shah had arranged pro-Shah

demonstration for purpose of showing sentiment continued exist in

country for him. This demonstration began in small way in bazaar area

but initial small flame found amazingly large amount combustible ma-

terial and was soon roaring blaze which during course of day swept

through entire city. Security forces sent to put down demonstration re-

fused to resort to violence against crowds some joining demonstrators

and others remaining passive. As crowds increased in volume in

various parts city they destroyed offices of those newspapers which

during recent days had been most scurrilous in their attacks on Shah in-

cluding most violently pro-government and pro-Communist organs.

One of first strategic points seized was Office of Posts and Telegrams

which was used in sending messages to stir up whole country. From

center city huge crowds commandeered vehicles of all kinds and

rushed northward engulfing Tehran Radio station. Members of Em-

bassy had good opportunity observe character these crowds at this

time. They were primarily civilians interspersed with members secu-

rity forces some of whom bore arms. Crowds however appeared to be

led and directed by civilians rather than military. Participants not of

hoodlum type customarily predominant in recent demonstrations in

Tehran. They seemed to come from all classes of people including

workers, clerks, shopkeepers, students, et cetera. Crowds seemed to be

imbued with strange mixture resolution and gaiety. Holiday mood

which seemed to prevail did not prevent execution of grim missions

which on at least two occasions resulted in loss life. Defenders radio

station failed to put it out commission. By early afternoon it was effec-

tive means of maintaining high morale of demonstrators and of trans-

forming their enthusiasm.

4. In early part of day attacks made by demonstrators against

house Prime Minister and against General Staff were repulsed with

some loss life. Later in day, however, despite resistance defenders

Prime Minister’s house overrun and gutted. Apparently he had in

meantime, escaped and gone into hiding. Shortly before night-fall Gen-

eral Staff offices fell into possession Zahedi Government and General

Batmanqilich assumed his duties as Chief of Staff. Almost simulta-

neously General Zahedi occupied desk in Prime Minister’s office which

had not been used by Mosadeq.

March–August 1953

5. Considerable concern up to night-fall regarding what attitude

commanders of military units in suburbs Tehran might take. Some fear

lest under orders General Riahi Mosadeq’s Chief of Staff they would

descend on city during night and retake it on behalf Mosadeq. Also

rumors afloat that Tudeh was preparing “show its hand” after public

enthusiasm pro-Shah crowds had worn itself out and they had dis-

persed. When, however, Batmanqilich assumed duties Chief of Staff it

would, seem all army units in vicinity Tehran automatically began

taking orders from him. It then became possibile for orders to be issued

clearing streets and proclamation 8 o’clock curfew. Since 8 p.m. last

evening strict law and order has prevailed. Plans to arrest prominent

members Tudeh party early this morning seem to have failed as result

of inefficiency of police. Tudeh reputed to be gathering for counterat-

tack this morning. Security forces being assembled to thwart this

counter move. Outcome this struggle extremely important for security

city and future Iran.

6. At this moment no reliable news from provinces. Unconfirmed

reports, however, would indicate most of Iran at present under control

of forces new government. According one report some resistance Is-

fahan. More information this respect will be included in subsequent

factual telegrams.

7. Not only members Mosadeq regime but also pro-Shah sup-

porters amazed at latter’s comparatively speedy and easy initial victory

which was achieved with high degree spontaneity. Among factors be-

lieved responsible for this are following:

A. Iranian people of all classes were disgusted at bad taste exhib-

ited by anti-Shah elements supporting Mosadeq. For instance, they

were outraged when gangs of hooligans bearing red flags and chanting

Commie songs began tearing down statues of Shah and father,

breaking into houses and shops for purpose destroying Shah’s pictures,

etc. They were repelled by vituperative language employed by Foreign

Minister Fatemi and by Iranian newspaper editors in attacking Shah.

B. Iranian people of all classes in general also worried by what

seemed to be at least temporary alliance between Mosadeq and Tudeh.

They were alarmed at seeing thousands of Tudeh demonstrators whom

they regard as agents Soviet Union marching openly arm-in-arm

through streets denouncing Shah and Western countries particularly

US. Tudeh clearly overplayed hand by causing Iranian people believe

latter had to choose between Mosadeq and Soviet Union on one hand

and Shah and Western world on other.

C. Iranian people had become thoroughly tired of stresses and

strains of last two years. They yearned for period of quietness which

would give them chance to improve their economic and social status.

Many had lost hope of improving their conditions under Mosadeq.

D. Rupture which had taken place between Mosadeq regime and

Tudeh on evening August 18 prevented effective cooperation on

morning August 19 between these two anti-Shah forces in facing

pro-Shah demonstrators. Tudeh was conspicuously absent all day. It

possible that Tudeh leaders were sure that during course of day they

would be called upon by Mosadeq regime come to its assistance. How-

ever, once demonstrations got underway Mosadeq regime not in posi-

tion ask for such help.

E. Most armed forces and great numbers Iranian civilians inher-

ently loyal to Shah whom they have been taught to believe is symbol of

national unity as well as of stability of country. Army in particular ex-

tremely friendly US partly as result fear of strong northern neighbor

and partly because of appreciation of US military aid during recent

years. TCI aid also has made many friends for US among Iranian ci-

vilians. Many military persons and civilians had become convinced

that Mosadeq’s policies prevented close American-Iranian cooperation

and that only under Shah’s leadership could that cooperation be

maintained.

8. As already pointed out crowds although intensely savage at

times were generally in holiday mood. No hostility manifested towards

foreigners with exception of minor demonstrations in front of Soviet

Embassy and reported destruction Soviet Information Bureau. No

shouts of “Yankee go home” no Americans stoned. Point Four Tehran

Regional Officer (not General Office) near Mosadeq’s house at which

he had taken temporary refuge during demonstrations February 28

damaged by crowd under mistaken impression he might again be

hiding there. So far as can be ascertained no Americans or other for-

eigners injured yesterday. Crowds insisted all autos turn on headlights

as symbol support for Shah and that they display picture Shah. Naval

Attache´’s car stopped by crowds which demanded he display Shah’s

picture. When he placed on windshield bank note containing Shah’s

picture crowds applauded and laughed.

Henderson

Rome to share the contents of telegram 419 from Tehran with the Shah. (National Ar-

March–August 1953

284.

Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency [text not

declassified]

Washington, August 19, 1953.

DIR 16330. 1. New State instruction follows. (These instructions

should be carried out by Ambassador Baghdad in event Shah leaves

Rome for Baghdad.)

A. Discreet contact should be established with

of the

or designate.

B. Shah should be urged strongly to make or reiterate public state-

ments thanking people for spontaneous uprising in his support and

calling on people Iran to continue this support, and also announcing

his intention returning Iran soonest.

C. Shah should be prepared return Iran soonest. We advised by

Teheran extremely large pro-Shah crowds awaiting give him trium-

phant reception. (FYI we feel it extremely important for Shah to return

immediately since issue is still in doubt and his presence just might

make all the difference.)

2. In event Shah still hesitant return, opinion below may be

cited as comment in diplomatic circles Washington: i.e. to be used

preferentially (?);

A. That what

did was entirely compatible (?) and legal

with Iranian law and moreover in keeping with Iranian practice and

tradition.

B. Had Shah remained in place and not run away—and backed up

Zahedi with his own presence and his affirmation of sincerity—the

change of government would have been effective in the first instant.

The failure is in very large part attributed to the fact that Shah departed

suddenly leaving behind only pieces of paper which are not too mean-

ingful or powerful if Iran is best (?) let alone when they are the subject

of compromise (?) as to their validity.

play as straight news President’s statements made to Rome in Persian

to Teheran. Has been doing so, [less than 1 line not declassified] now

being told query [less than 1 line not declassified] London re similar action

BBC.

4. For State only: Above is result of Shah policy changes from posi-

tion previously given you, aimed of course at new situation.

End of message.

285.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, August 19, 1953.

TEHE 737. 1. We frankly horrified at lack support and guidance

given Shah of Iran. Must point out also that Embassy no [not] been

given text Shah statement, as requested, and we received no guidance.

2. If we to continue support Shah, Station and (Iranian sources)

urge foll action:

A. British prevail on Shah to broadcast as Commander in Chief

order to army to give support to legal Prime Min Zahedi.

B. MAAG announce soonest cutback in military aid Iran.

C. Eisenhower at weekly news conference raise question as to

constitutionality of Mossadeq’s claim to premiership after being dis-

missed by Shah.

D. CIA and British Bagh urge Iraq mollahs cable Borujerdi re-

questing that he call jihab [jihad] against communism.

3. FYI:

A. Troops in Tehe broke up Tudeh demonstration night 18 August

bashing heads and shouting “long live Shah.”

B. Genl Gilanshah restrained by (Iranian sources) from making 15

plane air raid on capital.

C. Aminis angered by anti Shah demonstrations and Qashqais

willing drop Mossadeq but adamant in opposition to Shah.

D. Unconfirmed reports received 19 August that army garrison

Sanadej in revolt against govt.

March–August 1953

E. (Iranian sources) learned from G–2 and secret police sources

that they and we still “completely clean.”

End of message.

286.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, August 19, 1953.

TEHE 742. 1. Overthrow of Mossadeq appears on verge of success.

Zahedi now at radio station.

2. Ambassador Henderson and I request urgently that five million

dollars be held immediately available to support new govt and enable

it meet govt payroll. Will advise later how money should be deposited

287.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

TEHE 744. Ambassador Henderson believes moment has come

when the Shah should issue appeal to all members armed forces and all

Iranian civilian officials to obey orders of Gen Zahedi and those ap-

pointed by him. Shah also hopes all loyal Iranians will give full support

to this genuine national govt. Shah plans to return Tehe in near future.

In addition to making this statement suggest Shah have records made

of his appeal and rushed by air to Tehran. If necessary by chartered

plane. If Dept agrees it is hoped that immediate contact be made in

Rome.

End of message.

cautioned “that Shah of Iran must not now be permitted return. Let public sentiment de-

velop into demand for his return then let Shah of Iran return when Tehe reports mo-

ment.” (Ibid.)

288.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

Tehran, August 19, 1953.

400. PTT and Press and Propaganda offices occupied. Telegrams

reportedly being sent provinces urging pro-Shah action similar that of

Tehran.

Embassy officers report truckloads soldiers, civilians and six tanks

seen roaming city displaying pictures Shah.

Radio Tehran played nothing but recorded music for short period

after Press and Propaganda taken and silent thereafter.

General Daftari reportedly appointed Tehran Military Governor

and Police Chief. He apparently attempting use, according Embassy

radio intercepts, Customs Guards organization he previously com-

manded in behalf Mosadeq regime.

Henderson

London. The telegram is the Embassy copy as approved and has no time of transmission.

March–August 1953

289.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

TEHE 747. 1. MilSitRep last few days:

A. Efforts made to hold assets and develop new ones. Full story

later.

B. Movement today genuine peoples uprising led by nobody until

leaders were provided.

C. [less than 1 line not declassified] held Zahedi up and he proved to

be most courageous, work with military paid off. Farzanegan risked

life and got Bakhtiar to agree ride on Tehe with Kermanshah brigade.

D. Batmangelich proved himself a man. Farzanegan now at his

side with full [less than 1 line not declassified] orders to secure situation

from possible Tudeh takeover. All key points heavily guarded.

E. Zahedi and Guilanshah got in tanks [less than 1 line not declassi-

fied] and bravely won the day.

F. Farzanegan made a speech on Radio Tehran and defied them to

come get them.

G. MilAtts very helpful today. [less than 1 line not declassified]

should acknowledge their great work, particularly Major William

Kaiser, Assistant Air Attache´. McClure was of no assistance.

H. Every fifteen minutes through crucial night [less than 1 line not

declassified] receives reports from Chief of Staff’s and Prime Minister’s

office.

I. Army is getting ready for Tudeh.

J. Complete (new government) lineup now appointed. Momtaz

had to be killed. Will keep you advised.

K. City quiet 10 hundred hours local.

End of message.

290.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

among Iranian officials on best timing for Shah’s return and we think

this question best resolved without our involvement particularly since

direct communications between Shah and his people now easy. There-

fore tell Shah all news most encouraging and we understand his govt in

touch with him directly.

End of message.

291.

Memorandum Prepared by the Chief of the Iran Branch,

Near East and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency (Waller)

Washington, August 20, 1953.

General Fazlollah Zahedi is in definite control of Tehran and has

restored public order in the capital. No word has been received con-

cerning continuing significant pro-Mossadeq activity in the provinces.

From the outset the important Northwest Province of Azerbaijan, long

considered a stronghold of pro-Shah sentiment, was behind the Shah

and his newly designated Prime Minister Zahedi. The Military units

stationed in Senandaj and Kermanshah contributed armed forces to

General Zahedi’s successful attempt to assume the Premiership on

August 19th.

Iran 1951–1953. Secret. At the end of the memorandum is a handwritten note that reads:

“above written by John Waller for DD/I [name not declassified] to be incorporated in CIB.”

March–August 1953

The Royalist, pro-Zahedi, movement of August 19th contained a

large element of spontaneity and there seemed to have been a genuine

reaction of shock and dismay on the part of the Tehran populace when

the Shah left Iran for Iraq.

Prime Minister Zahedi and Chief of Staff designate, General Bat-

mangalich, themselves manned tanks during the early stages of the

events on August 19th in an effort to rally the people and army to the

Shah’s cause.

The Shah intends to leave Rome shortly and proceed to Tehran.

Depending upon events, and instructions from the Zahedi gov-

ernment, the Shah may stop off in Baghdad enroute to Tehran so that a

more appropriate and impressive entrance can be arranged.

The opportunistic but at least outwardly loyal Mossadeq sup-

porter, Abol Ghassem Amini, acting Minister of Court, who was ar-

rested by Mossadeq during the events of August 14th, is believed to

have thrown some support to the Royalist cause from the strong Amini

family who controlled certain key points of command in the Iranian

army. The strong and influential Qashqai tribe, led by four paramount

chieftains, who have remained loyal to Mossadeq and who have been

closely allied with the above-mentioned Amini family, can still be con-

sidered in opposition to the Shah, but indications are they will take no

paramilitary action to endanger Iran’s security for the time being.

292.

Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency to the

Station in Iran

Washington, August 20, 1953.

DIR 16474. 1. CIA officials are joined by the appropriate divisional

and branch officers in extending commendation and congratulations to

all Tehran Station personnel. Kermit Roosevelt both in HQS and on

scene of action has distinguished himself and served US Govt and CIA

well. We respect the Tehran group for their great stauchness in the face

of difficulties and temporary discouragement. We are proud of the

Tehran Station personnel who have all to varying degrees contributed

greatly to the success of overthrow. Commendation is also extended to

CIA official who has done an excellent job backstopping the operation

[less than 1 line not declassified] and has handled with credit the sensitive

task of conducting liaison [less than 1 line not declassified].

2. The DCI wished to extend his warmest personal congratulations

to Kermit Roosevelt for a superbly and successfully executed mission.

Roosevelt’s persistence, extreme competence and courage should be

commended most highly.

3. Commendation also being prepared for CIA official upon

latter’s return.

End of message.

293.

Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency [text not

declassified]

DIR 16556. 1. State has received Eisenhower approval that message

essentially same as one proposed originally by Kermit Roosevelt can be

delivered personally, orally, and confidentially to Shah. Decision as to

when this message can be released and sent [less than 1 line not declassi-

fied] to Teheran for delivery will be made by DCI.

2. Eisenhower and State do not want this message joint with

Churchill nor does Eisenhower want Churchill to affiliate himself with

message. Also Churchill should not make any reference this message in

one of his own.

matic way possible.

4. Tehran should not take action para 1 above until Spaake release

and approved text received. This should be soonest.

End of message.

March–August 1953

294.

Memorandum Prepared by the Deputy Director for Plans,

Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner)

Washington, August 20, 1953.

The following are additional points and thoughts which should be

considered in connection with the idea that the company might be in

the position to play a most useful and constructive role in connection

with the recent development in “x” country. The following informa-

tion is based upon statements of extremely well-placed and reliable

informants.

The new Boss has very definitely in mind a series of programs of

economic and social betterment for his country. As a matter of fact, this

is rather definitely confirmed by the fact that the very first words he ut-

tered upon getting to the loudspeaker on the eventful day were

promises to the people of such programs. Unfortunately, his ideas are

ill-formed and to some extent quite impractical and he is definitely be-

lieved to be standing in the need of advice. Specifically, he needs

someone, whom he would regard as disinterested and friendly, to

point out to him what kind of programs would be useful and construc-

tive and which are, at the same time, feasible. It would be of equal im-

portance for him to be advised as to what kind of programs, including

some ideas which he has in mind, are not feasible either in the imme-

diate future or, for that matter, at all. The time is ripe at this very mo-

ment for such advice and assistance because, if this is not forthcoming

and if there is no one who can provide this, he may commit himself fur-

ther along lines that he will not be able to deliver on to the people. This

in turn will have an adverse effect and will play directly into the hands

of the very worst elements of the opposition. (There is no doubt that

any overstatements or unkept promises will be exploited by the Party

and Soviet propaganda to the utmost.) It is even possible that the com-

pany might wish to send one of its knowledgeable representatives out

for a quick trip to look over the situation and to contribute his recom-

mendations. It is also believed to be a practical certainty that the Am-

bassador would recommend such a visit and would be only too glad to

arrange for appropriate introductions and the presentation of the most

favorable and impressive credentials.

Even though it is understood that there will presumably be contin-

uing governmental programs under the administration of Mr. Stassen’s

TPAJAX. Eyes Only. A typed note on the memorandum reads: “The following was dic-

tated by FGW in presence of [name not declassified] and [name not declassified] took the orig-

295.

Memorandum From Acting Director of Central Intelligence

Cabell to President Eisenhower

Washington, undated.

Comment on the Iranian situation:

An unexpected strong upsurge of popular and military reaction to

Prime Minister Mossadeq’s government has resulted according to late

dispatches from Teheran in the virtual occupation of that city by forces

proclaiming their loyalty to the Shah, and to his appointed Prime Min-

ister Zahedi.

Mossadeq and his chief of staff Riahi were reported still ensconced

in their respective headquarters but cut off from communications

which are in control of the royalist forces. The city appeared to be gen-

erally under control of royalist forces although some Mossadeq sup-

porters here reportedly still on the streets. The royalists in Teheran

were using the communications systems to urge the people and the

army to rise to the support of the Shah.

The strategic province of Azerbaijan according to radio dispatches

originating from Tabriz is held by royalists but Isfahan radio some two

hundred miles south of Tehran has in a single brief announcement pro-

claimed itself loyal to Mossadeq.

In this confused situation it appears that the tone and content of

the communique´s is definitely anti-communist. Tudeh overt activity

end of the memorandum is a handwritten note that

reads:

“DDE has

seen

March–August 1953

has been almost non-existing during the past critical hours. Should the

royalists manage to take over, Tudeh will be their strongest and most

violent opponent.

Our sources have confirmed press and radio reports that

pro-royalist forces appear in control of city of Teheran and that Zahedi

has returned to city where he broadcast proclamations to the people

promising a program of economic and social reforms. Our sources re-

port huge crowds in streets of Teheran calling return of the Shah.

C.P. Cabell

296.

Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence

Agency

Tehran, August 21, 1953.

TEHE 765. 1. Tudeh discipline appears to have been broken. This

particularly noticeable between hard-core, rigidly disciplined element

composed of leaders, functionaries, and responsibles, and ordinary

rank and file.

2. It definite that working arrangement obviously dominated by

297.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to Mitchell

Washington, August 21, 1953.

SUBJECT

Proposed Message to “C”

I should appreciate it if you would be kind enough to convey a

message along the following lines to your chief, in acknowledgement of

his informal message to me of August 20.

[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

“Regarding significance this matter, we regard it as substantial vic-

tory for the West as matters now appear, but are very concerned over

numerous and significant possibilities of new set-back or reversal.

Tudeh potential remains very strong and we should not rule out even

an attempted “snatch” operation by opposition. We must not relax vig-

ilance and must do all within our capabilities to provide support and

encouragement to new regime and to prevail upon our respective For-

eign Offices (and defense establishments) to act in ways best calculated

to shore up present regime and avoid statements or actions which

would be locally harmful. We are moving along these lines and have

received certain encouraging assurances.”

TPAJAX. Top Secret; Eyes Only. The recipient is referred to as “Mr. Mitchell” in the orig-

inal and is not further identified.

March–August 1953

298.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Iran Branch, Near East

and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans (Waller) to the

Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Wisner)

Washington, August 24, 1953.

1. Attached hereto is the draft of a cable prepared by Mr. Jernegan

of State on the basis of suggestions made by you.

2. It has not been sent, however, since Messrs. Byroade, Matthews

and Berry of State were in agreement that such an approach to Zahedi

at this time would be unwise. Specifically, their reasoning was as

follows:

A. State would possibly find itself in a difficult position if Zahedi

actually concluded economic agreements with the USSR. Such agree-

ments might, amongst other things, prejudice U.S. aid. If Zahedi were

to construe U.S. remarks per attached cable draft as encouragement to

continue negotiations, it would be difficult later to bring pressure to

bear causing Zahedi to abandon undesirable economic ties with the

USSR.

B. The Department of State would risk adverse U.S. criticism if the

attached cable draft should leak from Persian government sources and

be quoted out of context. Zahedi could, in fact, use it as an excuse for

later de´marches with the USSR which would be unacceptable to the

U.S.

C. Inexperienced as he is, Zahedi may find himself out-

manoeuvered and out-foxed by the Soviets in ensuing negotiations.

This could be to the detriment of U.S. interests.

3. If you still feel that the attached cable draft or a communication

similar to it should be sent, it is suggested that you discuss the matter

with Mr. Matthews.

Iran 1951–1953. Secret.

Attachment

In your discretion, if it seems appropriate, you may indicate to

Zahedi that it might be advisable for him to continue negotiations with

Soviets or at least not make first move to break them off. Such an atti-

tude would be in line nationalist policies expected of Zahedi and

would, if Soviets refuse pay gold or make concessions, be another black

mark against Russians in Iran. However, Zahedi should not obtain im-

pression American public would be unconcerned if his Govt made any

considerable concessions to Soviets.

299.

Draft Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense

for International Security Affairs (Nash) to the Chairman of

the Planning Board of the National Security Council (Cutler)

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Course of Action with Respect to Iran

1. Recent events in Iran have at least temporarily halted the dan-

gerous drift toward eventual communist control which was taking

place under Mossadegh. However, the situation is far from stable and it

is recommended that the U.S. initiate prompt action to insure the per-

manency of the Shah–Zahedi regime. Otherwise, we can expect in-

creasing trouble from the Tudeh party which, you will recall, recently

assembled over 100,000 supporters for a public demonstration in

Tehran alone.

2. Doubtless Ambassador Henderson, based on his intimate

knowledge of the situation, will submit proposals for U.S. action.

Without wishing to anticipate or prejudge his recommendations, the

following suggestions are forwarded as a possible course of action

March–August 1953

which would help stabilize the situation in Iran and insure the estab-

lishment of a firm, pro-Western government:

a. Make a clear-cut NSC decision to support the Shah–Zahedi

regime.

b. Avoid any discussions of the oil controversy until initiated by

the Iranians. Play down any publicity on this issue, either here and in

England.

c. Have the President express publically his congratulations to the

Shah for successfully re-establishing in Iran true democratic processes;

i.e., rule of law, public security, individual freedom and freedom of

assembly.

d. This Presidential message would also state that if the Shah

wishes, we are prepared to dispatch to Iran a high Cabinet official, such

as Mr. Stassen, to demonstrate our active interest in the success of the

Zahedi Government’s program and to initiate a new U.S. program of

economic and technical assistance.

e. Follow up this visit by expediting funds, equipment and tech-

nical assistance to Iran, in order that Zahedi can start implementing his

eight-point program immediately. In particular, the U.S. could help his

Government with its programs for the mechanization of agriculture,

free medical treatment and the roadbuilding program.

f. The British Government should be informed in advance of these

steps, but should not be permitted to inhibit vigorous unilateral action

on our part to exploit the current fortunate turn of events.

300.

Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the

Department of State

771. Altho Fonoff highly gratified at improvement Shah’s position

and downfall of Mossadeq, its attitude towards Zahedi, as revealed in

recent conversations with us, reflects considerable reserve.

Fonoff attributes Mossadeq’s fall from power primarily to reaction

against his steady march towards dictatorship (much of it at Shah’s ex-

pense) and to his inability deliver promised benefits under extreme na-

tionalist program (particularly profitable exploitation oil industry).

Cautious British attitude towards Zahedi seems derive partly from

distrust as result their war-time experience with him, but more impor-

tantly from fact that they regard him as opportunist. They are, for ex-

ample, concerned about association Zahedi appears have formed with

extreme nationalist elements such as Kashani, even though they recog-

nize former has been forced take his support where he could find it.

301.

Letter From Iranian Prime Minister Zahedi to President

Eisenhower

Tehran, August 26, 1953.

Dear Mr. President:

I wish to express to you and through you to the American people

the appreciation of the Iranian Government and people for the aid

which the United States has extended to Iran during recent years. This

aid has contributed much to the security of the country and to the

raising of its technical efficiency. The assistance which the United

States is already rendering Iran, helpful as it is, is unfortunately not suf-

ficient in amount and character to tide Iran over the financial and eco-

nomic crisis which I find it to be facing. The treasury is empty; foreign

exchange resources are exhausted; the national economy is deterio-

rated. Iran needs immediate financial aid to enable it to emerge from a

state of economic and financial chaos.

Iran also requires aid of an economic character to enable it to carry

out programs which the government is preparing for developing its ag-

riculture and industry, for exploiting its rich mineral resources, for im-

proving its transport and communications, for strengthening its in-

ternal and foreign trade, and for raising the health, education and

technical levels of the Iranian people.

The people of Iran are anxious to have a prosperous, orderly

country in which they can enjoy higher standards of living and make

greater use of their talents and resources. They are willing, if given an

opportunity, to work hard in order to obtain these objectives, but the

realization of their aspirations may be delayed for sometime unless

they receive technical, financial, and economic aid from abroad. I hope

that the United States will find it possible at this critical moment in Ira-

the letter is printed from a White House press release of September 1. The letter is also

302.

Letter From President Eisenhower to Iranian Prime Minister

Zahedi

Washington, August 26, 1953.

Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I have received your letter of August 26 regarding the problems

which you face in Iran. The American people continue to be deeply in-

terested in the independence of Iran and the well-being of the Iranian

people. We have followed policies in Iran, as in other countries of the

free world, designed to assist peoples of those countries to bring about

economic development which will lead to higher standards of living

and wider horizons in knowledge and opportunity. I am gratified that

the aid which we have extended has contributed to the security of Iran

and to the raising of the technical efficiency of the Iranian people. I am

also pleased to have your assurance that your Government desires to

the letter is printed from a White House press release of September 1. The letter is also

303.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

489. 1. I saw Shah again last evening at my request in order discuss

various matters, particularly exchange of letters re financial, economic

aid and Qashqai problem. Both these matters being discussed in sepa-

rate telegrams. This telegram limited to exchanges which might be of

interest to Department between Shah and myself on other subjects.

2. Shah again said he not happy re Cabinet. He thought it had not

made very good impression. Changes might be necessary very soon. I

said Cabinet not yet completed, if selections to fill vacancies should be

wise it could be materially strengthened. Shah would be deluged with

cret; Security Information. Received at 11: a.m.

visits disgruntled politicians who will criticize new government’s pol-

icies. I hoped he would neither by word or gesture indicate to any of

them lack of full confidence in his Prime Minister. All country, in-

cluding Zahedi, must be given to feel latter has Shah’s complete sup-

port. Zahedi might be kind of man who could move with decision if he

sure Shah back of him but who would become ineffectual if he not sure

Shah’s support. Even if Zahedi should do certain things which Shah

considered to be unwise, Shah should not be unduly critical. No two

persons do things in exactly same way. Zahedi must not feel he must

consult Shah re every detail. Shah agreed, said he would try to build up

Zahedi. During course of day he had given him active army status, pro-

moted him to Lt. Gen. and given him highest Iranian decoration.

Zahedi had conducted himself during this crisis with courage and

wisdom. As result his estimate Zahedi had risen. Nevertheless it must

be clear to Zahedi and every one that no person or organization can

come between Shah and Army. Energetic steps must be taken to

strengthen solidarity Army and to display favoritism at this time

would give rise to rifts. Only officers of highest character and proven

loyalty and ability should hold high positions. Certain additional US

military aid essential. He would discuss this another occasion.

3. Shah continued by stating internal programs should be formu-

lated rapidly which would appeal to youth of country. Communism

must be combatted (A) by mercilessly weeding out Communist leaders

who had buried themselves in number of united front organizations

(B) by instituting programs which would undercut Communist propa-

ganda. Iran must move in direction socialism; more equitable distribu-

tion of wealth of country. I said it seemed to me slogan should be

“Greater production accompanied by more equitable distribution.”

Emphasis should be on greater production and equitable distribution

should take second place. If slogan “More equitable distribution” given

too much emphasis, certain groups might obtain impression quickest

and easiest way improve their lots would be to take property from

other persons rather than to work hard in order increase wealth. Em-

phasis on more equitable distribution rather than greater production

would give rise to class warfare which could paralyze country and play

into hands Communists. Shah again agreed but said effective measures

must be taken without loss of time convince poor and needy Govern-

ment looking after their interests. He hoped re-launch his campaign for

distribution of crownlands on wide scale. He was wondering if Bank

for Reconstruction which he had organized might not have been at-

tempting to obtain loan immediately from EXIM Bank in order start

building workers houses in Tehran and other large urban centers. If

they could begin at once building cheap but healthy living quarters—

say for 10,000 homeless families in Tehran, and a thousand or more in

each of the other large Iranian cities—effect would be most salutary.

March–August 1953

Perhaps EXIM Bank could make loan to Reconstruction Bank without

necessity approval Majlis. I said I not qualified discuss this problem. It

might be Majlis would require some kind of government guarantee.

Shah said such guarantee would probably require Majlis approval. He

still thought Majlis should dissolve itself although Zahedi was of

opinion it would be politically wise permit rump Majlis to function

while he held elections to fill vacancies. He afraid any kind Majlis

would be great handicap to Zahedi. I said it seemed to me some kind

loans for Iran would be necessary if it was to receive substantial aid

from US particularly in direction road building, etc. Shah said he hoped

I would discuss this matter in some detail with Zahedi.

4. Said he understood I had seen Meftah acting Minister of Foreign

Affairs during course of day. I replied in affirmative stating I had dis-

cussed with Meftah US position in UN re problem and under instruc-

tions from Washington had expressed hope US could have Iranian sup-

port. At Shah’s request I outlined US position (DepCircTel 102, August

20). Shah asked if US could not get enough votes to support its posi-

tion without Iran taking sides. He did not wish do anything which

might offend Nehru. I said US would particularly like support Asian

power like Iran. Shah asked if any other Asian countries would take

sides against India. I said I certain number would.

Shah said he anxious have friendship Nehru. He therefore con-

templated calling in Indian Ambassador and suggesting latter send

message to Nehru to effect that Shah was not espousing socialism

against capitalism or capitalism against socialism. Shah favored mixed

economy in Iran. I asked Shah if it his intention give Nehru impression

Iran would support “third force.” I thought it would be unfortunate for

Iran to encourage Nehru’s ambitions in this direction. So-called “third

force” not force at all. Conception based on false premises that both free

world and Communist world equally guilty and “third force” was not

taking sides but was merely supporting whichever world happened to

be right re some particular point. Shah said he considered “third force”

idea as unsound and did not intend giving support to it. His purpose in

message to Nehru would relate merely to Iranian internal problems.

Iran would like an economy similar to that of Scandinavian countries. I

told Shah I hoped Iran would play more clear cut role on side free

world in UN. No desire that Iran should necessarily provoke Soviet

Union. Nevertheless it unbecoming sovereign country like Iran not to

support movement on success of which Iran’s future independence

might hang merely because of desire not displease Soviet Union. Free

world struggle to prevent Korea from becoming victim of aggression

really struggle to prevent all countries contiguous of Soviet interna-

tional communism from becoming such victim. If as result vacillation

and hesitation Korea should be lost to free world international commu-

nism would be encouraged to strike elsewhere. Shah did not reply.

5. Shah said he had difficulty knowing what be done with Mo-

sadeq. Latter should really be tried for treason. Yet he feared trial might

merely result in making former Prime Minister martyr. How could

Government justify trial Army officers acting under Mosadeq’s orders

without trying Mosadeq himself? Impression might be created Govern-

ment afraid to try Mosadeq. He had been toying with idea permit Mo-

sadeq go abroad for medical treatment. Europe however too close to

Iran. Might be preferable let Mosadeq go to US if he would give under-

taking to refrain in future from engaging in Iranian political activities.

He asked my opinion. I said matter too complicated for me to venture

off-hand advice. I thought however, that if Mosadeq should be brought

to public trial he might be able with his histrionic ability to make it ap-

pear that his accusers rather than he were being tried.

6. Shah said he had received letter from Qavam asking that latter

be permitted leave country for medical treatment. He in quandary be-

cause Parliament had passed bill of attainder against Qavam and he

might be condemned for permitting Qavam leave country in such cir-

cumstances. I asked whether it might not be possible to permit Qavam

go to Europe for medical treatment provided latter would give signed

statement he would return to Iran on Shah’s request if he should subse-

quently be needed in connection with legal proceedings. Shah said he

would look into this possibility.

Henderson

304.

Memorandum of Discussion at the 160th Meeting of the

National Security Council

Washington, August 27, 1953.

SUBJECT

Discussion at the 160th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday,

August 27, 1953

Present at the 160th Meeting of the Council were the Vice Presi-

dent of the United States, presiding; the Secretary of State; the Acting

Secretary of Defense; the Acting Director, Foreign Operations Adminis-

tration; the Director, Office of Defense Mobilization. Also present were

the Secretary of the Treasury; the Acting Director, Bureau of the

Budget; the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission; the Chairman,

Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army; the Chief of Naval

Operations; the Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force; the Commandant, U.S.

Marine Corps; Robert R. Bowie, Department of State; Frank C. Nash,

Department of Defense; General Gerhart, Joint Chiefs of Staff; Robert

Amory, Jr., Central Intelligence Agency; the Director of Central Intelli-

gence; Robert Cutler, Special Assistant to the President; C.D. Jackson,

Special Assistant to the President; the Acting White House Staff Secre-

tary; the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the Deputy Executive Secre-

tary, NSC.

There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the

chief points taken.

[Omitted here is discussion of Items 1 and 2.]

General Cabell briefed the Council on the most recent develop-

ments in Iran. He said that General Zahedi appeared to be establishing

a moderate nationalist government. There was real hope for its stability

and for improvement in Iran’s economic and financial situation.

Members of the new government were as experienced and capable as

one could anticipate in Iran, although the Shah had expressed disap-

pointment at the small number of new faces in the Cabinet. Indications

are that General Zahedi will oppose the indiscriminate imposition of

National Security Council. Top Secret; Security Information; Eyes Only. Drafted by

martial law, and when his control is firmly established he is expected to

recall the Majlis. Elections for a new Majlis are to be anticipated there-

after. The army will doubtless manipulate these elections to ensure a

conservative majority in the new Parliament.

General Cabell predicted that the Tudeh Party would be ruthlessly

curbed, with the result that it would probably go underground. Its

leadership is still intact, and it may be expected to work with the pro-

Mossadegh factions to discredit the Shah and the new regime.

The allegiance of the tribes, said General Cabell, is not yet com-

pletely clear, but the fact that they have never been able to work in con-

cert with one another minimizes the dangers which Zahedi must antici-

pate from the tribes.

General Cabell stated that the most urgent problems confronting

the new government of Iran are economic and financial. It is unlikely

that an agreement with Britain, to settle the oil controversy, can be

readily and quickly achieved, if for no other reason than that General

Zahedi cannot afford to seem a British stooge. However, concluded

General Cabell, if United States financial aid can be promptly extended,

Iran will again assume its place in the pro-Western grouping of nations

and American relations with Iran will improve. Relations between Iran

and Great Britain are not likely to undergo any sudden change, and a

settlement of the outstanding issues between the Soviet Union and Iran

is unlikely at present.

Secretary Dulles commented that while what happened in Iran

was spontaneous, he did feel obliged to say that a number of people in

Iran had kept their heads and maintained their courage when the situa-

tion looked very tough. He felt that CIA in particular was entitled to

great praise. He also expressed himself as pleased with the cooperation

between CIA, State and FOA.

As a result of what had happened, Secretary Dulles informed the

Council, the United States now had a “second chance” in Iran when all

hope of avoiding a Communist Iran appeared to have vanished. Secre-

tary Dulles said that there had been an exchange of letters between the

President and General Zahedi. Secretary Dulles summarized General

Zahedi’s letter, pointing out the latter’s statement that he desired to re-

consider the problem of the oil settlement and that he needed assist-

ance. The President had replied that General Zahedi’s request would

receive sympathetic consideration. Secretary Dulles went on to point

out that in order to assist the new regime, the Administration would re-

quire funds beyond those programmed in the Mutual Security Act. The

additional funds would probably be in the neighborhood of $35 mil-

March–August 1953

lion. The most difficult problem confronting us was how to develop

revenues for Iran out of her oil. We can’t very well subsidize Iranian oil

when we can’t make full use of present resources available to us. Since

we must not, however, miss this second chance, Secretary Dulles sug-

gested that we ought to select quickly an individual knowledgeable in

the petroleum field, and a skillful negotiator, and then turn over to him

full power to negotiate a settlement. In order to pick such a man

quickly and get him started, Secretary Dulles recommended that the

choice be entrusted to a committee consisting of himself, the Secretary

of the Treasury, the Secretary of Defense, and Mr. Stassen.

Mr. Cutler inquired whether such an individual would be a special

representative of the President. Secretary Dulles replied that he could

represent the President or the Secretary of State. In any case, he would

head up a task force. The main thing is to assure that all the mani-

fold ideas for achieving a settlement should channel through this

individual.

Secretary Dulles’ proposal was well received by the Council, and

CIA asked to be included in the committee if its representation thereon

appeared useful.

Mr. Cutler then reminded the members of the Council of the task

which it had asked the Attorney General to perform, noted that Judge

Barnes had been appointed by the Attorney General to carry out this

task, and that Judge Barnes was planning a committee of three indi-

viduals to perform the task. Mr. Cutler stated that Judge Barnes had al-

ready produced a tentative statement of the problem to which his com-

mittee should address itself. Mr. Cutler further pointed out the

relationship between Judge Barnes’ assignment and the committee

which had been contemplated in NSC 138/1, which, of course, had

never materialized. Mr. Cutler assured the members of the Council

that Judge Barnes would consult with the heads of appropriate depart-

ments and agencies before completing his report, which he hoped to

have ready by December.

Secretary Dulles inquired whether any new consideration was

now being given to postponing the civil suit against the so-called oil

cartel. As he understood it, open hearings on the case were scheduled

to begin in September, and while he sympathized with the problem

confronting the Attorney General, to whom was entrusted the task of

carrying out the law of the land, he was still very worried over the im-

plications of this suit for the national security and for our foreign rela-

tions. It would be highly advantageous, said Secretary Dulles, if the

case could possibly be settled out of court.

(Document 279).

Secretary Humphrey expressed emphatic agreement with Secre-

tary Dulles, and inquired whether this assignment should be added to

that contemplated by the special representative.

Secretary Dulles expressed doubts as to the feasibility of Secretary

Humphrey’s proposal, but again insisted that the civil proceedings

should be postponed if it was humanly possible.

Mr. Cutler suggested that the Council invite the Attorney General

to come to the next meeting of the Council to hear the arguments and to

discuss possible postponement of the suit. It developed that the At-

torney General would be out of town except for one day this week, and

Mr. Cutler therefore suggested that the Secretary of State get in touch

with the Attorney General and explain to him the Council’s unanimous

feeling that, for reasons of national security, it favored postponement of

the civil suit.

The National Security Council:5

a. Discussed the situation in Iran in the light of an oral briefing by

the Acting Director of Central Intelligence on developments, and in the

light of an oral report by the Secretary of State on actions taken or con-

templated with respect to the situation.

b. Agreed that the Secretaries of State, the Treasury, and Defense,

the Director of the Foreign Operations Administration, and the Di-

rector of Central Intelligence, should nominate, for the President’s con-

sideration, an individual to act as a special representative of the United

States to deal with problems related to an Anglo-Iranian oil settlement.

c. Noted an oral report by Mr. Cutler regarding the status of the At-

torney General’s study of the Near East oil situation pursuant to NSC

Action No. 875–b.

d. Agreed, with the concurrence of the Attorney General, to recom-

mend to the President that in the interests of national security, in view

of the Iranian situation, the Attorney General be requested to conduct

proceedings in the so-called oil cartel civil suit, now being carried on as

indicated in NSC Action No. 766–a, with due regard for their effect

upon United States foreign relations.

Note: The action in b above subsequently referred to the Secre-

taries of State, the Treasury, and Defense, the Director of the Foreign

Operations Administration, and the Director of Central Intelligence, for

implementation. The recommendation in d above subsequently ap-

proved by the President and transmitted to the Attorney General for

appropriate action.

[Omitted here is discussion of items 4–8.]

S. Everett Gleason

305.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans (Wisner)

to Director of Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, August 27, 1953.

SUBJECT

The first stages of negotiations for the settlement of the oil dispute, and other

matters pertaining to Iran

1. You are, of course, aware of the role played by this Agency prior

to your departure in alerting various other departments and agencies

(principally State and MSA) to the necessity of being prepared to pro-

vide economic assistance to Iran in certain eventualities. We have been

prompt in following up these preliminary preparations and have, I

think, done all that could be expected of us (CIA) in the direction of get-

ting things moving. As a matter of fact, this has led us inevitably into

certain aspects of the opening phases of consideration and negotiation

(hopefully) looking toward a settlement of the Anglo-Iranian oil con-

troversy. One of the reasons for our participation has been our close

knowledge of the facts, including the local temperaments and tempera-

tures in Iran, as well as the fact that our channel of communications

was used at the beginning. But in addition, we have had our own finan-

cial interest at stake in that our pocket-book is affected and will be fur-

ther affected if something is not got under way quickly to produce rev-

enues for the Iranian Government.

2. We have discussed various aspects of these related matters with

General Smith, Henry Byroade, Governor Stassen and others, making it

clear to all concerned at all times that we were most anxious to avoid

creating the impression that we are concerning ourselves with matters

not within our range of interest. One development which has occurred

and which you should know about is that (with General Cabell’s autho-

rization) I supported Henry Byroade’s appeal for assistance in the form

of getting Paul Nitze in on the State Department thinking and plan-

ning—if only on an arms’ length, no title, no pay, basis. This was over-

ruled for reasons deemed sufficient by higher echelons—a decision

which I personally regard as regrettable in view of the vast amount

of knowledge, background and experience which Paul has had

throughout the entire history of the Iranian negotiations. (It will be re-

called that he headed the US negotiation team which went to London

about a year ago.)

TPAJAX. Secret; Security Information; Eyes Only. At the bottom of the page is a hand-

written note that reads: “No other copies made—Orig shown to DDCI by FGW.”

306.

Memorandum From the Chief of Station in Iran [text not

declassified] to the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt)

[number not declassified]

Tehran, August 28, 1953.

[less than 1 line not declassified] Contribution to TPAJAX

1. In Station opinion we cannot be too complimentary concerning

the contributions of our [less than 1 line not declassified] agents to the

success of TPAJAX. [less than 1 line not declassified] did remarkably good

job while maintaining security at all times. They are to be highly com-

mended for laying the groundwork for action and providing the spark

which set off the demonstrations on 19 August. Their contribution can

best be described by a general review of TPAJAX.

2. As the project developed in late July and early August, we were

still faced with the overriding problem of fear—fear on the part of most

Iranians, including those in the opposition, to take any action against

the Mossadeq government. In retrospect, our only hope to get popular

and active backing in a movement to unseat Mossadeq was to point up

an issue which would instill greater fear in the average Iranian than his

fear of Mossadeq. For the first three weeks in August, [4½ lines not de-

classified] were able to lay the groundwork for future action. They were

assisted in this campaign [less than 1 line not declassified] who also em-

phasized the collaboration of Mossadeq and the Tudeh. Secretary

Dulles’ and President Eisenhower’s comments concerning the Tudeh

were of great help and gradually the people of Tehran began to feel a

greater fear than the one which previously pervaded their lives. They

began to feel that Mossadeq’s retention of power could only lead to a

Communist state. They believed this strongly and it was reflected in the

conversations of most to whom we talked during this period. There

was still a deep fear of Mossadeq, but the groundwork had been laid—

given an opportunity to act against Mossadeq with some degree of

success, Iranians would join together to overthrow him.

3. On Sunday, August 16, news of [cryptonym not declassified] press

interview began to leak out. The fact that he possessed a Firman began

to spread, but still there was no proof since few had actually seen fac-

similes of the Firman. [2½ lines not declassified] On Tuesday, reports of

the Firman were printed in several papers and Foreign Minister Fatemi

denied its existence. Nevertheless, the word continued to spread and

the number who saw a facsimile increased. [2 lines not declassified]

3. Meanwhile, Fatemi had aided our cause by having the Statues of

both Shahs torn down throughout the city. His violent speeches at-

tacking the Shah offended most Iranians and strengthened their resolve

to act. Their fear of the Communist menace, plus their indignation over

Fatemi’s actions combined in an emotional desire to do something.

Only the spark was needed to set off the conflagration.

4. Wednesday was the day set by the Station for action. [1½ lines

not declassified] We were hoping for a strong religious showing and felt

that something might happen if we could only get it started. It must be

said, however, that there were many persons out Wednesday morning

who had no connection with us. Nevertheless, they were disorganized

and milling about aimlessly until several people discovered a press

shop in process of printing broadsheets containing a facsimile of the

Firman appointing [cryptonym not declassified] Prime Minister. There

were several shops doing this and there were several different items.

[less than 1 line not declassified] a statement of [cryptonym not declassified]

along with his Firman. [less than 1 line not declassified] a call to revolt and

support the Shah along with a copy of the Firman. There was one other

as yet unidentified. (probably [cryptonym not declassified]) By 9: a.m.

people were running into at least two print shops, [1 line not declassi-

fied]. They distributed the broadsheets as fast as they came off the press

and the pressman happily continued to print them for the rest of the

day. [7 lines not declassified]

5. Armed with the knowledge that [cryptonym not declassified] was

the legal Prime Minister, that the Shah had actually made his move,

and conditioned for action by the past three weeks, the people of

Tehran acted. Trucks, provided by the Army, [less than 1 line not declas-

sified] were filled to overflow capacity and headed for Radio Tehran.

Buses were stopped and commandeered by the mobs and all means of

public transportation were forced to mob use. Private automobiles

were ordered to allow Shah supporters to climb all over them and head

for the radio station, which quickly fell to Royalist control.

6. After the mobs were out, the [less than 1 line not declassified] role

diminished and the military role became paramount. Indeed, if plans

had not been thoroughly laid for this aspect of TPAJAX the [less than 1

line not declassified] contribution would have been to no avail, all of

which points up the multifacted nature of TPAJAX’s success.

7. [1 line not declassified]

[name not declassified]

[name not declassified]

307.

Record of Meeting in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, August 28, 1953.

TPAJAX

PRESENT

Lt. Gen. Charles P. Cabell

Deputy Director of Central Intelligence

Mr. Frank G. Wisner

Deputy Director/Plans

Mr. Richard Helms

Chief of Operations, DD/P

Mr. Kermit Roosevelt

Chief, Near East Division, DD/P

Mr. Tracy Barnes

Chief, PP

DD/P

[name not declassified]

Deputy Chief, Near East Division, DD/P

Mr. John Waller

Chief, NE/4

DD/P

[name not declassified]

Special Assistant to DD/P

Mr. Donald Wilber

Consultant

[name not declassified]

Reporter

Mr. Wisner: Mr. Roosevelt reported that in his conversations with

the British going up to the highest levels they had expressed complete

understanding of and agreement with the reasons which he gave for

his failure to report adequately during the period from Sunday

morning until Wednesday afternoon. These reasons were that he was

faced with the choice of spending his time reporting fully and factually

or getting out and acting—he could not do both—and he chose to do

the latter. General Cabell responded that we, of course, are in full

accord.

Mr. Roosevelt: I think that the reporting up until Saturday night

was reasonably adequate, and I think you do have a pretty good pic-

ture of what was going on even though there were details that weren’t

TPAJAX (Iran). Top Secret; Security Information; Eyes Only. Drafted by [name not

declassified].

reported, but they can be filled in, but from Sunday morning on you

have only the haziest kind of picture. We did report all the indications

in the course of Saturday night that showed to us that the plan had

gone astray. The radio jeep didn’t arrive, the telephone system wasn’t

put out, tanks were moving but we couldn’t tell whose tanks they were,

and it was just obvious that something had gone very sour, and there

was a little shooting—not much. We weren’t sure of the situation really

to look the situation over, and they said, “Yes, there are lots of tanks

and troops around Mossadeq’s house,” but that wasn’t conclusive.

That would have been the case in either event. At about 6: o’clock

[less than 1 line not declassified] who was a tower of strength in this whole

business, showed up in pretty much of a stew, and he said Nasseri had

been arrested.

At that time I got hold of General McClure and asked him to go

and call on General Riahi and try to find out what the situation was. I

didn’t get McClure’s report until a lot later, but I believe it was then

that Riahi told him that there had been an attempted coup by the Shah’s

bodyguard under Colonel Nasseri and it had been defeated, but that

there was American implication in the thing, specifically that Com-

mander Eric Pollard had been implicated and that later on he told

McClure that he had information that we were hiding out certain

people in the Embassy including General Zahedi. I told McClure there

was nothing in that, that Pollard had not been plotting, that we were

not hiding out anyone in the Embassy.

Riahi was the Chief of Staff under Mossadeq. Mossadeq had an an-

nouncement put on the air at 7: o’clock to much the same effect that

there was no American implication . . . that simply a coup had been at-

tempted by the Shah’s bodyguard and had been defeated. There was

no mention of any firman by the Shah, no mention of any attempt to re-

place Mossadeq officially or appoint Zahedi. Zahedi’s name never ap-

peared in the first broadcast. [4½ lines not declassified] The Zahedis, fa-

ther and son, showed tremendous courage through this whole

business, so we then decided that the main thing to concentrate on was

to prove to the Army and the people that this was not an attempted

coup, that this was a legitimate change of government which Mossadeq

had foiled by a coup. Accordingly our first step was to arrange for a se-

cret interview with the foreign correspondents. There were only two—

one from the New York Times and one from the AP—and we set that up

for 11: o’clock. We wanted to have General Zahedi there, but he

wasn’t able to be there, and, incidentally, we weren’t there. We set the

thing up. Young Zahedi was there with, first of all, the original order of

the Shah appointing Zahedi Prime Minister and, secondly, with a

number of photostatic copies of it, which we gave to the correspond-

March–August 1953

ents, and also a statement from his father which came out, as a matter of

fact, which we sent out in the plane that went to Beirut to pick up Am-

bassador Henderson. We took over the firman then and kept it in our

safe in the Embassy after photostating. There were two photostats

made, one by Persians and one in the Embassy. The one by Persians

was actually better, but ours was the one that got the most distribution

and appeared in most of the papers. Now we then started immediately

to prepare a statement for Zahedi to the press and public of Iran. He

had seen the foreign correspondents. Now he was to speak to his own

people, and we were worked up. We dictated in the course of that after-

noon [3½ lines not declassified]. We did not have our own facilities for

printing in Persian in the Embassy, but we had the facilities, but we

didn’t have a type set up, and we were most reluctant to bring in an in-

digenous typesetter into the Embassy compound, so we compromised.

We had [less than 1 line not declassified] type the thing out in Persian on a

typewriter. He did 10 copies. We whipped them off to Zahedi who

signed them and sent them back to us, and then we distributed them to

the foreign correspondents, and to such of the local press as we could

get, and also to a couple of key army officers. By the time we finally suc-

ceeded in getting this it was too late to catch the morning papers, [5½

lines not declassified]. This came out Monday morning.

Mr. Wisner: [less than 1 line not declassified].

Mr. Roosevelt: [1 line not declassified].

Mr. Wisner: [less than 1 line not declassified].

Mr. Roosevelt: [less than 1 line not declassified]. Now there was one

other very encouraging sign Sunday evening, and that was that Tudeh

began some demonstrations in which they shouted, “Death to the

Shah,” and acting without orders, the Army started to beat the hell out

of them, and they carted away four truckloads of bloody Tudeh dem-

onstrators Sunday afternoon, and they had no authorization. It was just

a spontaneous thing, and that gave us tremendous encouragement, so

Sunday evening didn’t look nearly as black as Sunday morning. Now,

of course, the thing that was bothering us was the security of our prin-

cipal agents or allies in this business. You can’t call Zahedi an agent, but

he was an ally, and he was someone to whom we had responsibility.

We were desperately afraid that if he were captured the whole damn

thing would collapse, and, therefore, we took the risk of hiding the

principal people out in American houses. We actually did have some in

the American compound and the house of one of our commo people,

but most of them were outside of the compound but in American

houses. That was necessary for two reasons: One, to try to give them

some security, and also to enable us to see them because if they were

hiding out in some locale where Americans never went, it would be im-

possible for us to see them, and in order to put this thing through we

had to be able to be in quite constant contact with them, so we took this

chance.

Mr. Wisner: Where was this famous “cave” that Zahedi was sup-

posed to be in?

Mr. Roosevelt: It is entirely mythical as far as I know. Zahedi was

in our hands from Monday morning on. He took care of himself

Sunday night. He was turned over to us on Monday morning.

[1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]

Well, by Monday morning . . . of course, the news of the Shah’s de-

parture arrived Sunday afternoon, and that was no particular surprise

and really no particular shock.

Mr. Helms: He just took off?

Mr. Roosevelt: He just took off. He never communicated with us at

all. He just took off. He was up in the Caspian. That was no concern ex-

cept that we were concerned about getting either him on the radio,

which I could see was difficult, or at least the statements from him on

the radio from Baghdad in Persian, and I do feel that the British let us

down on that. They should have been able to do that, but they didn’t.

They struggled. I think the British seriously struggled, but the Foreign

Office was just thumbs down definitely.

Monday was devoted largely to circulating photostatic copies of

the firman, which had a tremendous effect, particularly among the

Army, and trying to arrange for follow throughs from Zahedi. We got

additional statements. We tried to place them. We tried to get the pre-

vious evening’s statement placed, and we tried to get the firman

printed in as many papers or even just single sheet emergency papers

as possible. [1 line not declassified] It was really an amazing thing, and I

don’t know how they did it, but they carried the firman; they carried

the fake interview with Zahedi; they carried the next day the real inter-

view with Zahedi; they carried more copies of the firman photostats;

and they kept attacking Mossadeq; and they still continued publishing.

I just don’t know how they managed. Now we haven’t had a bill for it,

but that was the general tenor of Monday’s events, and there were

more talks between McClure and Riahi, and McClure himself was ar-

guing at the time that the best thing to do was to make a deal with Riahi

and hope that in due course he would overthrow Mossadeq.

The Ambassador arrived back Monday afternoon, and Monday

was a day in which there was still a certain amount of pro-Mossadeq ri-

oting in town and no particular indication of pro-Shah feeling except

that these firmans were obviously having an effect. Everyone was

asking about them. Was it true that the Shah had issued a firman? If so,

why was Mossadeq lying about it? And wasn’t that a most reprehen-

sible thing to do? Monday evening was a curious evening for me. We

March–August 1953

had a big Council of War in one of the houses in the compound and

consisting of General Zahedi, [1½ lines not declassified] and myself. We

smuggled these people in and out in the bottom of cars and in closed

jeeps, and strangely enough never at any time was there any attempt to

stop cars going in or out of the American Embassy, which was just as

well, but, of course, there is an awful lot of traffic. I mean people . . .

hundreds of cars come in and out of there. Well, this conference was

going on, and I would have to leave it occasionally and go over and see

Ambassador Henderson, and General McClure was sitting out in front

of his house in the compound worrying over Ambassador Henderson’s

forthcoming interview with Mossadeq and McClure’s previous inter-

views with Riahi, and they would say to me, “Now we must be able to

assure the Prime Minister that we are not hiding out any Persians in the

compound,” and I would say, “Please give them every assurance,” and

we would discuss the matter for a while, and I would say, “Excuse me

for a few moments,” and then I would go back to this meeting. Hen-

derson knew perfectly well what was going on. He told me afterwards.

He said, “You did the only thing you could do. You had to tell them,

but you also had to do your business.” I don’t think McClure knew. The

decision was eventually reached that night. It was a typical Persian dis-

cussion. It went all around the God damn map for about four hours. I

felt no compunction coming in, and going out, and reassuring Hen-

derson from time to time, and then eventually obviously someone had

to make some decisions, and so we decided that we were going to make

our play on Wednesday, and that we were going to send off three mes-

sages outside of Teheran, and that we were going to continue and in-

tensify our activities inside Teheran, and the three messages were to be:

[3 lines not declassified] and that we were then going to build up a ter-

rific demonstration on Wednesday around the religious theme that it

was time for all loyal army officers, and soldiers, and the people of Iran

to rally to the support of their religion and the throne.

Then we wanted some outside military support from outside of

Teheran, and it looked to us as if the two best bets within reach were

the troops at Kermanshah under Colonel Bakhtiar and the troops

at Isfahan under Brigadier General Mahmud Davalu. [6½ lines not

declassified]

[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

Of course, the build-up that had gone on over the previous

months, and particularly, I think, the material produced by the head-

quarters here, the cartoons and the articles, etc., had an accumulated ef-

fect by this time. I mean seeds weren’t falling on barren soil at all. You

could see that there was a response, but Tuesday was a bad day none-

theless because there was nothing much we could do. [12 lines not

declassified]

Well, by that time we had suffered so many postponements in this

business that it really looked as if we were damn close to the end of the

road, and we said, “Well, all right, if the Mullahs can’t act until Friday

they can’t act until Friday, and that is too bad, but we have got to have

some kind of a demonstration on Wednesday. We can’t let this thing

just drift because if it drifts it is going to drift away from us.”

The Shah’s statement3—incidentally it was from Baghdad—was

by that time receiving a good deal of circulation by word of mouth,

and that was having a good effect, so although there were discour-

aging signs, it didn’t look too desperate, so we sent out. [8½ lines not

declassified]

Mr. Waller: [less than 1 line not declassified].

Mr. Roosevelt: Well, they did. Incidentally, those troops didn’t get

to Teheran until after the thing was pretty well over, but they served a

very useful purpose on the way because the one place in which there

were serious pro-Mossadeq demonstrations on Wednesday was Ha-

madan, and these boys hit Hamadan just as the Iran Party and the

Tudeh was out on the streets, and they shot them up a bit and sent them

scurrying back to their hiding holes and came rolling on to Teheran. No

one could understand just how this happened. The General Staff was

very puzzled about it later. And incidentally in Hamadan the author-

ities were entirely confused. They couldn’t see how a man from Ker-

manshah had suddenly fallen upon them and taken care of their

problem, so that was the first good news on Wednesday.

Then at about 9: o’clock in the morning, which I think is rather

early, isn’t it, for demonstrations to start—

Mr. Waller: Much too early.

Mr. Roosevelt: By God about 9: o’clock in the morning they

started getting word from the Bazaar that there were crowds out and

that they were tearing the Iran Party Headquarters to pieces, that they

tore down “Bakhtar Emruz”, and I think this was [less than 1 line not

declassified].

Mr. Wilber: I wondered because one of the statements we got was

that that mob was headed by people from Zuhrkhaneh exercise clubs,

sport clubs, and [less than 1 line not declassified].

Mr. Roosevelt: We don’t know. We will find out in due course, but

we don’t know yet, but when their targets appeared we felt fairly confi-

dent that [less than 1 line not declassified] and they went after “Bakhtar

Emruz” which was the most virulent, and pro-Mossadeq, and anti-

March–August 1953

American paper, and they really wrecked that place, and the Security

Forces wouldn’t fire on them. So things started developing, and by, I

think, about 10 o’clock there was a mob headed toward Mossadeq’s

house. That was where the bloodshed was because the troops were

uncertain at that time, particularly Mossadeq’s guard, of what way

things were going, and they fired on the mob. They obeyed orders, and

they fired on the mob, and I think that was where most of the casualties

were. The casualties so far as we could make out were greatly exagger-

ated in newspaper reports and Radio Teheran reports, as also was

the account of fighting around Mossadeq’s house. I read Time this

morning, and it said that tanks were shooting 75 millimeter shells at

each other, and they were bouncing off World War II armament for

four hours. Well, dammit all, that just isn’t true because one of the girls

in the office went down to look at what was happening, and in front of

Mossadeq’s house about 2: the fighting was all over, and the house

was being ransacked, and there wasn’t anything like that. Later on

there was mortar firing, and I think that some of the troops just lobbed

mortars into Mossadeq’s house for fun.

Mr. Wisner: Weren’t there ransackers in there?

Mr. Roosevelt: They probably broke it down before they got in. I

don’t think they would worry about whether the ransackers were in.

There was a certain air of irresponsibility at that time.

Well, beginning about 10: o’clock we began to have really great

hopes of the situation, [26 lines not declassified] and we brought him to

the place where Zahedi was hidden, which was quite close to the Em-

bassy compound in the house of one of our people. He was in the base-

ment there, and we put the two of them together and we said, “Now,

gentlemen, it is very likely that you are going to have to take action

soon, and you just talk it over and decide what the best thing to do is,”

and that was about 12:00, I guess, and what worried us then was the

possibility that this, like all previous Persian demonstrations, would

take time off for lunch and a siesta because that is the usual thing. At

and, of course, we didn’t want to take our precious little chickens and

put them out in the open if the damn thing was going to fold for lunch

and siesta, so we didn’t dare make the move then. Furthermore we

didn’t yet have the confident strength, but a great big crowd started

heading up the road to Teheran Radio Station, and the road was

blocked off by military, and they wouldn’t let any traffic through, but

they were cooperating with the crowd, and so that looked very encour-

aging, and so at about 1:30, although there appeared to be a slight lull,

we decided that things were pretty good, and I went off to get a bite to

eat around 2: and started listening to Radio Teheran which had been

discussing cotton prices all through this business but which switched

something wrong with the record. It would halt or would sound

slurred, and at about 2: the thing just went off the air, and we had no

way of getting to the radio station, but it looked pretty good. The one

real worry I had was that they might have wrecked the radio station so

badly that they couldn’t get it on the air again, and while that would

hurt Mossadeq, it would also hurt us if we were going to be able to

make the play, so I went back to the Embassy, and at about 3: Radio

Teheran came on the air again deliriously pro-Zahedi. As a matter of

fact, it was an irresponsible and silly performance, but anyhow they

were pro-Zahedi. As a matter of fact, they had one man speaking for a

time who claimed to be Zahedi, which caused us to raise our eyebrows,

but . . . so as soon as I knew Radio Teheran was on the air, we sent out a

scouting party to determine whether there were still tanks and trucks

of troops waving the Shah’s picture and the word, so about 10 minutes

of four I went over to the house where Zahedi was hidden in the base-

ment, and I found Zahedi in his underwear and khaki pants eating

lunch with [name not declassified] who was clad in a dirty old sport shirt

and some torn up pants. Zahedi had his uniform there, and I said,

“Gentlemen, the time has come now. You are going to have to get out

on the streets and take command of the situation, and we have Radio

Teheran.” Unfortunately the radio we had given to them the batteries

went dead, so they didn’t know we had Radio Teheran, but they both

responded immediately, and they said, “Certainly, how do we do

this?” and I said, “Well, what we are going to do is we are going to

send [name not declassified] out in one of our cars with white tags—non-

diplomatic tags—and we are going to hunt around until we find a tank

or truckload of soldiers which are pro-Shah, and then [name not declassi-

fied] will get out, and he will pick up the tank preferably, and, if not, the

truckload of soldiers, and he will meet General Zahedi at a given street

corner at 4: sharp, and we will deliver Zahedi in a closed jeep with

again white tags on it to this street corner. He will get in; he will ride up

to Radio Teheran, and General Zahedi will go on the air, and he will

make a statement, and after that you are in,” and they said, “Fine”.

There was some argument. [name not declassified] had the idea

maybe they should go directly to the Chief of Staff’s office. I vetoed

that. I thought it was too dangerous, so anyhow [name not declassified]—

Mr. Helms: Excuse me just a second. At this point had Mossadeq

already fled? I mean are you aware he had disappeared?

Mr. Roosevelt: We weren’t sure where he was. He had left his

house by then, yes, but we didn’t know. The rumor was he had gone to

the Chief of Staff’s office, and so [name not declassified] went out on the

street, but this, like every other part of the plan, didn’t go quite ac-

cording to schedule.

March–August 1953

[name not declassified] got out on the Naderi, and he saw some air

force officers, so he said to the guy who was driving him along, he said,

“You have done enough. Now it is up to me. Let me out right here,”

and the guy let him out, and [name not declassified] went up to these air

force officers who recognized him and embraced him. [less than 1 line

not declassified] and so very popular with them, and they said, “What

can we do for you?” He said, “I would like a tank, if you please,” and

they said, “Fine, we will get you a tank,” so they searched around and

they got him a tank, and they put him in it, and they draped themselves

all over the outside of the tank, and then they said, “Now do you know

where General Zahedi is?” and he said, “Yes, I do and, as a matter of

fact, we have a date to meet him at 4:30.” Well, then they looked at their

watches, and it was only ten past four. They said, “The hell with that.

Take us to him right now.”

[name not declassified] said to me afterwards, he said, “What can I

do?” So he took them to him, and this tank came sailing right into the

compound of this house, and Iranian Army officers poured out of it,

and they went in and they got Zahedi out of the basement, and they put

him on their shoulders, and they put him in the tank, and they marched

up to Radio Teheran.

Fortunately there were so many wild stories going around that

night that this one got no more attention than any of the others, and

also, fortunately, the guy who got the credit for it was the landlord of

the house. He was considered to be a great patriot for having hidden

Zahedi out without the knowledge of the Americans.

Mr. Wilber: It is a long way out to the radio station. How did the

tank get up there without breaking down?

Mr. Roosevelt: It just shows MAAG has done a good job. The tanks

were getting around pretty well that day. We lost any immediate re-

sponsibility for the operation from then on. They took it into their own

hands, and they kept in constant touch with us, but largely about secu-

rity measures, what to do about the Tudeh, how to act when the Chief

of Police whom they had counted on defected on them and fled to the

hills.

Mr. Wilber: Who is he, Kim?

Mr. Roosevelt: Naderi, the Chief of Secret Police. They had

counted on him. I think he was the person who betrayed them.

Mr. Wilber: I was wondering if you had any stronger ideas.

Mr. Waller: What happened to Mumtaz?

Mr. Roosevelt: He wasn’t killed. Mumtaz was in charge of the

guard in front of Mossadeq’s house. They apparently did fight for a

while. The first story we got was that Mumtaz had been killed in front

of the house by a machine gun from a tank.

Mr. Wisner: Was that the fellow who was mentioned in the

telegram?

Mr. Helms: One telegram said he had to kill so and so.

Mr. Wilber: Yes.

Mr. Roosevelt: Did they say that we had to kill him?

Mr. Wisner: They said, “Unfortunately so and so (Mumtaz) had to

be killed.”

Mr. Roosevelt: Well, Mumtaz, we had nothing desperately against

him. He didn’t do very well by us.

Mr. Waller: Was he supposed to be in on it?

Mr. Roosevelt: No, he was not anyone we counted on, but we

hoped at the last minute he would come on our side, but he apparently

directed the defense of Mossadeq’s house and then fled at the appro-

priate moment, but the story was he had been shot and then committed

suicide in front of Mossadeq’s house, but two days later he turned up

without a scratch on him under arrest.

I think really when you come right down to it there were about

three casualties among the military which is, considering all the

shooting that went on, a remarkable thing, and probably somewhere

between 50 and 100 civilian casualties.

Mr. Waller: What about the Qashqais?

Mr. Roosevelt: Well, the Qashqais had gone to Shiraz now without

the mother who was in Teheran. The Qashqais left as far as we can

make out Tuesday because they could smell that things weren’t going

too well, and they beat it down to Shiraz, [9 lines not declassified].

There was one moment when the Tribesmen started to disarm the

gendarme´rie, and troops were sent down from Isfahan, and the whole

thing collapsed, and the Qashqai were being very quiet, so nothing

much came of them at all.

Now that covers the gap that wasn’t reported to Washington.

Mr. Helms: You may be interested to know as an aside that the

FBIS started picking up Radio Teheran play by play, and it was blasting

in here at a hell of a rate, so we were practically abreast of it the way

you were in Teheran.

Mr. Roosevelt: Except Radio Teheran was an extremely unreliable

source.

Mr. Helms: I mean it reported its unreliability. It would be off one

minute, and on the next, and crazy the next, etc., so we were all sitting

here sort of getting the pattern of this thing, wondering whether we

were in, out, up, or down.

Mr. Roosevelt: By the time we had Radio Teheran we were in. It

was just a question of getting them safely out on the streets, and, well,

March–August 1953

Mr. Wisner: May I ask you a couple of questions here?

Mr. Roosevelt: Yes.

Mr. Wisner: What do the tribes, in particular the Qashqai, look like

doing now?

Mr. Roosevelt: Well, I can tell you the first thing that happened

when this government came in was all the tribes except the Qashqai

sent telegrams to Zahedi saying, “If these Qashqai make any trouble,

don’t send the Army after them. Let us go and take care of them.” A

whole batch of telegrams came in, so that is one indication.

The Qashqai represented a problem that we have to concern our-

selves with now because it may be, much as some people like the four

brothers, that the time has come for them to go, and I think it could be

done quite easily.

Mr. Wisner: Would they make common cause in your opinion

with any opposition elements that might come up?

Mr. Roosevelt: They might, yes. I am in favor of fairly drastic ac-

tion with the Qashqai.

Mr. Helms: When this fellow Roosevelt says somebody has got to

go, you sort of go like this, don’t you, or they have had it?

Mr. Roosevelt: [1½ lines not declassified].

Mr. Waller: [1 line not declassified].

Mr. Roosevelt: [1 line not declassified].

Mr. Wilber: I wonder if it wouldn’t be the time instead of having us

go for us to move in on them as we plan to do over the years and

haven’t been able to quite pull off because of their resistance?

Mr. Roosevelt: It may be that that could be done, but the trouble is

the one thing they have been consistent on is they have always been

against the Shah. The Shah is now our boy and, dammit all, we can’t

Mr. Waller: You don’t suppose we could force them and, as Don

says, use a blunt instrument, not to do away with them but to get them

to help us out on a couple of odd jobs?

Mr. Roosevelt: Well, it might be. This is going to take a little study.

I don’t think it is anything we want to move too rapidly on. They are

potentially very useful and also potentially very dangerous, and we

have to decide which side of the coin is most likely to come up most

often.

Mr. Wisner: I would like to ask another question here. It has more

than one facet, and you can handle it in any way you like. It has to do

with the Tudeh Party, and their present strength, and the strength of

the menace that they represent at the present time, and what measures

are actually being taken against them.

Mr. Roosevelt: Well, first of all, about the present capabilities. [1½

lines not declassified] and after an initial period of confusion they all ap-

peared to be presenting the same picture, which was one of very sub-

stantial disruption, that the leadership was still relatively firm in its in-

tentions, but that the rank and file had pretty much dropped away. Has

anything come in since I left to give a different picture on that?

Mr. Waller: No.

Mr. Roosevelt: They tried to arrange a demonstration on Thursday

classified] and the Security Forces got word, and it never even showed

its head. I mean a few of them came creeping out looking for friends

and didn’t find any and scurried right back underground again, and I

would say that for the present time the Tudeh is in as bad shape as it

has been. When was it last proscribed?

Mr. Wilber: February, ’49.

Mr. Roosevelt: Yes, well, it is probably in worse shape than that.

Furthermore, the parties with which it has been allied recently, or with

which it might have allied, are also in bad shape—the Iran Party. Has it

been confirmed that Zirakzadeh’s brother cut his throat?

Mr. Wilber: We heard his older brother actually committed sui-

cide, but we haven’t any additional confirmation.

Mr. Roosevelt: We have that too, and it was evident that the Iran

Party had lost confidence in his leadership, and the great danger, of

course, was an alliance between the Tudeh and the Iran Party.

Mr. Wisner: Well, what measures are being taken to further smash

the apparatus and the machinery of the Tudeh Party?

Mr. Roosevelt: Well, both the Shah and Zahedi promised me that

very vigorous measures would be taken. What slowed them up was the

defection of this Police Chief of whom we had been hoping a great deal.

[3 lines not declassified] But what happened, on Wednesday morning the

guy took to the hills, and finally a day or so later we managed to arrest

him. So the machinery that had been set up to take care of that just

never functioned. Now when I last spoke to the Shah and Zahedi about

it and pointed out the urgency of the matter, they said that they recog-

nized the urgency, and what they proposed to do was combine the

Army and the Police, or at least assign Army Officers and Army units

to strengthen the Police and really go after these people in a big way.

Mr. Wisner: And the arms caches, surely they must be able to find

those?

Mr. Roosevelt: According to the newspaper reports they have al-

ready found one of the two major ones. At least I saw that in the London

Press.

March–August 1953

Mr. Wisner: Were any of the suggestions that we sent through to

you in one rather long cable4 just about the day before you left—we

hoped that you would receive it before your last conference there with

the Shah and Zahedi—accepted, or was it simply fortuitous that some

of these things were done anyway? These had to do with various meas-

ures such as the disposition of Mossadeq.

Mr. Roosevelt: Oh, yes. Well, those, as you probably recognized

when you sent them, were already things that we were trying to do.

Mr. Wisner: Yes.

Mr. Roosevelt: The disposition of Mossadeq was a debated subject

when I left. The Shah discussed it with Henderson. He discussed it

with me a little bit, but I didn’t really feel that it was up to me to get into

it too much. This was my final interview with the Shah on Saturday,

and I had certain points that I wanted to get across, and I didn’t want to

discuss a whole lot of things that really weren’t part of my operation.

Mr. Wisner: We appreciated that when we said it.

Mr. Roosevelt: I did say that I thought it was wise not to make a

martyr out of Mossadeq, and the Shah agreed, but I think the Shah still

at that time had the intention of having the public trial. Now I felt that

Henderson could talk him out of that if it is the opinion of the United

States Government that he should be talked out of it, but I would tell

you one thing: I would be more inclined to trust his judgment and

Zahedi’s about it than I would ours. I mean they know the psychology

of the situation, and certainly from here we can’t tell it. Maybe Hen-

derson [less than 1 line not declassified] out there can tell it, but I will tell

you back here you certainly can’t, and the one thing that I did say to the

Shah on the subject of trials was that I thought Riahi should be exe-

cuted, and the Shah said, “Well, why particularly?” He said, “he may

not have known he was acting against a firman of mine.” I said that he

certainly damn well did know and that he had said to General McClure

that even if he did know that it was your firman, Mossadeq was on the

side of the people, and his loyalty was to the people, and I said, “He

seems to have made a slight miscalculation, but I don’t think that ex-

cuses him for having committed treason,” and the Shah said that he

didn’t either. In fact, the Shah got rather a nasty glint in his eye at that

stage of the game. Riahi, you know, was the guy who wrecked us in the

first attempt. If it hadn’t of been for him there wouldn’t be any trouble

at all. So he and I think it is important for the morale of the Army that

an example be made of the senior officer who disobeyed the orders of

his Commander in Chief, so even though General McClure thinks Riahi

is a fine man, I am afraid that I think he should suffer.

Mr. Wisner: I have a number of other questions to ask, but I think

that probably they could wait. I am sure, however, that General Cabell

and the rest of us would like to hear something about what happened

in London.

Mr. Roosevelt: Oh, yes. Well, I don’t know whether you want all of

this taken down or not.

Mr. Wisner: No, I don’t think this is necessary.

308.

Monthly Report Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

IRAN

August 1953

A. General Developments

1. The fall of the Mossadeq government overshadowed all other

activities and operations in Iran. The successful outcome of the efforts

of General Zahedi and his supporters to gain control of the government

and the return of the Shah to Iran have undoubtedly paved the way for

increased internal stability and closer relations with the U.S., and have

created a favorable atmosphere for CIA operations in the country. As a

result of the change of government CIA contacts in key government

and military circles have been greatly increased; few losses were

sustained.

2. Experience has proven, however, that the Iranian internal polit-

ical situation is given to rapid and drastic change. While CIA should

capitalize to the fullest extent on the present favorable situation it

should at the same time prepare itself to cope with problems arising

under new and possibly unfavorable conditions.

3. The greatest assurance for the maintenance of the present gov-

ernment in power and internal stability lies in a rapid improvement of

the country’s finances and economy. Prompt initiation of new labor

giving projects under the long-range developmental program, known

3, Monthly Report—August 1953—Country Summaries and Analyses. Top Secret.

March–August 1953

as the Seven Year Plan, would create popular confidence. This action, if

properly propagandized, could be developed into a nation-wide pop-

ular appeal, having the effect of reducing the appeal of extreme nation-

alism and communism.

4. U.S. aid now contemplated may tide Iran over financially for the

time being and also provide means for starting developmental works,

but in the long run the solution lies in a settlement of the oil problem.

5. The new government wasted no time in clamping down on the

Tudeh Party by raiding cells and publications and making arrests. It

has established its control over the country generally through the Army

and civilian appointments. There is no information on the residual

strength of the now latent, extreme nationalist and other pro-Mossadeq

elements.

6. The Qashqai who appeared to be on the point of rebelling

against the new government at the time of its accession to power, are

quiescent at least momentarily, and with a consolidation of the new

government it is unlikely that they will take action against it. The Shah-

sevan and at least a part of the Bakhtiari have given their allegiance to

the new government. Other tribal elements appear to be quiescent, ex-

cept a few minor groups who frequently take advantage of unsettled

conditions to raid and plunder.

B. Station Synopsis

[Omitted here are paragraphs 7–12.]

C. Operational Summary

Political and Psychological Warfare

13. Although the anti-Tudeh activities continued, PP operations

were largely directed in support of bringing about a change in

government.

[4 paragraphs (11 lines) not declassified]

Paramilitary Operations

18. There were no important developments in the paramilitary

field during the month, as Iranian political developments compelled

the station to concentrate its efforts on political and psychological war-

fare activities.

[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]

John H. Waller

CNE-4

2 [name not declassified] signed for Waller above Waller’s typed signature.

309.

Memorandum From the Acting Chief of the Near East and

Africa Division, Directorate of Plans ([name not declassified])

to Director of Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, September 2, 1953.

SUBJECT

Memorandum of Conversation Between Mr. Henry Byroade, Assistant Secretary

of State for NEA, and John Waller, CNEA–4, Concerning Allayar Saleh, Iranian

Ambassador to the United States

The conversation reported herein took place at the request of the

Deputy Director, Plans:

1. Mr. Waller called Mr. Byroade’s attention to the fact that Ambas-

sador Saleh had tendered his resignation and presumably planned to

return to Iran in the near future. Information had reached us to the ef-

fect that the Iranian government had urged Saleh to remain at his post

and withdraw his resignation. However, it appeared that Ambassador

Saleh definitely intended to relinquish his post. Mr. Waller stated that

CIA was concerned by the prospect of Saleh’s return to Iran at this time

in view of his Iran Party ties and his very considerable personal pres-

tige which might be exploited by pro-Mossadeq or even pro-Tudeh po-

litical factions which are in current opposition to the Shah and the

Zahedi government. In this connection Mr. Waller recalled the recent

role of the Iran Party in support of Premier Mossadeq and in violent op-

position to the return of the Shah, which role had brought the Iran

Party dangerously close to outright alliance with the Tudeh Party.

2. Mr. Waller observed that this was essentially a Department of

State problem but that CIA felt that it was appropriate for its views to

be brought to the attention of the Department of State. Furthermore, it

would be perhaps possible for CIA to take covert action designed to

neutralize any adverse effect which Mr. Saleh’s return might occasion.

3. Mr. Byroade acknowledged the fact that the possible problems

presented by Ambassador Saleh’s return to Iran were of concern to the

Department of State. He stated that he also had received information to

the effect that the Zahedi government had urged Saleh to remain at his

Iran 1951–1953. Secret.

September 1953–December 1954

post in Washington and that Ambassador Saleh had refused to do so.

Mr. Byroade added that in his opinion Saleh now regretted having an-

nounced in such strong terms his allegiance to Mossadeq and opposi-

tion to General Zahedi. In Mr. Byroade’s opinion, Ambassador Saleh’s

press release on the subject was hastily made and made on the basis of

inadequate information from Iran which had caused Mr. Saleh to

under-estimate the degree of popular support for the Shah. Mr. By-

roade stated that the Department probably should have gotten to Am-

bassador Saleh before he made his unfortunate remarks to the press,

but that since these remarks were made it would appear that Ambas-

sador Saleh had burned his bridges behind him. Mr. Byroade believed

that there was absolutely no chance that Saleh would at this point con-

sider remaining as Ambassador to the U.S.

4. With regard to possible black campaigns intended to discredit

Saleh or otherwise neutralize him in Iran, Mr. Byroade felt that we

should proceed with caution since Saleh, given favorable circum-

stances, might later prove helpful to the U.S. Mr. Byroade stated that

the Department had an informal channel of contact with Saleh through

Mr. Engert, former Ambassador to Iran and Ambassador to Afghani-

stan. Through this contact it might be possible to encourage Saleh to

delay his return to Iran. However, Engert had reported recently that

Saleh intended to return straightway to Iran despite real fear and ap-

prehension as to his reception there.

5. Mr. Byroade stated that he was not sure we need worry about fu-

ture opposition activities by Saleh in Iran. Nevertheless, he shared to

some extent CIA’s concern in this regard. Mr. Byroade said he would

like to think about the problem further and he would let CIA know of

any action which the Department felt it should or could take either to

delay Saleh’s return to Iran, or to neutralize him once in Iran.

[name not declassified]

310.

Despatch From the Station in Iran to the Chief of the Near

East and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)

Tehran, September 4, 1953.

311.

Despatch From the Chief of Station in Iran ([name not

declassified]) to the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt)

Tehran, September 4, 1953.

312.

Telegram From the Chief of the U.S. Military Mission in Iran

(McClure) to the Chief of Staff, United States Army

(Ridgway)

mins. Conf was entirely in English with no rpt no interpreter nec. His

first and most important problem was the morale of the armed forces.

Something must be done immediately to provide min housing rqmts

for jr officers and noncommissioned officers many of whom at present

living in squalor. He accepted as an interim organization the one which

our mil had programmed and is now prepared to support—12 Inf Bri-

gades and 3 Armored Brigades and appropriate supporting trps. He

desires a highly proficient and tech trained small army with consider-

able mobility which could be backed, in time of war, by large numbers

of tribesmen armed as Inf and trained to fight defensively until over

run and then resort to guerilla tactics. To this end he required strate-

gically located bases to support a retirement from his northern frontier

to a final defensive line. While accepting the reorganization plan as an

interim measure, he is not rpt not satisfied with the equip we are pro-

viding. He stated that the tank battalions are equipped with tank de-

stroyers instead of tanks. These tank destroyers should ultimately be

transferred to Inf Brigades. He believes the heaviest tank which the

Russians would attempt to use on this country is the modified T–34 and

that his 3 Armored Brigades must be equipped with US tanks which

Iran 1951–1953. Confidential; Security Information.

September 1953–December 1954

will compete on favorable terms with this Russian tank. To this end he

asked for consideration of furn 3 battalions of Patton tanks. He stated

that each of the 5 corps required an Anti-Acft Battalion to protect

ground trps from straffing and bombing attacks, as well as to prevent

paratroops from dropping on airfields beyond our line. He asked for 3

additional AA Battalions. He also stated that airfields in the Teheran–

Tabriz areas would be non-usable thru immediate bombardment or by

seizure with paratroops. He wants these fields heavily mined and pre-

pared for destruction as well as the mining of critical passes thru the

Eiburz mountains. Recognizing the lack of adequate airfields in the

southern part of the country he rqsts consideration of steel matting for

air strips. He visualizes the mission of the Air Force as being one of

close support to ground trps only. He does not rpt not feel the F–47 is

effective enough to justify its continuance. He accepted the T–6 as an in-

terim vehicle and recognizes that it is much too early to ask for jet acft.

However he believes that specially selected Iran officers should be sent

to the US for a period of 2 years to become proficient in jet acft and form

the nucleus of an instructor group in Iran. He was very disappointed to

learn that the 155 Howitzers had been removed from the program. He

recognized that he had no rpt no authority over Gen Staff at the time

that was agreed upon. He was emphatic that the minimum rqmt for the

type force which Iran must have would require 5 battalions—1 for each

corps. He said an opponent having 155’s would put his ground forces

with 105’s at such disadvantage they would not rpt not stand even in

mountain passes. He also commented on the fact that there was no rpt

no bridge equip other than for tng purposes prov in the program.

While admitting there were apparently few rivers of any size in this

country he said that in certain seasons of the year his Armored Div

should have aval 200 meters of Bailey Bridge. He stated that he would

direct the Gen Staff to proceed at once with the reorganization. In his

parting remarks said he hoped we would have frequent meetings to

discuss mil matters and planned an early one to go over his strategic

plans in the event our northern neighbor moved south. In summary his

Imperial Majesty is concerned primarily with (A) Morale (B) The provi-

sion of 3 Tank Battalions capable of stopping the improved T–34 (C)

The addition of 3 Anti-Acft Battalions (D) The provision of 5 Battalions

of 155 Howitzers (E) Provision of bridge equip (F) Early tng of jet pilots.

The Shah was confident positive and intense during the conference and

left no rpt no doubt in my mind that he expects to assume leadership

over the Armed Forces.

313.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans (Wisner)

to Director of Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, September 8, 1953.

SUBJECT

Financial and economic assistance to Iran; the views and position of Mr. Eugene

Black, of the World Bank

1. Reference is made to the various memoranda held in reserve for

the Director concerning the efforts of this Agency to stimulate (by all

appropriate means) the interest and action of various US governmental

and other officials to the end that sufficient and timely economic and fi-

nancial assistance may be provided to the new Iranian Government.

After some days of unsuccessful effort to reach Mr. Eugene Black, he fi-

nally called me on September 4 and we had a very carefully guarded

conversation of which the following is the substance (although not the

wording, since no identifying references were made). I opened the con-

versation by saying that because of my familiarity with his own past in-

terest and efforts in “a certain country recently in the news,” I won-

dered what thought he was giving currently to the latest developments

and whether he had any idea of sending one of his representatives

there to take soundings. Mr. Black understood immediately and said

that he had indeed been thinking about this matter and had taken a few

actions, although he had not been approached by the State Department

about it.

2. Mr. Black said that the World Bank could not, at the present

time, entertain any request for a loan to Iran since it is a principle of the

Bank to make loans only in those cases where there is solid assurance

that the loan can be repaid. In the case of Iran obviously such a loan

could not be repaid unless and until that country’s problems with the

British were satisfactorily resolved.

3. Under the circumstances Mr. Black did not propose to send [less

than 1 line not declassified] representative of the Bank to Iran, as this

would undoubtedly give rise to speculation that the Bank was about to

entertain a loan application, which might cause further embarrass-

ment. However, with realization of how much assistance the Bank

could render Iran, Mr. Black consulted the head of the Monetary Fund

with respect to the willingness of the Fund to send a mission to Iran, if

Iran 1951–1953. Secret; Security Information. A note on the memorandum indicates it was

noted by DCI on September 10.

September 1953–December 1954

and when asked, to aid in solving the exchange problems which are

sure to arise—and in fact have already come up—[2 lines not declassi-

fied]. The head of the Fund readily agreed, and Mr. Black is hopeful that

this plan may go forward soon. [2 lines not declassified]

4. Mr. Black regards most favorably the man who has been named

as the new head of the Central Bank of Iran. This individual (Nasr) has

been Iran’s representative on the World Bank Board up until very re-

cently, and is now on his way home to take up his new post. Mr. Black

discussed with Mr. Nasr the desirability of the visit to Iran of a mission

from the Monetary Fund and understands that Mr. Nasr will, in his

new capacity as head of the Central Bank, request such a mission.

While Mr. Nasr was on duty in Washington, Mr. Black personally took

care to see that he met quite a number of key US officials such as As-

sistant Secretary of State Byroade, and persons of considerable impor-

tance in both the Treasury and the Federal Reserve System.

Frank G. Wisner

314.

Central Intelligence Agency Information Cable

CS PD 916

Washington, September 8, 1953.

SUBJECT

Qashqai–Zahedi Relations

SOURCE

[2 lines not declassified]

SUPPLEMENT TO

1. The Qashqai Khans are attempting to obtain from the Zahedi

government some “face saving” concessions (possibly a public an-

nouncement that the government has no intention of arresting “loyal

Iranians” Khosro and Mohammad Hoseyn Qashqai, and that it has re-

Political Activities—Iran. Secret; Security Information. Sent to the Departments of State,

Army, Navy, and Air Force, the National Security Agency, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the

Secretary of Defense, the Office of National Estimates, and the Office of Current

Intelligence.

315.

Memorandum From the U.S. Technical Cooperation

Administration Regional Director in Shiraz (Bryant) to the

Director of the U.S. Technical Cooperation Administration

Mission in Iran (Warne)

Shiraz, Iran, September 9, 1953.

Third Memorandum Report Pertaining to the Ghashghaie Situation

The Governor General, Mr. Haiat, and the General of the Sixth Di-

vision, Mirjahangiri, met the Ghashghaie brothers in an area near

Abadeh, at which time every effort was made to reconcile the Ghash-

ghaie with the present government. The Ghashghaie chiefs presented a

large number of considerations, some of them nearly impossible for the

government to accept without being embarrassed and showing

weakness. They asked for an early release of Mr. Mossadegh, members

of his Cabinet, and deputies of the Majlis who have been placed under

arrest by the present government. The brothers entered a strong protest

September 1953–December 1954

of being policed by the military except during periods of martial law

when instituted for the entire country.

In later discussions with the brothers they indicated that they did

not expect the government to concede to all of their requests. The pro-

posals made by them to gain their support or to remain quiet were pur-

posely difficult for the government as the Ghashghaies at this time

were not in a position to make a decision as to their future course of ac-

tion. This final decision will not be made until they meet with all of the

sub-tribal chiefs, consisting of approximately 100, in about two weeks

time.

The meeting was conducted in a friendly atmosphere and the

Ghashghaie high personal regard for Mr. Haiat and General Mirjahan-

giri was further enhanced; however no real satisfaction was realized by

the government (as intended by the chiefs), but a promise was made to

submit the Ghashghaie proposals to Tehran for further consideration.

Following this meeting there was a definite indication of increased

concern, particularly with the Kashkuli and Darashuri tribes, that a

peaceful settlement could not be obtained. It appears that this fear de-

veloped as a result of the difficult position purposely pursued by the

Ghashghaie brothers. Bahmanbegui made an early contact with me fol-

lowing this meeting stating that Ziad Khan, chief of the Darashuri, and

Elias Khan, chief of the Kashkuli, were in Shiraz and that they were

very uncertain as to the position taken particularly by their chief,

Khosrow Khan. They would not be disloyal, but they disliked any con-

tacts or any traffic of any nature with members of the Tudeh party.

They were also of the belief that no benefit could be achieved by

anti-government action on their part.

I turned down an invitation to see them personally since this might

be misconstrued by the brothers that we were creating dissension and

disloyalty among their people. These two chiefs, however, represent at

least 60 per cent or more of the Ghashghaies and, as it was evident that

they represented definite soft spots, I did send a message through Bah-

manbegui to them. We explained that we understood their concern and

that we were of the opinion that they could do much to stablize the

tribes at this critical time.

In an effort to lend their support they left Shiraz to meet with the

brothers a full day in advance of my appointment to see Khosrow and

Malek Mansour Khan. I believe that they contributed substantially in

convincing Khosrow that he should not take any anti-government ac-

tion at this time, but should make an effort to reconcile their position.

These two powerful sub-chiefs would undoubtedly remain loyal to the

majority view of the brothers, but, without question, Khosrow’s atti-

tude was softened as a result of pressure exerted by them. Khosrow’s

position would be greatly weakened if he failed to take their views into

consideration.

Bahmanbegui contacted Nasser Khan on my instructions for the

purpose of making arrangements for me to meet with him. Realizing

that Nasser was in sympathy with giving support to the present gov-

ernment, I left it for him to decide with whom I should meet. Nasser,

recognizing Khosrow’s popular following, suggested that I first meet

with Khosrow and Malek Mansour and, if this meeting was not suc-

cessful, he would make arrangements to see me at a very early date.

My meeting with Khosrow Khan, Malek Mansour, and other

leaders of the Ghashghaies took place on September 5 in an area known

as the Tangarue plain, approximately four or five hours drive from

Shiraz. Other Ghashghaies present at this meeting besides Khosrow

and Malek Mansour were Ziad Khan, Elias Khan, Habib, and Bahman-

begui. The camp was located only a very short distance from the area in

which they are presently staging a part of their force. I later learned that

it was necessary for them to establish this separate camp since they had

other visitors in their main area. I gathered that for the most part these

visitors consisted of pro-Mossadegh followers who are doing what

they can to encourage the Ghashghaies to take up action against the

government.

I covered frankly, but in some detail, the information which was

reviewed and decided upon in Tehran to give them. It was evident that

they were extremely anxious to hear from us and that in all probability

they would determine a course of action in accordance with the desires

of the Americans. I explicitly informed them that the action taken by

Ambassador Henderson was, in my opinion, extraordinary on their be-

half and that we expected this to remain absolutely confidential. They

were informed of the assurances given by General Zahedi that it was

not his desire in any way to make their position difficult, that he had

always enjoyed their friendship and confidence, and that he desired to

continue to maintain a close and satisfactory working relationship and

understanding with them. I also explained that General Zahedi would

welcome a visit by any of the brothers and that he would further assure

them of safe travel to and from Tehran if they wished to meet with him.

Khosrow deeply appreciated the fact that Ambassador Henderson

recognized that assurances from the Prime Minister would not be suffi-

cient to safeguard their future security and had, therefore, discussed

their situation with the Shah. In discussing the conversation that Am-

bassador Henderson and the Shah had, I pointed out to them that I was

of the opinion that Mr. Henderson had presented their situation in the

most favorable manner. They were informed that the Ambassador had

spoken to the Shah of the good working relationship we had always

maintained with the Ghashghaies and that they had always extended

September 1953–December 1954

to the Americans the finest hospitality and, in addition, had been of

substantial service to the Americans.

I explained that the Shah did not understand why they disliked

him since he felt that he had personally never done anything counter to

their interests. I further explained that the Shah had also informed Am-

bassador Henderson that he was so deeply concerned over the future of

Iran that he was not only willing but desirous to let “bygones be by-

gones,” and that he in no way wished to make conditions difficult for

the Ghashghaies. I made it clear to them that Ambassador Henderson

stated that he accepted these assurances from the Shah in the good faith

that he thought they were given. It was quite evident that Khosrow

would liked to have received more of a direct assurance from the

Americans, but nevertheless accepted our position that we could not

give a guarantee on matters which pertain to the internal affairs of any

nation. I am certain that these statements and assurances extracted by

Ambassador Henderson immediately greatly impressed the other

Ghashghaies and that as Khosrow had an opportunity to think about

it he was deeply appreciative for the effort that was made by Mr.

Henderson.

In my discussion with the Ghashghaies I covered in some detail

the opinions of Ambassador Henderson as to the consequences they

could expect if they took action counter to the interest of the gov-

ernment. I told them that the Ambassador was of the opinion that such

action on their part could lead to nothing but disaster as far as the

Ghashghaies were concerned. They were informed that as their friends

we would not want to see them suffer losses among their people, their

flocks, and their land.

Knowing that they had been in contact with the leading member of

the Shiraz Tudeh party (Tavalali) I stressed the fact that I knew that

they understood that we could not have a satisfactory relationship with

any group that had direct or indirect dealings with the Communists.

Khosrow did not hesitate to say that he had personally held discussions

with representatives of the Communists and that he had informed

them that regardless of the present situation that some day in the future

they would undoubtedly be shooting at each other.

Throughout all the discussion the Ghashghaies indicated that they

had faith and believed in General Zahedi, but that they did not feel that

his government would remain in office for any prolonged period of

time. However, at no time did they indicate that they could ever accept

the Shah or believe in any statement made by him. They are of the

opinion that the Shah will continue to interfere and to make political in-

trigues against the Prime Minister and his government. They stated

that they have concrete evidence that the Shah has already started to

criticize Zahedi. I believe, if anything, they have more contempt for the

present Shah than they even held for his father, if this is possible.

They hold in the highest regard the Governor General Haiat and

General Mirjahangiri, but possess a fear that they will be replaced by

someone who will not give them the consideration which they feel they

deserve. As indicated they deeply appreciate the efforts made by Mr.

Henderson, but fear also that at some date he may leave Iran and that

his influence will be forgotten. I pointed out to them that the conversa-

tions which took place had been reported and that certainly Wash-

ington would be informed of our position. This seemed to give them

some satisfaction as pertains to their future.

Since it was impossible to return to Shiraz Saturday night, I re-

mained with the Ghashghaies and later that evening Khosrow spent

about three hours with us at which time he spoke in detail of their

present situation. His attitude had softened a great deal as compared to

the early afternoon when I had talked with them as a group. It was evi-

dent that they had reviewed their situation and were fully aware that

any action on their part would ultimately benefit the Communists.

Khosrow stated that he knew they could not win, but that his first con-

cern was that they should be treated as other Iranians and that they

should not be subjected to martial law and that such action on the part

of the government might create an incident whereby they would be un-

able to avoid taking up arms. There seemed to be no doubt in his mind

as to their ability to seize the population centers of south Iran.

The one thing which the Ghashghaies seem to have in common is

an absolute lack of fear of military. Khosrow believes that many of the

officers are not loyal to the present government and stated that he was

informed by the Communist representatives that at least one garrison

held a 30 per cent Tudeh membership. He pointed out to me that

during the past week he had personally purchased 150 Bruno [Brno]

rifles sold by the army officers to them. These rifles were new and had

never been out of the box. They have been able to purchase any quan-

tity of ammunition that they desired from the army officers. They have

been promised other weapons including machine guns, bazookas, and

one officer had told them that he could secure for them two 75 mm.

guns. With this condition existing within the military they feel that it

would be completely ineffectual when placed under attack.

Khosrow stated that under no circumstance would they make an

immediate attack upon Shiraz. Their plan is to station a force near

Shiraz which would tie down the military in giving security to that vi-

cinity. They would then take as their first objective the city of Kazeroon.

Their choice in making Kazeroon their first objective is based on their

belief that 75 per cent or more of the population of that city would sup-

September 1953–December 1954

port the Ghashghaies, and secondly, because most of the military am-

munition dumps are in that vicinity.

Throughout Khosrow’s private discussion with me he continu-

ously kept coming back to the realization that regardless of what they

might achieve through armed action he realized that in the end they

would lose and that the Communists would gain. Khosrow stated that

he had repeatedly appealed to Dr. Mossadegh to discontinue his prac-

tice of tolerating the Communists and that he had tried to persuade

him to be more positive in his relationship with the United States. He

frankly stated that the tolerance of Communism by the past govern-

ment was the great mistake, and that although he recognized this, he

did not feel that he could desert Dr. Mossadegh. He pointed out that re-

gardless of what might happen to Iran in the future that he and the

Ghashghaies could never accept Communism and that as long as they

were a force they would fight it.

There is no doubt but what Khosrow still holds Dr. Mossadegh in

the highest esteem and sincerely believes that he has been one of Iran’s

great leaders. I emphasized to Khosrow that in my opinion in the

present situation one had to rise far above the matter of personalities

and that it was important to believe as the Shah in putting the welfare

of Iran above any individual differences. I am certain that Khosrow be-

lieves this is the proper attitude and that this will have a real bearing on

his final decision. In addition to this Khosrow has a very high respect

for Mr. Goodwin and repeatedly referred to him and I believe this to be

a very healthy influence upon him at this time.

Upon leaving the Ghashghaie camp the following morning one

could not help but feel that the Ghashghaie would accept most any sit-

uation rather than endanger their American friendship. I sincerely be-

lieve that they want to reconcile their views with the government. They

do not want to lose contact with us. They will not in the end try to drive

a hard bargain with the government. They would like to see Dr. Mos-

sadegh released, but not create trouble unless a sentence involving cap-

ital punishment were imposed.

Their second concern is the imposition of military supervision.

They want the same kind of policing as given to other Iranian civilians.

They state that they do not object to paying taxes or to having their sons

drafted for military service. They state that many of the Ghashghaie

families now have sufficient money whereby they are able to pay for

keeping their sons out of service and that this practice is not different

with them than other Iranian families that can afford to do so. They

want some share in aid which is being given for technical purposes and

for economic development. Three of the brothers believe that the tribes

should have a long range plan whereby they can be settled down and

amalgamated into the Iranian population.

They want most of all the development of an Iranian agency which

has the primary responsibility of not only supervising the tribes, but

will have a responsibility for their welfare. They want a bureau of tri-

bal affairs that has welfare functions over and beyond policing

responsibilities.

Upon leaving the camp one could not help but notice a change in

the atmosphere. I was specifically informed that they had carried their

discussions far into the night and that they had made one definite deci-

sion: they would not have any future contacts with members of the

Tudeh party, that they would not talk to anyone as an intermediary be-

tween them and the Tudeh party. They stated that they now realized

that the Tudeh party would only use the Ghashghaies to their advan-

tage and they were very anxious to impress upon me that they would

not receive in the future any other representatives. It should be men-

tioned that the Tudeh had definitely promised them all of the ammuni-

tion that they would need as well as helping them with arms and com-

munications. It is apparent that they will now have nothing to do with

this.

The following day after my return home I was informed by Bah-

manbegui that a message had been sent to one of the sub-tribal chiefs

by Khosrow that they were going to make peace with the government.

In evaluating the present situation I believe that much progress

has been made as a result of Mr. Henderson’s contacts and relation-

ships which have been maintained with Khosrow by Embassy officials

in the past as well as the efforts which have been undertaken by repre-

sentatives of the Iranian government. I do not believe that the Ghash-

ghaies will undertake any armed activity unless they feel that they are

being subjected to pressure or that an unfortunate incident should

occur between members of the tribe and the military. However, I have

been given assurances that they will make every effort to prevent any

incident occurring and that if one does occur they will do their best to

keep this from spreading into a larger conflict.

They will stage some forces near the vicinity of Shiraz. This will

not inconvenience them this year because of the extreme drought in the

south. They will benefit by remaining in this area until after the first

rains. They will probably not give open support to the present gov-

ernment, but will refrain from taking any anti-government action. They

believe that this government will fall through intrigues of the royal

court and that then they will have an opportunity to support a con-

structive third government. If this does not happen and there are no in-

cidents within the next two or three months and they feel assured that

this government has strength, there is a good possibility that they then

may support it. If this government remains in office for two or three

316.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 154

Tehran, September 11, 1953.

SUBJECT

Attitude of Qashqai Tribes Toward the Zahedi Government

There are transmitted herewith several items reflecting upon the

attitude of the Qashqai tribes toward the Zahedi Government (see list

on page 3).

As was to be expected, the Qashqai tribes were greatly alarmed by

the change in administration occurring on August 19, fearing that it

portended activity against them by the Central Government and by the

Shah in particular. Principally through the leadership of Khosro Qash-

qai, a member of the National Movement Faction in the 17th Majlis, the

tribes thoroughly allied themselves with the Mosadeq Government

and on repeated occasions indicated to American officials in Iran that

they would resist with force any change in administration unless they

were assured in advance of a benevolent attitude on the part of the suc-

cessor government.

In keeping with previous events, on August 19 tribesmen dis-

armed the Gendarme´rie garrison of some 20 men at Semiron, summer

seat of the tribes, but restored them to their former duties several days

Security Information. Drafted by Gannett. Received September 18. Sent by pouch to Is-

fahan and London.

later when it appeared no untoward actions against the tribes were

forthcoming from Tehran. Khosro Khan, who had personally led an

anti-Shah mob through the streets of Shiraz on August 16, was back in

Tehran by August 19 but beat a hasty retreat that day to Fars Ostand

when it became apparent the Mosadeq Government was falling. Mean-

while, Nasr Khan who had already sought to impose the role of inter-

mediary between the tribes and the American Government upon Mr.

Elmer C. Bryant, Regional Director at Shiraz of Technical Cooperation

for Iran, got in touch with Mr. Bryant through Dr. Bahman Bege. Ini-

tially his intentions were ostensibly to acquaint the American Govern-

ment with the alarm the tribes felt, but in reality he doubtless wished to

solicit American moral if not material support as well as to sound out

the intentions of the new administration in Tehran. The tribes began

immediately preparations for the southward migration, some 30 days

earlier than customary, in order to place as much distance between

them and Tehran as possible and to take up secure winter positions in

the shortest period of time. Mr. Bryant relates his several conversations

with Dr. Bahman Bege in a memorandum of August 24, 1953 (see enclo-

As a consequence of these conversations and of the local situation,

Mr. Bryant decided to come to Tehran, making the trip by car on Au-

gust 23. The Embassy’s telegram to the Department (no. 484 of August

from the Qashqai chieftains, the Ambassador’s conversation with the

Shah and the oral messages given to Mr. Bryant to be conveyed to the

chieftains from the Shah and the Ambassador. As yet no report has

been received from Mr. Bryant concerning any further conversations he

may have had with the Qashqais. Under date of August 30, however,

he forwarded a memorandum (enclosure no. 2) on “Current Activities

of the Qashqais and Associated Tribes,” in which he indicates he had

not yet been in direct touch with the Qashqais as the chieftains, who ap-

parently desired to meet jointly with him, were still separated over a

wide area and would not receive any communication through an

intermediary.

The Qashqai chieftains have, of course, maintained other, more

conventional channels with Tehran. Their mother has remained in the

capital since before the events of August 19 and is known to have coun-

seled them recently more than once not to take any precipitant action.

Habib Qashqai has made a number of trips to the South since the fall of

the Mosadeq Government. Moreover, Ali Hayat, who became Gov-

ernor General at Shiraz following August 19, but recently resigned that

post in order to accept appointment as President of the Supreme Court,

September 1953–December 1954

has been in direct touch with the tribes and states that “since there is

still some unfinished work to be done (he is going back to Fars tempo-

rarily) as the Government’s special representative” (see enclosure no.

4). He has stated that the tribes have given solemn assurances they will

not disturb the peace, and that for its part the Government has assured

the chieftains may safely visit Tehran in order to pay their respects to

the Shah.

As of present writing, it seems apparent that the Qashqai chieftains

do not in fact intend to resort to a state of insurrection against the Cen-

tral Government unless they are subjected to punitive action, but that

they intend to take precautionary measures against such an eventu-

ality. Meanwhile they have talked “loudly” and made numerous

threats, partly as a result of the initial shock felt by the turn of events on

August 19, partly to check any untoward moves by the Tehran author-

ities, and partly to save face with their own tribesmen. The Zahedi Gov-

ernment as well as the Shah, on the other hand, gives every indication

of wishing, for the present at least, to relax tensions between them and

the Qashqais, and to restore amicable relations.

For the Ambassador:

Roy M. Melbourne

First Secretary of Embassy

pointment of Ali Hayat, former Governor-General of Fars Province, to the Presidency of

the Supreme Court. In his former capacity as Governor-General, Hayat commented on

the tense, although improving, relationship between the government and the Qashqai.

reproduces a warning issued on August 21, in which Brigadier Davalu referred to rumors

that Mohamed Nasr Qashqai wished to incite a rebellion in the Semiron area. Davalu

warned: “If these publications were really signed by Mr. Mohamed Nasr Qashqai, he, as

well as Messrs. Mohamed Hosein and Khosro, is hereby notified to confess that he has

been wrong, come immediately to Isfahan, and ask to be forgiven and be sure that he will

definitely be secure. Failing to do so, they and the small number of people who, contrary

to their religious and national duties, should make troubles for the people or the guards

at the Gendarme´rie outposts, etc., will promptly and mercilessly be wiped out by air and

land.” Enclosure no. 5 is a report from Asia Javan, September 9, that listed four conditions

rumored to have been put to Hayat by the Qashqai, but which Hayat denied. The condi-

tions read: “1. Release of Dr. Mosadeq and the leaders of the National Movement; 2.

Freedom for political parties; 3. Continuation of the national struggle; 4. Continued sev-

erance of relations with Britain.”

317.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–20045

Washington, September 14, 1953.

SUBJECT

Relations between the Shah and Prime Minister Zahedi

SOURCE

[1 line not declassified]

since his return to Iran. “Before 19 August 1953, I was the son of Reza

Shah. Now I am the Shah in my own right.”

2. The Shah stated also that he will not make the mistakes he made

with Ali Razmara and Mohammed Mossadeq. During their premier-

ships, he kept “hands off” and let them run the country; he will now

take a direct interest.

3. The Shah has told Brigadier General Hassan Akhavi, Deputy

Chief of Staff, to send all Army papers to him. The Shah added that

Prime Minister Zahedi could receive information copies but that all ac-

tion on Army matters would proceed from himself.

4. The first disagreement between the Shah and Zahedi occurred

concerning Major General Ahmad Vosuq, Deputy Minister of National

Defense. Vosuq is a “Shah man” and Zahedi is resisting Vosuq’s ap-

pointment as Minister of National Defense and states that he does not

trust Vosuq. The Shah has announced that Zahedi must refrain from in-

terfering in Army affairs.

5. The Shah has included Ardeshir Zahedi, the son of the Prime

Minister, within his private circle of friends. The Shah plays volleyball

with Ardeshir, and once, when the latter was two hours late for an ap-

pointment with the Shah about which Ardeshir had not been notified,

the Shah solicitously sent his own limousine in search of him and called

the Police and the Military Governor. The Shah is worried about the

danger of attempts on the lives of both Prime Minister Zahedi and his

son Ardeshir.

6. The Shah has ordered Prime Minister Zahedi to wear a bullet-

proof vest of American origin on all state occasions, saying, “This is an

order that you must obey.”

CS Information Reports 20040–20049. Secret; Control—U.S. Officials Only.

318.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Iran Branch, Near East

and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans (Waller) to Director

of Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, September 16, 1953.

SUBJECT

Transmittal of Texts of Messages Sent By Prime Minister Zahedi and Prime

Minister Churchill

At your request, made during the NSC briefing given to you 15

September, the texts of Prime Minister Zahedi’s personal message to

Prime Minister Churchill, and Prime Minister Churchill’s reply to

Prime Minister Zahedi are herein repeated.

Personal and Secret Message Sent By Prime Minister Zahedi to Prime

Minister Churchill on 3 September:

“Everything I suffered at British hands is forgotten. The centuries-

old friendship between Britain and Iran, which was temporarily broken

by mischief-makers, must be restored.

“I want Iran to be one family with Britain and America, to stand

firmly hand-in-hand against Soviet Communism. To survive, we must

act as one. I pledge my hand.

“Because of Iran’s present condition, she is in need of friendship.

She will accept friendly gestures as only proud and dignified people

can do, recognizing at the same time the dignity and nobility which

prompt friends to give her assistance.

“This is spoken to you from a soldier’s heart, withholding nothing

from a greater soldier whom I greatly admire and respect.”

Personal and Secret Reply to Above Sent By Prime Minister

Churchill to Prime Minister Zahedi on 8 September:

“I am very glad to receive your message and congratulate you on

coming to the rescue of your ancient land and preserving its constitu-

tional monarchy. You may be sure that Britain will welcome the revival

of our centuries old friendship. We ought to be able to find ways of

helping each other and we are certainly willing to play our part. I shall

always be very glad to hear from you.”

The above messages were transmitted via CIA channels.

John H. Waller

NSC Briefing 17 Sept 53. Top Secret; Security Information.

319.

Briefing Notes Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

for Director of Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, undated.

THE SITUATION IN IRAN

I. Zahedi disappointed over US aid:

A. Prime Minister Zahedi considers $45,000,000 too small to un-

dertake necessary development and job-creating projects.

B. He allegedly considered resignation, but stated he was reas-

sured after talking to Ambassador Henderson on 11 September.

C. Zahedi is planning to send a special envoy to Washington be-

fore Congress opens to ask for more aid.

D. Point IV director Warne estimates that $37,000,000 of American

aid is required to meet Iran’s budget deficit for next 7 months—

$8,000,000 would remain for economic development.

E. The American grant enables Iran to meet immediate obligations,

but Zahedi must settle with Britain and sell Iran’s oil in order to carry

out program after US aid ends.

II. Zahedi has not yet proposed reopening oil negotiations with British:3

A. He has sent a message to London via the Swiss asking British to

“take the initiative in creating a more favorable climate in Tehran.”

B. The British have asked the US to find out informally what

Zahedi means by “taking the initiative.”

III. The Foreign Office feels that negotiations with Zahedi should be based

on the February 1953 proposals made to Mossadeq:5

A. Any agreement must provide “fair compensation” to AIOC for

loss of its enterprise in Iran.

B. Iran must not profit more from its oil than the neighboring

countries.

NSC Briefing 17 Sept 53. Top Secret; Security Information. Prepared for DCI Dulles for

his briefing to the NSC on September 17; see Document 320.

September 1953–December 1954

C.

The

February

proposals

represent

Britain’s

minimum

requirements.

D. Zahedi cannot appear too eager to settle with British nor can he

fail to settle the dispute.

E. He is not likely to consider settling on terms which appear to

prevent Iran from receiving full value for its oil or which puts Iran in

Britain’s debt for a long period.

IV. Anti-Tudeh drive continuing effectively:

A. 3,000 suspect government employees reportedly discharged, ar-

rests of Tudeh total about 1,300.

B. Many arrested Tudeh will be put in a concentration camp in

Luristan province in western Iran.

C. Important Tudeh members will be given trial by military court;

rank and file will probably be released without trial after short

imprisonment.

D. Tudeh membership is disorganized by police raids, but the

party is trying to reduce cell structure from 8 to 3 to increase its

security.

E. Tudeh reportedly receiving arms smuggled in from Soviet

Union via Caspian Sea. Soviet embassy in Tehran believed printing lit-

erature for Tudeh whose presses have been destroyed.

F. Party still trying to carry on propaganda campaign including

wall slogans and tracts; also trying to form united front with other

anti-government groups such as Iran Party.

G. Despite government measures, party structures considered

intact and party making strong effort to continue functioning

underground.

H. Tudeh will be ineffective only as long as a government con-

tinues strong suppressive measures.

V. The shah is asserting leadership:

A. Reports from Tehran emphasize shah’s new-found confidence.

B. He apparently feels that he has the mandate of the people.

C. Shah is trying to establish tight control over the army.

D. This pleases the minister of defense and the chief of staff, but

has resulted in friction with Zahedi.

E. Possibility exists of more disagreements between shah and

Zahedi.

VI. Some cabinet changes are expected:

A. The cabinet, containing many old-time politicians, has aroused

criticism.

320.

Editorial Note

The 162nd meeting of the National Security Council, September

17, 1953, included a discussion of Iran. While delivering his briefing on

significant world developments affecting U.S. security, Director of

Central Intelligence Dulles commented that “Zahedi would have his

headaches in spending the $45 million aid from the U.S. He called at-

tention to the new determination being exhibited by the Shah, for ex-

ample, in his requiring the Chief of Staff to report directly to the Shah

rather than to the Prime Minister. In the long run Mr. Dulles felt this

would be a favorable and stabilizing change. In explanation of the

Shah’s change of behavior, Mr. Dulles suggested that it was only now

that the Shah had become convinced of his personal hold over the

people.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Series, Box 4a,

162nd NSC Meeting) (For the text of that portion of the memorandum

of discussion at the National Security Council meeting devoted exclu-

sively to Iran, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, volume X, Iran,

321.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 172

Tehran, September 18, 1953.

REF

SUBJECT

Attitude of Qashqai Tribes Toward the Zahedi Government

There is transmitted herewith an additional memorandum con-

cerning the Qashqai tribes by Mr. Elmer C. Bryant, Regional Director at

Shiraz of the U.S. Operations Mission for Iran. Mr. Bryant describes

the interview he had with Khosro Khan and Malek Mansur Khan to de-

liver oral messages to the Qashqais from the Shah and from Ambas-

sador Henderson (Embassy Telegram no. 484, August 26, repeated

London as no. 140) as regards the tribes’ relationship with the Zahedi

Government.

In summary, it would appear the Qashqais continue to consider

the Shah as an anathema and Prime Minister Zahedi, while personally

an honorable man, as the Shah’s creature whose Government can be ex-

pected to fall in the not distant future; hence they will continue to re-

main aloof and will wait until the anticipated formation of another

government before coming to terms with the Tehran authorities. Nev-

ertheless, the chieftains appeared impressed by the word conveyed by

Mr. Bryant that the Shah wished to let bygones be bygones and that

Ambassador Henderson accepted this assurance as given in good faith.

Finally, the chieftains appeared to have reached a decision to disasso-

ciate themselves completely from the Tudeh. In this latter connection

there have appeared in the last few days a number of press stories that

Nasr and Khosro have publicly reaffirmed their devotion to Mohamed

Mosadeq and their desire to see the former Prime Minister returned to

power. It seems probable this unlikely and unconfirmed report was in

fact originated by the Tudeh, who have carried it as one item in a clan-

destinely circulated printed leaflet of their own.

Security Information. Drafted by Gannett. Received September 19. Sent by pouch and

copied to Isfahan and London.

There are, unfortunately, indications that the Shah is in fact rather

riled by the Qashqais’ actions in recent weeks and would derive consid-

erable personal satisfaction in causing them harm. But for the moment

there appears little likelihood that this disposition will be allowed to set

the course of events.

Mr. Bryant, who has been in Tehran the last few days for a confer-

ence of Regional Directors, states the only item of interest coming to his

attention with regard to the Qashqais since the date of his most recent

memorandum5 was concerned with an incident at Firuzabad, to the

southeast of Shiraz, on about September 10. Apparently a sizable

number of Qashqai tribesmen straddled the road from Shiraz in that vi-

cinity, but did not attempt to interrupt traffic; nevertheless, this display

of force so greatly alarmed officials at Firuzabad that they sent frantic

messages to Shiraz and eventually some 80 gendarmes on duty in the

vicinity simply departed in fright. The incident is indicative of the gen-

eral uneasiness felt in the area and the possibilities for more serious

troubles. The tribesmen in question appeared to be part of a group

which remained in the Shiraz vicinity at the time of the northward mi-

gration last spring, to oversee Qashqai interests in view of the incident

of April 16–17. As Mr. Bryant indicates, the tribes intend to group for

the next few months at least in the general vicinity of Fahlian, to the

northwest of Shiraz, where this year grazing is more advantageous

than in more traditional but drought-stricken areas further south.

For the Ambassador:

Roy M. Melbourne

First Secretary of Embassy

322.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt)

Washington, September 21, 1953.

The following information from Tehran, Iran dated 19 September,

1953 is evaluated at 3. Sources of this information were competent

American observers (B). Subject of the information is “Survey of Cur-

rent Iranian Situation”.

1. Political:

A. Energetic action against Tudeh Party is gaining increased public

respect for new government. However, this partially offset by slowness

in bringing former Prime Minister Mossadeq and his advisors to trial.

B. Because of “soft” government treatment of Mossadeq, Mos-

sadeq’s followers and the Tudeh Party are exploiting the situation to set

up opposition to Prime Minister Zahedi; the suggestion that Mossadeq

“is down but not out” is heard more and more frequently.

C. There is much public criticism of Zahedi’s appointments but

few constructive suggestions on possible replacements. It is obvious,

however, that part of this criticism stems from disgruntled politicos

who have not received jobs.

D. Among factors threatening stability of the Zahedi government,

the most serious are signs of friction between the Shah and Zahedi over

Army appointments and talk in court circles that Dr. Baghai might be a

good man to replace Zahedi.

2. Military:

A. Chief of Staff Batmangelich “is throwing his weight around”,

bypassing Zahedi and Minister of Defense Hedayat, and carrying his

problem directly to the Shah (who insists that the Army is his).

B. As a result of paragraph 2A above, Batmangelich is the object of

Zahedi’s ire.

C. Intriguing jointly with Batmangelich against Zahedi are Gen-

erals Deihimi and Akhavi, Deputy Chiefs of Staff, who are also at-

tempting secretly to oust Batmangelich in favor of pro-British General

Arfa.

3. Religious: The Shah is courting the favor of the leading Moslem

prelates; Zahedi is losing their favor because of his firm stand in re-

sisting clerical efforts to dictate appointments to government jobs.

Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret.

323.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt)

Washington, September 22, 1953.

The following information from Tehran, Iran, dated 5–17 Sep-

line not declassified] well-placed to obtain this information (C). Subject of

the information is “Rivalry Between Shah and Prime Minister Zahedi

Over the Control of the Army”.

1. A power tug-of-war between the Shah and Prime Minister

Zahedi over the control of the Army continues to be a serious threat to

Iranian stability.

2. Zahedi and General Hedayat, Minister of National Defense, pull

against the Shah, Chief of Staff General Batmangelich and the latter’s

two deputies, Generals Akhavi and Deihimi.

3. The Shah has replaced Colonel Moini (first name unknown) of

Military Police and Brigadier General Timur Bakhtiar, Commander of

Kermanshah Brigade, without Zahedi’s knowledge.

4. Batmangelich is resisting the return of retired officers to active

duty while Zahedi is pressing for their return.

5. Zahedi now hopes to have General Garzan installed as new

Chief of Staff.

6. Rumors persist that General Arfa is behind Generals Deihimi

and Akhavi. Akhavi asked “a colonel” to see General Guilanshah and

have latter urge Zahedi to make Arfa Chief of Staff.

7. General Vosuk, soon leaving for Iranian Embassy, Washington,

was the victim of the Shah–Zahedi power struggle.

Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret. Printed from an uninitialed copy.

324.

Memorandum From the Chief of Station in Iran ([name not

declassified]) to the Ambassador to Iran (Henderson)

Tehran, September 25, 1953.

1. Qashqai Khans and all Kalantars pledged their word to the

writer 22–23 September that they:

A. Will fight only if attacked.

B. Have “complete confidence” in Gen. Zahedi whom they con-

sider friend of 30 year standing, but do not trust the Shah (because of

past betrayals) and must be prepared to protect themselves against

him.

C. Intend to obey laws, pay taxes, etc.

D. Would, if provided with “face-saving” device, swear (and keep)

allegiance to Gen. Zahedi and the Shah.

E. Will not join any Tudeh plan, nor tolerate Tudeh activity in their

area.

2. Qashqais’ requested that above be passed on to Gen. Zahedi,

and the following proposal be discussed with both Gen. Zahedi and the

Shah:

A. In order to save Qashqai face and free them from word given

Mosadeq to support him to “end” the Shah might pardon Mosadeq, on

Qashqai petition, allowing him retire to village or leave country.

B. On promise such action, Qashqais would bow before the Shah

and give guarantee they would:

(1) support him and government “100 percent.”

(2) have no further dealings with Mosadeq or followers.

(3) themselves (Qashqai Khans) leave Iran if the Shah felt their ab-

sence would benefit Iran.

3. Advised by the writer that he felt above proposal would not be

accepted, Qashqais said they view it as simple face-saving device, but

would welcome any other acceptable proposal under which they could

bow before the Shah without violating word to Mosadeq, whom they

hold in greatest respect. Once they considered their pledge to Mosadeq

fulfilled, Qashqais’ said, they ready assure same degree loyalty to

Zahedi–Shah.

(chieftains and gray beards of all 18 Qashqai units and one Boir Ahmad

unit) stated:

A. In past (except under Mosadeq) they relegated to role second-

class citizen and subjected to “control” by army groups which despised

and insulted them, molested their women and stole their goods.

B. Under Mosadeq, their welfare “considered” and there was no

trouble in their area.

C. In past, their enemies saddled them with unwarranted reputa-

tion double dealing. They “gave their word” to Americans years ago

and to Mosadeq 28 months ago and considered themselves bound in

both cases.

D. They had not caused trouble since Mosadeq fall only out of re-

spect their cooperation to Americans. They intend to continue to follow

American advice but in present instance feel bolt to Zahedi bandwagon

would cheapen them and tend to confirm enemy accusations (C above).

5. During the powwow at Qashqai headquarters Nasr Khan

Qashqai expressed confidence in the Commanding General, Shiraz

Garrison, and, in order to relieve local anxiety regarding Qashqai con-

centration, started Qashqai groups on southward migration—despite

obvious shortage forage. Two of the largest units were observed by Col.

Brooking, The Embassy’s Air Attache´, the following morning, moving

southward 20 miles west of Shiraz.

6. Following the powwow, a close friend of the Qashqais told the

writer: “The wound is fresh now; give them three months and this will

heal itself”.

7. Returning to Tehran by air the morning of 24 September, the

writer observed hordes of Qashqais and flocks jamming 30-mile moun-

tain trails moving southward toward winter quarters.

325.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 187

Tehran, September 26, 1953.

SUBJECT

Aspects of the Political Environment of the Zahedi Government

Summary

There has been a tendency to regard the Mosadeq Government in

retrospect as a noble but unsuccessful experiment, and to credit Mo-

sadeq himself with high motives which were thwarted by unworthy

advisers and the former Prime Minister’s own faults of character. It is

necessary to convict Mosadeq and his advisers of their crimes as soon

as possible; delay makes this already thorny problem increasingly diffi-

cult. The Zahedi Government has not succeeded in posing as the inher-

itor of the nationalist movement, but has successfully represented itself

as the guardian of the constitution and the monarchy and therefore as

the champion of order and stability; its popularity rests in part on the

belief that it can achieve and maintain profitable relationships with the

West, particularly the United States. Iranians welcome American sup-

port of the new Government, and advise us that in their eyes the United

States has now, by supporting the Zahedi Government, recognized its

responsibilities in Iran; they desire internal political support as well as

economic aid from the United States. Iranians also hope to improve

their relationships with the nations of the free world, including Britain.

Public opinion now seems favorably inclined toward some kind of rea-

sonable settlement of the oil question; however, there will be an oppor-

tunity for unscrupulous demagoguery to complicate matters before the

problem is finally resolved. Political courage and skill will be required

to reconstitute a full-fledged Majlis following Mosadeq’s attempt to de-

stroy this institution. Continued good relations between the Govern-

ment and the Court are vital to the stability of Iran; the relationship will

continue to be subject to disruptive influences.

The Mosadeq Era in Retrospect

The Iranian people’s retrospective assessment of the historical sig-

nificance of the Mosadeq era is one of the major factors defining the

freedom of action of the present and any future governments of Iran.

dential; Security Information. Received October 2. Drafted by John Howison, Second Sec-

retary of Embassy. A handwritten note on the despatch indicates it was read and ap-

proved by Henderson.

One of the seeming paradoxes so frequent in Iranian politics has

been the public’s inclination to begin weaving a favorable myth around

the Mosadeq Government only a few days after demonstrating an over-

whelming desire that Mosadeq be ousted. Even among those who had

opposed Mosadeq most bitterly during the final months of his incum-

bency there are partisans of the belief that the old National Front move-

ment had been a noble if unsuccessful experiment. The Government

has begun an information campaign seeking to nullify this impression

with limited success to date.

Some Iranians offer the unilateral explanation that the lingering

favor for the former Government represents the hold on the public of

Mosadeq’s personality. Representatives of all shades of opinion stub-

bornly cling to the belief that Mosadeq was a patriot sincere in purpose.

Most of his strongest critics grant him this much, but condemn him for

disqualifying traits of character such as stubborness, inflexibility, and

hunger for power. His defenders attempt to blame all the former Gov-

ernment’s shortcomings on Mosadeq’s advisers. This analysis serves to

exalt Mosadeq even further: he becomes a sort of demi-god who is too

good to live among ordinary Iranians, who frequently seem to take a

perverse pride in themselves as a nation of unprincipled Haji Babas.

A somewhat broader explanation of Mosadeq’s continuing reputa-

tion proceeds from the nature of the “national movement” which he

epitomized. Some anti-Mosadeq observers now admit that the Na-

tional Front initially had the sympathies, at least in principle, of as

many as ninety percent of politically conscious Iranians. It seems evi-

dent that nationalism, defined to mean freedom from foreign political

influence and economic exploitation, is still an attractive ideal to most

Iranians, even those who reject it as impractical or as incompatible with

their personal interests. Under these circumstances, at a time when

many Iranians feel obliged to compromise on the matter of foreign in-

fluences, Mosadeq to some extent symbolizes the nationalist ideal.

However, most Iranian observers are inclined to think that Mosadeq’s

term as the active leader of the forces of nationalism has ended.

Mosadeq’s Advisers

Public attitudes toward Mosadeq’s advisers are sharply different

from those expressed toward the former Prime Minister. Ex-Foreign

Minister Hosein Fatemi is probably the best-hated man in modern Ira-

nian history. Anti-Mosadeq elements are hardly less bitter toward Fa-

temi than are Mosadeq’s most devoted partisans, who put Fatemi in

first place among the “unworthy” advisers whom they blame for Mo-

sadeq’s failures. When Fatemi was reported to have been torn to pieces

by the mob on August 19, the Iranian public, usually repelled by the

idea of physical violence, seemed to welcome the report without a

qualm. Efforts to capture him still hold a high place in public interest.

September 1953–December 1954

Next in order of degree of guilt, as judged by the Iranian public,

come Deputies Shayegan, Zirakzadeh, Sanjabi and Hasibi. The first

three are blamed along with Fatemi for Mosadeq’s cooperation with

the Tudeh Party. Hasibi is blamed for contributing to the Mosadeq

Government’s failure to achieve a favorable settlement of the oil ques-

tion; a stronger reason for blame may be, however, that he, like Fatemi,

jumped from comparative obscurity to a position of influence without

undergoing the requisite political apprenticeship which is normally ex-

pected of top-ranking government figures. As in the case of Fatemi,

these four advisers are now unpopular with Mosadeq supporters and

opponents alike.

Particularly distasteful to anti-Mosadeq Iranians are individuals

such as former Ministers Alemi and Sadeqi, who after Mosadeq’s fall

professed to have been completely fooled by Mosadeq and to have

been entirely unaware of his more flagrantly anti-constitutional inten-

tions. Several prominent Iranians intimated to Embassy officers that

the disclaimers of responsibility by Alemi and Sadeqi were in their eyes

prime examples of the moral degradation which had accompanied Mo-

sadeq’s destruction of constitutionalism. Referring to these ministers,

Dad on September 14 editorialized:

“They allowed themselves to be used for the annihilation of our

country, and now that the government has fallen, they are making sor-

rowful statements to acquit themselves.

“These turncoats who bow before every power are the cause of

misery and wretchedness of our fatherland. It is deplorable that a min-

ister who admits that he used to read government decisions in the

papers continued in office and drew his salary until the last day of the

government.”

Prosecution of Mosadeq and His Advisers

One of the thorniest political problems besetting the new Govern-

ment is the disposition of the person of Prime Minister Mosadeq and of

those of his advisers and supporters who are also accused of treason or

deliberate breaches of the constitution. More than a month after

Zahedi’s accession, no indictments against them have been rendered.

Although the Government maintains that cases are being prepared as

fast as possible and occasionally makes general statements of the

progress being made, the problem becomes progressively more acute

as time goes on. The public generally interprets the Government’s

failure to take prompt action as a sign of weakness, and anxiously

awaits actual trials; delay has already given time for the pro-Mosadeq

legend to grow, and for the feelings of righteous indignation earlier

held by part of the public to wane.

Qualified Iranian observers who have discussed this problem with

Embassy officers have varying opinions as to the preferable jurisdiction

for these trials, but most agree that the choice of a court is of secondary

importance. They have been virtually unanimous on three points:

1) the sooner the trials are held and sentences passed, the better for the

Zahedi Government; 2) Mosadeq should not be allowed to put his his-

trionic abilities to work in a public trial if it can possibly be avoided;

3) no harm should come to Mosadeq personally. The most popular for-

mula provides that Mosadeq be tried promptly on charges of treason,

in a closed or carefully managed court, and condemned to death, sen-

tence to be commuted by the Shah to permanent exile.

Although there seems to be little question of the advisability of

prompt trials, it goes without saying that the trials should be conducted

carefully, with an eye to maximum propaganda exploitation. The os-

tensible reason for the delay in proceeding with the trials is that consid-

erable time is required for formal interrogations and the preparation of

indictments. Other possible reasons for the delay have been suggested,

most of them purely speculatively: Zahedi may be uneasy, looking

backward at the Qavam affair, about establishing a fresh precedent for

the punishment of ex-premiers; bribes or blackmail may be at work in-

side the military judicial machinery which is preparing for the trials;

hidden sentiment for Mosadeq the individual may be motivating

members of government. Embassy observers find it difficult to credit

the popular belief that the Government’s lethargy represents simple

“fear” of pro-Mosadeq elements. The simplest and perhaps best expla-

nation of the Government’s slowness in proceeding against Mosadeq is

that such processes are always slow-moving in the hands of Iranians.

Neither Government nor public seems very concerned about the

chastisement of Mosadeq’s advisers and lieutenants such as former

Chief of Staff Riahi; should Fatemi be captured, this situation might

well be altered.

Attitudes Toward the Zahedi Government—General Zahedi acceded

to the Premiership, not on the basis of what he stood for as a person-

ality, but as the chosen instrument of forces opposed to the destruction

of the monarchy and of constitutional government in Iran. He was ac-

cepted as the man of the hour capable of assuming “field leadership” of

pro-Shah, anti-Mosadeq and anti-Tudeh elements. He gained added

prestige as a result of the belief that he was the individual most accept-

able to the Western powers, particularly the United States. According

to their point of view, various political groups hoped that Zahedi could

best draw American support to Iran, or that he could best come to a “re-

alistic” agreement with the British. Armed with the Shah’s firman ap-

pointing him Prime Minister, Zahedi was almost unanimously ac-

cepted by the popular forces which rose up on August 19 against the

Government which had given Iran two years of frustration culminating

September 1953–December 1954

in the final moves to upset the institutional framework of constitutional

government.

Zahedi was widely credited with having saved Iran from “a

change of regime”, which many believed would have resulted in a

Communist take-over in short order. Almost immediately, however,

some possibly disgruntled individuals began to wonder whether

Zahedi had not “fulfilled his historic mission”, or whether, at least, he

would not have done so after a fairly brief period in which he would

devote himself entirely to reestablishing orderly government. On the

whole, however, it came to be accepted that Zahedi and his backers ex-

pected him to play a larger role. Particularly after the prompt grant of

American aid, it was realized that Zahedi could not be expected to step

down before his own hand had been tried at the task of reconstruction

and reform.

It soon became apparent that Zahedi, despite his personal history

as an early partisan of the nationalist movement, and despite the pro-

testations of his supporters that Zahedi was returning the nationalist

movement to its proper course, was not being successful in repre-

senting himself as the inheritor of the nationalist mantle. The popula-

tion took it for granted that Zahedi would again accept for Iran the in-

fluence of a major power—in this case, the United States. Most of those

who regarded foreign influence as undesirable seemed to accept the

United States as a less objectionable patron than either Britain or the

USSR.

Given this background, it is not surprising that Zahedi’s personal

prestige is related to his continued close association with the monarchy

and the United States, both of whom carry more prestige with the

public under current circumstances.

Despite this tertiary position, Zahedi has maintained his personal

predominance over other politicians now “on-stage.” His personal dig-

nity and skill in handling himself publicly have earned him respect;

criticism of his government has generally not been directed at Zahedi

personally.

Criticism of Zahedi’s subordinates began almost immediately after

his rise to power. He has not to date satisfied original hopes that he

would fill key positions with new faces, capable of supplying real lead-

ership in a program of reconstruction. Although professedly anxious to

return to conservative patterns of government, the Iranian public nev-

detailed analysis of Iranian attitudes toward the members of the Zahedi Government.

[Footnote is in the original. Despatch 185 is in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Files

ertheless hoped that Zahedi would somewhere find untainted person-

alities to fill seats of responsibility.

Attitudes Toward the United States—Although most Iranians recog-

nize the fact that truly popular forces manifested themselves spontane-

ously in the uprising of August 19, they seem equally convinced, how-

ever illogically, that the United States was somehow responsible for

Zahedi’s success. The United States’ prompt grant of aid, although

smaller than many had hoped, served notice to the public that Zahedi’s

Government had our full support. America thus gained part of the

credit for saving constitutional government in Iran, and her prestige ac-

cordingly soared. The consensus was that the United States had at last

begun to fulfill her moral “responsibilities” to the Iranian people. The

idea that the United States has such “responsibilities” is hardly ques-

tioned by Iranians, even by ardent nationalists. The fact of our being a

great power in itself implies obligation in their minds, and they have

never forgotten Western promises to repay Iran for her “cooperation”

during World War II. In the Iranian view, we have now recognized

these responsibilities by our backing of Zahedi, which act directly obli-

gates us to “see Iran through”. Iranians of almost every political per-

suasion are now advising us that Zahedi, or at least the forces which he

represents, must succeed, else the United States will “go the way of

Britain”. Failure to “make the Zahedi Government succeed” would be a

blow of the first magnitude to the American position in Iran.

The “American support” which Iranians are seeking does not con-

sist solely, perhaps not even primarily, of economic aid, although that

is an essential factor. “Guidance” and political support within the

country are considered a second basic aspect of American aid to Iran.

We are told that we must supply ideas as well as finances to the new

Government; the more cynical version is that we must “lead the new

Government by the hand”.

Although the attitudes described in the above paragraphs are

widely held among the public at the present time, it must be kept in

mind that the Government itself, as is usual with Iranian Governments

receiving support from abroad, can be expected to seek a maximum of

aid for a minimum degree of policy control from outside sources. The

same can be said for the Shah, whose confidence in his own ability to

rule as well as reign has doubtless been strengthened by recent devel-

opments. Regardless of these factors, and regardless of the validity of

Iranian imputations to the United States of “moral responsibility” for

effective government in Iran, the fact remains that a breakdown in such

effective government would entail grave consequences to the United

States’ position in Iran.

General Attitudes on Foreign Relations—Overt manifestations of Ira-

nians’ innate xenophobia have declined markedly since Zahedi came to

September 1953–December 1954

power. Simultaneously, there has appeared some evidence that the in-

creasingly isolated position in which Mosadeq’s policies had placed

Iran during the past two years had not been to the taste of most edu-

cated Iranians. Xenophobic though they may be, on occasion, Iranians

are as anxious as any other nationalistically inclined people that their

nation be a fully accepted member of the family of nations. The press

has recently made repeated criticisms of the Mosadeq regime for

having “alienated” Iran’s neighbors and other countries.

Relations with Great Britain—Although it would still be suicidal for

an Iranian to espouse friendship with the British openly, a desire to

“normalize” relations with the United Kingdom, at least at the diplo-

matic level, has been frankly expressed in the pro-Government press.

Iranians now feel free to declare that Mosadeq’s anti-British policy was

too radical, and even to question the reasonableness of having broken

diplomatic relations. The sense of insecurity developed during the past

two years will not be entirely erased until Iran’s long-run relationship

with Britain has been defined. The pro-Government press has frankly

admitted that the initiative in seeking this definition should come from

the Iranian side. The majority of Iranian observers believe, however,

that this initiative might better await the settlement of the oil problem,

or at least substantial progress toward such a solution.

These attitudes do not mean that Iranians generally are willing to

“give in” to the British, or that the majority of Iranians would welcome

a return to the former degree of British influence. The public seems

more concerned at the moment with the personal capabilities of their

leaders than with the extent to which they may be subject to British

influence.

Although the underlying anti-British sentiment of the Iranian

people remains, it has become more passive since the futility of blindly

anti-British policies has been widely recognized. Since August 19, con-

comitantly with the improvement of the American position in Iran,

British prestige has risen somewhat. This has taken place in a country

where prestige has long been a reasonably satisfactory substitute for fa-

vorable regard. In any case, Britain may have to continue indefinitely to

rely on prestige rather than affection as the basis for achieving a satis-

factory modus vivendi with Iran. Her prestige could depend largely on

the extent to which she appears to Iranians to be successful in reas-

serting her influence in Iran.

The Oil Question—Public interest in a settlement of the oil dispute

with Great Britain continues to be high. This interest appears to rest pri-

marily on the belief that major oil revenues would of themselves offer

promise of general economic betterment, although more sophisticated

Iranians recognize that the problem has far wider implications. The be-

lief that Mosadeq mishandled the oil question is widespread, and there

is considerable appreciation of the fact that the oil question might long

since have been resolved in a manner satisfactory to Iran had not Mo-

sadeq preferred to exploit the problem for internal political purposes.

Although the Iranian public is eager for an oil settlement, the

problem remains an extremely sensitive one. The degree of difficulty to

be expected in negotiating and implementing an oil settlement de-

pends largely upon the tact with which developments are presented to

the public and upon the turn of political events in Iran having little to

do with the public’s essential willingness to make this or that conces-

sion to the British. The consensus of Iranian opinion consulted is that

“if all goes well” the Iranian public would accept a settlement little

more favorable than that offered Mosadeq in February of 1953.

Most Iranians, even in high government circles, are as yet insuffi-

ciently aware of the factors impeding a prompt settlement of the oil

question. For example, the importance to the West of ratification of any

such agreement by a full-fledged Majlis is not generally appreciated.

The political stresses which will inevitably be created by election cam-

paigns may provide an occasion for individual Iranian politicians to

seek to turn the oil question to their personal advantage. Although the

Iranian public now evidences a “reasonable” attitude toward the ques-

tion, it is impossible to predict the extent to which public opinion may

be influenced by unscrupulous demogoguery during the next few

months.

The Parliamentary Situation3—Another of the major problems fac-

ing the Zahedi Government is the disposition of the 21-member rump

Majlis which survived Mosadeq’s efforts to destroy it. Its members

show little inclination to disband voluntarily, and the Seventeenth

Majlis might well continue to exist in its present anomalous form until

the end of its normal term in May, 1954. Although the Majlis has legal

status, it cannot conduct regular business, enact legislation, or ratify in-

ternational agreements in the absence of a quorum. As elections of the

Seventeenth Majlis were never completed, it would be theoretically

possible to achieve a quorum by holding elections in unrepresented

constituencies for the 56 seats which were never filled. This procedure

would take less time than full-scale elections of a new Majlis. However,

actions such as the ratification of international agreements by such a

Majlis might at a later date be repudiated on the ground that the Majlis

had been “irregular” even though technically entirely legal.

September 1953–December 1954

Under the above circumstances, and given the importance of final-

izing such international agreements as might grow out of negotiations

for an oil agreement as soon as possible, the Zahedi Government may

be obliged to dissolve the Seventeenth Majlis and proceed to the elec-

tion of the Eighteenth. This procedure entails difficulties. First, the

present rump Majlis must be forced by political pressure to dissolve it-

self, or the Shah must assume the responsibility and invoke his consti-

tutional prerogative to dissolve it. The Government would then have to

face the major difficulties inherent in holding elections in Iran, where

the actual voting procedures normally required take several months.

Holding elections in Iran usually absorbs a major portion of the Gov-

ernment’s energies, and produces tensions which not infrequently re-

sult in public disturbances. The resurrection of a full-fledged Majlis fol-

lowing Mosadeq’s efforts to destroy it thus poses a problem which will

require both courage and political skill for the Zahedi Government to

solve.

The Government and the Shah—The Zahedi Government received

from the public on August 19 a mandate to safeguard constitution-

alism; the obligation to protect the position of the monarchy was im-

plicit in this mandate. As the public has given little attention thus far to

the possibility of friction between Zahedi and the Shah, the subject of

their relationship lies beyond the scope of this despatch. It may be ob-

served here, however, that the perennial problem of defining the re-

spective spheres of influence of the Court and the Government has by

no means been removed. Although Zahedi and the Shah have no sub-

stantive grounds for disagreement, and although each has everything

to gain and nothing to lose from continuing cooperation, the habit of

various political elements of trying to play one against the other can be

expected to threaten their relationship increasingly.

For the Ambassador:

Roy M. Melbourne

First Secretary of Embassy

dures. [Footnote is in the original. Despatch 135 was not found.]

326.

Monthly Report Prepared in Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

IRAN

September 1953

A. General Developments

1. The new Iranian government, under General Zahedi, seems to

be firmly established at the moment having received emergency aid in

the amount of $45 million from the U.S. and taken prompt and effective

action against the Tudeh Party. There have been indications of internal

disharmony between the Shah and his Prime Minister, particularly on

the matter of ministerial appointments and control of the Army. On the

basis of recent reports, however, there has been some improvement in

the Shah–Prime Minister relationship. General Zahedi feels that the

Majlis should be reconvened as soon as possible, mostly because the

Majlis affirmation is required to settle the oil question, while the Shah

feels that the Majlis should not be brought into session because a strong

authoritarian government is necessary to provide the country’s internal

stability. Ex-Premier Mossadeq has been brought to trial under closed

military court, whose verdict will quite certainly be guilty of treason.

Zahedi desires immediate execution of Mossadeq while the Shah is still

hesitant about going that far. The Shah, however, has issued orders that

Mossadeq be killed immediately by his guards in case of any serious

Tudeh rebellion.

2. General Zahedi sent Brigadier General Farzanegan, Minister of

Posts and Telegraphs, to the U.S. as a secret envoy to thank President

Eisenhower for U.S. aid and to feel out the attitude of the U.S. Govern-

ment regarding substantial increases in emergency aid. Zahedi ap-

peared grateful for the U.S. grants given to Iran about ten days after

Zahedi’s take-over, but was disappointed that the amount was not

greater. Farzanegan saw various high U.S. Government officials by

whom he was given a cordial welcome but from whom he was given no

encouragement regarding increased aid at this time. He was, however,

given assurance by the Department of State that the U.S. Government

4, Monthly Report—September 1953—Country Summaries and Analyses. Top Secret; Se-

curity Information. The report is attached to a covering memorandum from Roosevelt to

Dulles, October 8.

September 1953–December 1954

would do all possible to encourage the British to reach an equitable oil

settlement.

3. The oil question still holds paramount position in the immediate

welfare of Iran. The Zahedi government has begun a propaganda pro-

gram to soften the Iranian public for a re-opening of oil negotiations

with the British. It is too early to predict the chances for an early settle-

ment, although preliminary discussions are now taking place between

U.S. and U.K. oil experts in Washington.

4. Persistent reports in the latter half of the month indicated that

the Qashqai tribes were preparing for open conflict with the gov-

ernment forces provoked by the issuance of an ultimatum for Mos-

sadeq’s release. However, Qashqai leaders have assured U.S. officials

that while winter migrations had started earlier than usual, the

Qashqai’s have every intention of remaining at peace with the present

government. There were rumors also that the Qashqais had joined

forces with the Tudeh Party and at the precise time that the Iranian Air

Force was to have made a token show of power over the city of Shiraz

in Qashqai territory, more than 80 per cent of the Iranian Air Force

planes were put out of action for several weeks by direct sabotage com-

mitted by Tudeh members of the Air Force personnel. The Qashqai

leaders subsequently admitted Tudeh overtures to them, but denied

that they had agreed to any Tudeh alliance.

5. Throughout the month, the Zahedi government has continued

vigorous anti-Tudeh repressions by weeding out known members on

government payrolls, by strenuous efforts of the security forces against

known Tudeh members and their facilities, and by strong propaganda

measures.

6. As reported last month, the change of government has resulted

in greatly improved CIA contacts in government and military circles.

Consequently, CIA capabilities have become greatly enhanced both in

terms of short-term political action programs designed to support the

existing government and in terms of long-range programs designed to

327.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt)

Washington, October 2, 1953.

The following information from Tehran, Iran dated 30 September

1953, is evaluated at 1 (referring to reportorial accuracy). Subject of this

information is “Shah’s Decision Concerning Disposal of Mossadeq”.

[less than 1 line not declassified]

1. The Shah has decided that former Prime Minister Mossadeq

must be tried and condemned to death, but he has not decided whether

Mossadeq should then be pardoned by royal decree and immediately

banished from Iran or immediately executed.

2. The Shah believes that any delay in disposing of Mossadeq, fol-

lowing the trial, would invite Tudeh (and pro-Mossadeq) counterattack

under a slogan such as “Save Mossadeq’s Life”.

328.

Editorial Note

In his diary entry for October 8, 1953, President Eisenhower re-

ferred to the United States role in the overthrow of the Mosadeq gov-

ernment, and noted his admiration for the efforts of Kermit Roosevelt

329.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt)

Washington, October 9, 1953.

The following information from Tehran, Iran, dated 1–4 October, is

evaluated at 3. Source of this information is [1 line not declassified]. Sub-

ject of the information is “Activities of Mullah Kashani”.

1. A Soviet Embassy Attache´ who speaks Persian and claims to be a

Moslem, met a representative of Mullah Kashani on the night of 1 Oc-

tober at the home of engineer Gholim (first name unknown), official ar-

chitect to the Soviet Embassy. The Attache´ told Kashani’s repre-

sentative that the Shah and the Iranian Army were becoming stronger

every day and that, if Kashani wants to maintain his position, he must

organize the National Front again.

2. Kashani organized a meeting for the night of 4 October at the

home of former deputy, Yusef Moshar. The meeting was attended by

Kashani, Moshar, Hoseyn Makki and Haerizadeh, who agreed to re-

form the National Front movement.

Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret.

3. Source does not believe that Kashani is being paid by the So-

viets. However, Kashani told source on the day after the overthrow of

former Prime Minister Mossadeq that Iran must get along with the So-

viets and must not provoke them to act against Iran.

4. Kashani hoped to enlist one hundred Mullahs in Iran to preach

for him.

5. Source believes that Kashani will not support the Zahedi gov-

ernment and will lead the National Movement against Zahedi, thus

representing dangerous threat in the oil settlement.

330.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–22194

Washington, October 14, 1953.

SUBJECT

Opposition to the Zahedi Government

SOURCE

Paragraph 4: [less than 1 line not declassified]

Paragraph 10: [less than 1 line not declassified]

Right-Wing Political Activity

Mossadeq, including Shamshiri (fnu), a cafe owner and important

bazaar

merchant,

were

arrested

for

participation

in

an

anti-

Government conspiracy which had succeeded in closing the Tehran

bazaar for several hours. The closing of the bazaar was inspired en-

tirely by right-wing opposition to the Zahedi Government, although

the Tudeh Party exploited the incident by calling an independent dem-

onstration on the same day.

2. The Iranian police questioned the twelve arrested persons and

interrogated “scores” of bazaar merchants. On the basis of the informa-

tion obtained from these investigations, Source concludes that the

CS Information Reports 22190–22199. Secret; Security Information; Control—U.S. Offi-

cials Only.

September 1953–December 1954

following are leaders of the right-wing opposition to the Zahedi

Government:

Hoseyn Makki

Dr. Mozaffar Baghai

Mullah Kashani

Mullah Behbehani

Pro-British Political Activity

3. The investigations also indicated that the right-wing opposition

is bidding for the support of Mossadeq’s followers and is rallying be-

hind pro-British Ali Soheli, who aspires to succeed Zahedi as Prime

Minister. The interrogations revealed that the bazaar merchants are

particularly impressed by the right-wing opposition to Zahedi because

they consider the leaders as “British agents” and the merchants there-

fore assume that the British Government must desire to replace Zahedi.

4. The British have financed Dr. Baghai in the past and they are

paying him at present through Hassan Arab, who is very close to Dr.

Baghai.

5. Dr. Farokh Faroud8 has organized a new party for engineers and

scientists in Iran. The new party’s directing committee is composed of

the following members:

a. Hoseyn Pirnia, Undersecretary of Finance.

b. Dr. Ahmed Houman, who is considered by Source to be the

most important member of the committee.

c. Adeshir Zahedi, son of Prime Minister Zahedi.

d. Major Houshang Afshar.

e. Dr. Farokh Faroud.

6. The committee intends to organize sub-committees throughout

Iran, particularly among engineers who administer factories.

7. Ardeshir Zahedi was invited to join the committee in order to

allay his father’s suspicions, but according to Source, Ardeshir Zahedi

may be unable to control the overwhelming British influence within the

group.

8. Ali Mansur, a pro-British political figure, has been holding po-

litical meetings with “many Iranians who are not trusted by Prime Min-

ister Zahedi.”

331.

Editorial Note

Herbert Hoover, Jr., Consultant to the Secretary of State on the

Anglo-Iranian oil dispute, who was appointed on October 14, 1953,

visited Iran from October 17 to November 4 to ascertain Iranian views

on resuming diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom and

finding a solution to the Anglo-Iranian oil controversy. On November

1, Iranian Foreign Minister Entezam told Hoover that a solution to the

oil dispute would have to precede any resumption of diplomatic rela-

tions between Iran and the United Kingdom. To resolve the oil dispute

Entezam suggested creation of an international consortium that would

purchase oil directly from the National Iranian Oil Company. Though

the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company could participate, it would not exert

majority control over the consortium. Regarding compensation, the

other companies in the consortium would “compensate” the Anglo-

Iranian Oil Company. The proposal delivered by Entezam was trans-

mitted to the Department of State in telegram 1022, November 2. For

332.

Letter From the Ambassador to Iran (Henderson) to the

Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs,

Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs

(Richards)

Tehran, October 17, 1953.

Dear Art:

I am enclosing herewith as of possible interest to you, Mr. Stutes-

man, and other members of the Department, a number of memoranda

which I have received in the last few days from various members of the

staff. Since these memoranda are self-explanatory I will not comment

on them at length. I am not sending them under cover of despatch since

I consider that they are too fragmentary to have a place in the perma-

nent files of the Department.

Security Information; Official–Informal. Attachments 3–5 are attached but not printed.

See footnotes below.

September 1953–December 1954

[name not declassified] who is the author of several of these memo-

randa, is, as you are undoubtedly aware, a most active CAS source.

During the turn-over last August he made close contacts with certain

military circles, including the Prime Minister and the son of the Prime

Minister, and has assiduously exploited those contacts. The Prime Min-

ister’s son arranges frequently for [name not declassified] to join himself

and the Prime Minister at dinner. During these dinner parties many

matters are discussed. Usually [name not declassified] advises me re-

garding at least certain passages of these conversations. The fact that he

sees the Prime Minister so frequently of course builds up his prestige

and causes many Iranian officials to approach him rather than our

Armed Forces Attache´s and other appropriate members of the Em-

bassy staff.

You will note that Colonel Pakravan, Chief of G–2, who formerly

maintained close relations with CAS, has avoided CAS contacts since

August 19. It is clear that Colonel Pakravan is hostile to General Zahedi

and is unhappy at the shift which brought Zahedi into power. It would

appear from the comments which he made to Colonel McNulty that he,

like a number of other Army officers who do not feel that they are pro-

fiting from [name not declassified] close relationship with the Prime Min-

ister, is not pleased at this relationship. I assume that [name not declassi-

fied] is carrying on his activities under instructions from his superiors in

Washington. I am trying so far as is possible to cut down too much

free-wheeling. This is not too easy, however.

I have discussed with the Shah the growing strength of Baqai in

the Army, but His Majesty does not seem to be particularly concerned.

He intimates that he is sure that Baqai and the Army are loyal to him,

and so long as they are there is no need to worry regarding their atti-

tude towards the Government. The Shah even remarked to me that it is

important that there be some opposition to the Government and it is

preferable that that opposition be composed of persons loyal to the

Crown. I have tried to impress upon the Shah the fact that it would be

unfair for the Prime Minister to be compelled to deal with a General

Staff politically active and critical of himself. The Shah however takes a

rather smug attitude about the matter.

I thought you might be interested in Imam Jumeh’s conversation

with Howison. There is no doubt in my mind that the so-called “pro-

Shah” party which the Imam is organizing is not particularly friendly

to the Prime Minister. We are not particularly disturbed regarding the

warning which Ahmad Aramesh gave to Mr. Howison. There is always

a possibility, of course, that some of us might be made victims of terror-

istic tactics. I believe, however, that Aramesh has talked about this with

Howison primarily to establish a closer personal relationship with

him.

You of course will recall Mostafa Fateh who has the reputation of

being a particularly loyal British agent. He has been extremely critical

of the United States in the past. He is one of the Iranians who has re-

peatedly charged that nationalization of oil would not have taken place

without U.S. encouragement.

Sincerely,

Loy W. Henderson

Attachment 1

Tehran, October 12, 1953.

SUBJECT

Meeting with Gen. Batmangelich on October 9, 1953

1. At the request of Chief of Staff Batmangelich, the undersigned

visited Batmangelich at his office on 9 October 1953. Deputy Chiefs of

Staff Akhavi and Deihimi were also present.

September 1953–December 1954

2. In the course of the meeting, the following observations were

made:

A. Batmangelich stated that the Chief of Staff should have full con-

trol over martial law in Tehran. Failing that, he should at least have

final authority over the right of release of incarcerated persons. The

COS said that Military Governor Dadsetan was a junior officer and

owed him, Batmangelich, more respect.

B. Batmangelich stated that his relations with Gen. Zahedi are now

good but the latter has asked him to relieve Deputy COS Deihimi, who,

according to Batmangelich, is a very good officer. The COS said he

would not relieve Deihimi until forced to do so.

C. Batmangelich said that the plight of the junior officers and the

men is terrible. He said that the Army must not be undermined by the

Tudeh Party, and that the U.S. is taking an unnecessary gamble by re-

fusing to use money from the Military Aid program to increase the pay

and improve the living conditions of military personnel. He said that

Gen. McClure had tried and failed and that Ambassador Henderson

should step in to help.

D. Akhavi and Deihimi agreed with the above and said that

fighting the Tudeh in the Army is not enough; the U.S. should insist on

a united political front between Zahedi and the National Front leaders.

Both Akhavi and Deihimi told of former close associations with Baqai.

After a discussion between Akhavi and Deihimi, they both said that it

was impossible to unite Zahedi with the National Front; therefore, the

latter should be split by joining Zahedi with Baqai.

E. Deihimi stated that the only hope for Iran was for a Zahedi–

Baqai coalition.

3. As a result of the above statements, the undersigned reached the

conclusion that: Baqai’s strength in the Army is obviously becoming a

serious matter. Deihimi and Akhavi fully control Batmangelich, who

seems to feel that his position is strengthened vis-a`-vis Zahedi by Baqai

support.

[name not declassified]

Attachment 2

Tehran, October 14, 1953.

SUBJECT

Baqai Influence in the General Staff, Iranian Army

1. Chief of Staff Nader Batmangelich and his two deputies,

Brig.Gens. Akhavi and Deihimi, have engaged in power struggles

against Prime Minister Zahedi, Commanding General of the Gen-

darme´rie Golpyra, and Military Governor Farhat Dadsetan.

2. Maj.Gen. Batmangelich has a reputation for honesty in handling

funds but heretofore has not been accused of possessing political

acumen. Therefore, CAS has conducted an investigation to determine

what influences lie behind Batmangelich and to what extent they con-

trol him.

3. It will be recalled that Maj.Gen. Batmangelich displayed cow-

ardice during the night 15–16 August. During that same night and for

several days before, Brig.Gen. (then Col.) Akhavi was sick in bed and

himi (then Col.) was Chief of Staff of the Kerman Division and did not

4. Batmangelich was accepted as Chief of Staff by HIM the Shah

upon the nomination of Brig.Gen. Akhavi, who has for years seconded

Batmangelich during Batmangelich’s Army assignments.

5. Brig.Gen. Akhavi and Maj.Gen. Batmangelich are known to be

close friends of Maj.Gen. Arfa; in fact, Akhavi suggested, through two

cut-outs, to Gen. Zahedi that Gen. Arfa replace Batmangelich. Bat-

mangelich stated on October 2nd that he considers Maj.Gen. Arfa one

of his oldest and dearest friends, but Batmangelich does not know of

Gen. Akhavi’s attempts to make Gen. Arfa Chief of Staff. The fact that

Maj.Gen. Arfa has for years been close to British officials is well known,

but it is not believed until further evidence is gathered that either Gen.

Akhavi or Gen. Batmangelich are particularly pro-British. However,

the influence of Maj.Gen. Arfa upon those two officers seems to be

quite strong.

6. Brig.Gen. Deihimi stated to the undersigned on October 2nd that

he acted for five years as an official in the Shah’s personal intelligence

organization. Gen. Deihimi stated that he was a foe of Gen. Razmara’s

and later, an enemy of the National Front. Gen. Deihimi related that

when the National Front, led by Dr. Mossadeq, threatened to become

strong enough to oust the Shah, he went to the Shah and asked for

imperial authority to split the National Front by weaning Dr. Baqai

away from Dr. Mossadeq. Gen. Deihimi stated that the Shah gave him

that authority and that subsequently Dr. Baqai did break away from

Mossadeq.

7. American sources have reported that Dr. Baqai for years has

considered Deihimi one of his closest lieutenants. It is not known to

what extent Akhavi was involved in the Baqai group, but on October

2nd Gen. Akhavi stated that he joined privately with Dr. Baqai approxi-

mately one year ago in an effort to oppose Dr. Mossadeq and that he

has been in touch with Dr. Baqai ever since. The relationship between

Gen. Deihimi and Dr. Baqai appears to be much closer than the Ak-

September 1953–December 1954

havi–Baqai relationship. Gen. Akhavi has stated that he respects Gen.

Deihimi as much as any other officer in the Iranian Army and that he

heavily relies upon Gen. Deihimi’s judgment.

sadeq, Gen. Akhavi sent Gen. Batmangelich’s personal Army plane to

Kerman to fly Gen. Deihimi to Tehran. In Tehran Gen. Batmangelich

and Gen. Akhavi ousted Acting Deputy Chief of Staff Col. Abbas Far-

zanegan and replaced him with then Col. Deihimi. The Shah approved.

9. There followed a struggle which continues: the struggle between

the Shah and the Prime Minister for control of the armed forces.

Maj.Gen. Vossuk, Deputy Minister of National Defense, a Shah man,

was ousted by Prime Minister Zahedi from his cabinet. Maj.Gen. He-

dayat, whom Gen. Zahedi believes to be his man, was made Minister of

National Defense. In the meantime, the Shah ordered Gen. Batmange-

lich to refer all papers concerning the Army directly to him, rather than

going through Gens. Zahedi and Hedayat. This decision by the Shah

greatly strengthened the position of the Chief of Staff, who thereby was

able to promote officers friendly to him in such a way that Gen. Zahedi

was unable to prevent it. It is known that Gens. Batmangelich, Akhavi

and Deihimi have ignored Army regulations in promoting their per-

sonal friends, with the Shah’s approval.

10. The prosecution of the Army officers apparently guilty of

treason and of Dr. Mossadeq and his closest advisers has proceeded at

what Gen. Zahedi considers to be a snail’s pace. Upon five different oc-

casions Gen. Zahedi has sent his son to protest against this slow-down.

Gen. Zahedi became convinced that the Chief of Staff and his deputies

were deliberately attempting to embarrass the Zahedi government by

keeping alive the hopes of those who were still political friends of Dr.

Mossadeq and of the Tudeh Party. Upon one occasion Gen. Zahedi

threatened to resign. On 13 October he sent his son to the Shah with a

demand that the Shah dismiss the Chief of Staff or accept Zahedi’s res-

ignation; however, his son did not tell the Shah that Gen. Zahedi de-

sired to resign, in an effort to smooth over this crisis in his father’s polit-

ical career. There now can be no doubt that the failure by the Chief of

Staff to execute, or at least to prosecute, those traitors now in his hands

continues gravely to embarrass the Zahedi administration.

11. Efforts by the U.S. to keep the Shah and the Prime Minister to-

gether have been successful except over the issue of the armed forces.

This problem is greatly complicated by the fact that Gen. Batmangelich

and his deputies now seem to feel strong enough in the Shah’s graces to

move out and to attack Zahedi stalwarts. Recently Gen. Batmangelich

attempted to replace Col. Malek, Chief of Staff to Maj.Gen. Golpyra,

with Brig.Gen. Mirfanderski, Gen. Batmangelich’s brother-in-law. For

professional reasons, the American Mission to the Iranian Gendarme´rie

has strongly opposed that move and has sought CAS intervention. On

October 9th Gen. Batmangelich promised CAS that Col. Malek would

not be removed from his post. On October 11th CAS learned that

Gen. Batmangelich was still attempting to assign his brother-in-law to

the Gendarme´rie where, as a Brigadier-General, Mirfanderski would

greatly strengthen Batmangelich’s ability to intervene politically on be-

half of Baqai or other Zahedi opponents in the forthcoming elections.

This situation is further complicated by the fact that Maj.Gen. Golpyra

and Brig.Gen. Mirfanderski are old enemies; in fact, Gen. Zahedi’s right

hand, Maj.Gen. Hedayat Guilanshah, stated on October 13th that

Maj.Gen. Golpyra might be forced to resign unless Gen. Zahedi be able

to block the Mirfanderski assignment.

12. Gen. Batmangelich has also attacked another important official.

During interviews with Maj.Gen. Dadsetan, Military Governor of

Tehran, Gen. Batmangelich has attempted to gain complete control of

the Office of Military Governor, an office of great importance in the

forthcoming elections. When Gen. Dadsetan refused to buckle under,

Gen. Batmangelich asked for Dadsetan’s resignation. Gen. Dadsetan re-

fused. Gen. Batmangelich then carried his fight against Dadsetan to the

Shah. On October 2nd and 9th, Gen. Batmangelich also solicited CAS

assistance in attacking Gen. Dadsetan. With the Gendarme´rie and the

Office of the Military Governor of Tehran in his hands, the political po-

sition of Gen. Batmangelich would be very strong indeed. Of course,

the position of Gen. Zahedi might seriously be weakened.

13. From numerous sources and from direct personal observation,

CAS is convinced that Gen. Batmangelich is only the creature of Gens.

Akhavi and Deihimi. This certainly means that the influence of Dr.

Baqai is far greater at the moment than is overtly realized.

14. The ability of the U.S. to do something about this matter is fur-

ther complicated by the fact that there is a distinct possibility that the

Shah is a party to the Baqai–Deihimi scheme. Gen. Deihimi has himself

stated that when he was appointed Deputy Chief of Staff, he was told

by the Shah to “play politics” with Dr. Baqai on the Shah’s behalf. Gen.

Zahedi was not told by either the Shah or by Gen. Deihimi of that

action.

15. Gen. Zahedi’s protest to the Shah on October 13th against Gen.

Batmangelich met only a noncommittal answer by the Shah, and the

entire problem remains unsolved.

[name not declassified]

333.

Memorandum From the Second Secretary of Embassy in Iran

(Cuomo) to the First Secretary of Embassy in Iran

(Melbourne)

Tehran, October 19, 1953.

SUBJECT

Suggested Program for Combatting Communism in Iran

General Considerations

To be effective, any program to combat communism in Iran must

be based on the assumption that there is a sincere desire to do so. The

events immediately preceding the August 19 uprising, the full-scale at-

tack against the monarchy on the part of the communist organization,

leave little doubt that the Shah, at least, is thoroughly aware of the

danger and willing to cooperate in such effort. However, there is a

constant danger in a country such as Iran that its governments sooner

or later come to the conclusion that a little communism is a good thing

in international affairs to help pry concessions from the Western

powers. Mosadeq played this game and failed, and perhaps the policy

is sufficiently discredited for it to remain so for some time to come.

On the assumption that there is a sincere desire at this time to insti-

tute and carry through a program designed to keep communism within

manageable proportions, it seems logical to suggest that those in

charge of such a program be familiar with the nature of the problem—

the communist doctrine, its dynamics and its appeal. The education of

the Government leadership, not excluding the Shah, might well be a

first step. A program of this type in a setting such as Iran will require

constant vigilance and prodding from above if it is not to be completely

emasculated in administration. Consideration should be given to the

strong likelihood that measures will be progressively weakened as ac-

tion is taken on them by the lower echelons.

Security Information. Drafted by Cuomo. The memorandum is an enclosure to a letter

from Henderson to Richards, October 21, which reads in part: “In the past few weeks it

seemed advisable to us here to attempt to put down on paper for our private use, and not

for general distribution, an outline program for combating Communism in Iran which

we could use in our day-to-day operations and in conversations with Iranians in a posi-

tion to do something about the question. Roy Melbourne suggested to Cuomo, in view of

Communism being his field of reporting, that he evolve an outline draft. After some

amendment and rewriting, the attached memorandum of October 19 is the result.”

Upon Tudeh Party Prospects.” [Footnote is in the original. Despatch 155 from Tehran is

There is a tendency in this country to be unusually lenient towards

acquaintances and relatives. Those who are to take action are entirely

too prone to regard their acquaintances and relatives as merely “mis-

guided” persons of no real danger. Since nearly everyone is related to

everyone else, and it is easy to find “a friend of a friend” we find that

although the authorities agree that communists generally are dan-

gerous, individual communists find ready advocates to prove them

little black sheep who, if given another chance, will return quickly to

the fold. For this reason as well, the Government leadership must be

firm in its decisions or any program with the most minute safeguards is

doomed to failure.

With regard to economic aid and economic development upon

which most Iranian authorities rely for the elimination of communism,

the comments appearing in an Embassy despatch may be pertinent:

“On the basis of the available information on the Tudeh Party—or

more specifically communism in Iran—the pattern seems to follow the

lines of communism in most, if not all, countries still this side of the

Iron Curtain. Communism apparently does not spring from poverty.

[Although the leadership may come from frustrated middle-class intel-

lectuals, numerically the communist party in Iran is predominately

composed of workers.] The greatest incidence of communism seems to

be found among city, employed workers, not among the unemployed,

and usually among the highest paid, literate workers. If relationship

there is between communism and poverty and communism and unem-

ployment it is a highly indirect one, and it would appear to be dan-

gerous to assume that the mere elimination of poverty would cause its

disappearance. That might and probably would occur in the long run,

but in the early stages of raising the standard of living it is not incon-

ceivable that the communist potential would rise perhaps in greater

proportion than the rise in living standards.

“There is no doubt that an attempt must be made to improve the

economic condition of the masses of Iran for humanitarian, if for no

other reason, yet the danger involved might be constantly borne in

mind until those masses have gained such substantive advantages as to

give them a vested interest in the then existing social and economic

order. Until that time they will probably be increasingly vulnerable to

the communist organization and its methods.

“Any program designed to eliminate communism in Iran might

well be one based on long-range methods, on the frank assumption that

there is probably no panacea to cause its disappearance in the imme-

diate future. The middle-class intellectuals who provide the leadership

September 1953–December 1954

could be the first target and consideration might be given to the neces-

sity of suppression for some time to come on the same principle that a

broken leg is placed in a cast to prevent harmful movement until the

fracture has been healthily rejoined. The notion that communism feeds

on suppression may be accepted to be communist inspired. The docu-

ments of communist parties abound in revealing their fears of firm po-

lice action and above all of illegality.”

The Judiciary

There is a law promulgated by Reza Shah which makes the advo-

cacy of communism a criminal offense. This law is still in force and

could easily be made into a spearhead of an anti-communist program.

Arrangements could be made to have the law interpreted so as to

render culpable “front” groups, as well as the underground communist

party itself. If in prosecution the law is found to be weak, corrections

could be made—if necessary even through legislation.

In countries under the shadow of the Soviet Union, tolerance of a

communist party can be suicidal. It is elementary that communist

parties or communist controlled parties be prohibited by law. Unfortu-

nately this fact has been understood in the United States only during

recent years. When governments of the countries of Eastern Europe be-

fore the second World War tried to save themselves by outlawing com-

munist parties, they were almost unanimously condemned by the

United States public press as “fascist.” Similarly after the war, public

sentiment in the United States appeared to favor tolerance of commu-

nist parties in Eastern Europe, China, etc. Fortunately the western

world is becoming enlightened in this respect. For this reason an anti-

communist law, properly worded, is essential. Consideration might be

given to the possibility of passing a new law rather than dependence on

the present one. A new law might contain certain provisions which

would make it more effective than existing legislation and, more im-

portant, it should not include provisions relating to agitation against

the monarchial form of government, etc. These provisions could re-

main in existing legislation.

Security Measures

A centralized agency should be formed to deal solely and exclu-

sively with this problem. As it is now there are several agencies dealing

with it, at times at cross purposes—the G–2, the Shah’s office, the police

and even the Prime Minister’s office. When everyone is responsible, it

is certain no one is responsible.

The centralized agency should maintain a centralized file con-

taining all pertinent information. If necessary, technical assistance

might be given in this regard. A security clearance program could be

instituted in connection with present employees and workers, as well

as applicants. This program need not be complex, given the lack of ef-

fective administrative control in the government bureaucracy, but the

minimum of a check against this file would produce adequate results.

Until the central file has been set up, the individual Ministers and

chiefs of other organizations may have to be prodded into taking action

on whatever information is now in the possession of the various secu-

rity agencies. This information is sufficient to hunt out the most fla-

grant offenders. In this connection select committees in each gov-

ernment agency might be formed to draw up lists and see to it that

action is taken on them.

Labor

This is a very sensitive field and should be given the highest con-

sideration. In view of communist penetration of most labor organiza-

tions suppression of such organizations might for the moment be the

only solution, but steps should be taken without delay to employ other

means. An attempt might be made to establish a national union,

perhaps encouraged by pro-Western elements, but definitely not

government-sponsored. It would seem in the early stages that the

union leadership will require financial support, and arrangements

could be made to obtain a success or two in the union’s demands in

order to gain the confidence of the rank-and-file, and to gain adherents.

The union could carry the fight into the communist camp without,

however, neglecting true union objectives.

Given communist methods in the field of labor and the head start

the communists now have among organized labor in Iran, there seems

to be no other way of diverting the small existing labor movement

away from the communist groove except through some “encouraged”

organization. There is no guaranty of success in such a delicate opera-

tion. It would seem dangerous, however, to let labor continue to drift in

a northerly direction.

in Labor Affairs in Iran.” [Footnote is in the original. Despatch 145 is in National Ar-

September 1953–December 1954

The Intellectuals

The intellectuals of Iran are few and most of them are either in the

Government service and in the educational system or in some way con-

nected with that system. Communism as such has never been openly a

subject of study. It has been in fact a surreptitious study, giving it

thereby an attraction far greater than it intrinsically possesses. If

brought out into the open, it would be a relatively simple matter to ex-

pose its fundamentally fallacious premises, illogical deductions, and at

times ludicrous conclusions. There need not be single courses in

Marxism if that is thought inadvisable. The desired material could be

inserted in economics, philosophy and political science courses on a

comparative basis or wherever it is determined to be most effective

after consultation with appropriate educationalists. In this connection

there should be made available in translation studies on this subject, as

cheaply as possible and for the widest possible distribution. These

might include the works of Max Eastman, Bertrand Russell, Benedetto

Croce, Arthur Koestler. The possibilities of inserting pro-democratic

material in these courses correspondingly should be encouraged.

Other minor programs could be found in the field of education to

demonstrate the fallacy of communist doctrines. One such has been

suggested by the Imam Jumeh of Tehran, who would encourage short

story and fable writing slanted to prove the absurdity of these doctrines

or in some way to leave a pro-democratic impression upon the readers.

The Clergy

The Shi’a clergy have proven inept in the past in dealing with this

problem. Therefore, any program intending to utilize the Shi’a clergy

or the Moslem religion would have to be cautious. It might be possible

to have leading clergymen give effective sermons, particularly on reli-

gious holidays or during the months of Moharram and Ramazan. Such

sermons would have to be carefully worded, however, to avoid the ap-

pearance of political haranguing. Among certain elements of the

country the opinion is making headway that the temporal and spiritual

spheres should be kept separate and distinct. Thus, strenuous political

action by the clergy could run the risk of having the opposite effect

from that desired, particularly among the religious minorities of the

country which constitute the most vulnerable sectors of the population.

A Word of Caution

Whereas firm, direct methods are necessary, they should not take

such a form as to arouse sympathy for their victims. While application

of power frequently obtains results in Iran, care should be taken in

using it not to arouse the strong Iranian tendency to sympathize with

the underdog. Pro-communists, as contrasted with known communist

activists and leaders, who are removed from the state bureaucracy, for

334.

Memorandum From the Deputy Chief of the Near East and

Africa Division, Directorate of Plans ([name not declassified])

to the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Wisner)

Washington, October 20, 1953.

SUBJECT

Termination of the [less than 1 line not declassified] phase of TPAJAX

I have discussed this matter with Mr. Roosevelt. He feels it should

be discussed as casually as possible and at the operating level. He sug-

gests I be designated to take it up with [name not declassified] here and

does not believe it advisable to call in either RS of the British Embassy

or any State Department official. He proposes I take the following line

with [name not declassified]. Raising the subject of the [less than 1 line not

declassified] I should state that we do feel that the period of [less than 1

line not declassified] operation has come to an end and we don’t want the

[name not declassified], or for that matter any other agent, to speak on our

behalf. As [name not declassified] is well aware, Mr. Roosevelt so in-

formed both the Shah and Gen. Zahedi. We should therefore now re-

vert to the type of relationship which existed prior to the initiation of

TPAJAX with this one change however; to wit that so long as the British

have no official representation in Tehran we will continue to pass on to

TPAJAX. Secret; Security Information.

335.

Letter From the Ambassador to Iran (Henderson) to the

Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs,

Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs

(Richards)

Tehran, October 20, 1953.

Dear Art:

Attached hereto is a memorandum prepared by [name not declassi-

fied] which is almost self-explanatory. General Batmanqilich seems to

be dominated by his two deputies, Generals Deihimi and Akhavi, who

owe allegiance to Dr. Baqai and who owe their present positions to the

support of the Shah. General Batmanqilich, in my opinion, means well

but he is politically an infant and fears what might happen to him if

Baqai and Baqai’s friends should turn against him.

I met Batmanqilich on the evening of October 17 at a reception and

had a frank talk with him. I told him that [name not declassified] had de-

scribed to me the conversation which [name not declassified] had had

with Baqai, as arranged by Batmanqilich. Batmanqilich said that he was

glad that [name not declassified] had seen Baqai. Baqai was probably the

greatest man in Iran and it was important that the American Embassy

should work with him. I said that Baqai had been arguing publicly for

Security Information; Official–Informal.

an oilless economy and had advocated such an economy in his conver-

sation with [name not declassified]. If Baqai intended to oppose a solution

to the oil problem and the exploitation by Iran of its oil, he was in my

opinion one of the most dangerous enemies of Iran. Iran could not af-

ford to have dangerous internal enemies at the present time and if Bat-

manqilich was following a policy of strengthening and collaborating

with an Iranian who favored an “oilless economy” he was doing his

country great disservice. An oilless economy would mean the doom of

Iran.

Batmanqilich was somewhat taken aback. He asked if I could not

arrange to meet him, General Deihimi and Baqai secretly. I said the

American Ambassador met no one surreptitiously. If Baqai would care

to call on me I would be glad to meet him. If Baqai would like to invite

me to his house I would go there. There would, however, be nothing se-

cret about such a meeting. The General asked if I would be willing to

speak to the Shah about the matter. He was afraid to arrange for me to

meet Baqai without the consent of the Shah. I said I would be glad to

discuss the whole matter with the Shah.

It is my intention when I next see the Shah to talk with him frankly

about the situation in General Staff. I have already touched on the

matter during previous conversations with the Shah, who on each occa-

sion changed the subject. During my last talk with the Shah on October

14, I mentioned the danger to the country from the direction of Baqai.

The Shah minimized this danger. He said that an opposition was a

good thing and in his opinion it was better for Baqai, who was loyal to

the regime, to be leader of an opposition than someone who was op-

posed to the regime. It was clear that the Shah in referring to the regime

meant himself. It would seem that the Shah is endeavoring to placate

Baqai at a time when Baqai is undermining Zahedi.

The Shah did make the concession in talking with me that it might

be a good thing to send Baqai out of the country for a time. He thought

Baqai might be a good man to serve as a contact with Iranian students

in Europe and America. Baqai was a learned man and could probably

be useful in convincing Iranian youth abroad that the Iranian Govern-

ment was after all progressive. When I suggested to the Shah that

Baqai’s particular type of “socialism” might not be a good thing with

which to infect the students, the Shah reminded me that he personally

thought that socialism might be good for Iran. He repeated that he was

rather sympathetic to socialism and in his opinion the future of Iran lay

in a marriage between socialism and capitalism.

I have been so busy during the last week with the Congressmen

and am at present so much occupied with Mr. Hoover that I fear that I

am unable to keep the Department currently informed to the extent

September 1953–December 1954

that I would like of political developments here. I may say that I am

not happy with the situation, which seems to be gradually deterio-

rating. I hope that the Shah and Zahedi will have come to a better

working arrangement during their trip to Isfahan. They are returning

this morning.

Sincerely,

Loy

Attachment

Tehran, October 19, 1953.

SUBJECT

Conversation with Dr. Mozaffar Baqai

at the request of Chief of Staff Maj. Gen. Batmangelich. While talking

Gen. Batmangelich insisted that the undersigned meet with Dr. Baqai.

Gen. Batmangelich repeated several times that Iran should have two

top men: Zahedi and Baqai. Undersigned accepted Gen. Batmange-

lich’s invitation to meet Dr. Baqai.

2. At 2100 hours undersigned met with Dr. Baqai and Brig. Gen.

Deihimi in the latter’s home; Dr. F. Taylor Gurney of the Embassy

interpreted.

3. The undersigned asked Dr. Baqai what he thought of the present

situation. Dr. Baqai replied that in his opinion the situation is not good.

He severely criticized the Zahedi Cabinet, saying that Gen. Zahedi had

retained several members of the old Razmara Cabinet: Dr. Jehan Shah

Saleh, Maj. Gen. Hedayat, Hekmat, and Eng. Sharif Emami. Dr. Baqai

also severely criticized the appointment of Dolatabadi and Amidi-Nuri

as assistants to the Prime Minister.

4. Dr. Baqai charged that only “poor” members of the Tudeh Party

were being arrested, while those with influence and money were not.

Dr. Baqai said that no real effort was being made to arrest the real

leaders of the Tudeh Party and that among those arrested who were

important Tudeh members, Lankarani, Noruzi, and Hormoz had im-

mediately been released. Dr. Baqai said that the same thing occurred

under Dr. Mossadeq. He said, “When we saw that and also the way

Mossadeq was helping the Tudehs secretly, we worked for his over-

throw—to get him out and to get Zahedi in.”

5. Dr. Baqai severely criticized the opening of the Senate and said

that he had not been consulted in advance concerning that event.

6. When asked about his opinion concerning the possibility of

achieving an oil settlement, Dr. Baqai launched on a long dissertation

about the possibility of achieving an oilless economy. He said that Iran

had never really enjoyed any oil profits. He said that those profits

which were intended for use by the Seven Year Plan Organization had

been dissipated by quarreling between the British and Americans. Un-

dersigned asked Dr. Baqai to expatiate upon that statement but Dr.

Baqai changed the subject. Dr. Baqai expressed the opinion that Dr.

Mossadeq had always used the oil question as a means of silencing his

opponents, who were constantly told that they must remain silent be-

cause a settlement was imminent. He said that he did not propose to re-

main silent any longer, although it was perfectly true that Zahedi could

force an oil settlement on Iran should he desire to do so. Undersigned

then asked Dr. Baqai if he believed an oil settlement to be important to

the future of the country, and Dr. Baqai replied that he did not neces-

sarily believe it was. He then praised the economic assistance that the

United States had given Iran, and said that because of that policy, the

prestige of the U.S. had been very high. Dr. Baqai was asked if he real-

ized that the present administration in the U.S. had been elected on a

platform of balancing the budget, reducing the national debt, and cut-

ting costs wherever possible. In the same line of questioning, Dr. Baqai

was asked if he believed an oilless economy were possible if the Amer-

ican government found it necessary to reduce in FY 1954 economic

assistance to Iran. Dr. Baqai then answered by saying that he did not

know if an oilless economy were possible without American economic

assistance but that he was certain that if the Zahedi administration con-

tinued to blunder as it was now doing, the country would be ruined

anyhow. Dr. Baqai stated that he had appointed a small commission to

study the oil question on behalf of the Toilers’ Party and that he would

print the results of that study when it was completed. He said that he

would support “an honorable oil settlement based upon the nine points

of the Nationalization Law.”

7. Dr. Baqai stated that he was identified with the Zahedi gov-

ernment whether he liked it or not, but that he would criticize that gov-

ernment whenever he felt it necessary. When asked if he were a sup-

porter of the Zahedi administration or an opponent of it, Dr. Baqai

replied that he found himself in a dilemma: he had helped bring the

Zahedi government to power and was politically identified with it, but

he felt Zahedi’s gang would ruin the government if it continued in the

way that it has started. He made it clear that he was neither identifying

September 1953–December 1954

himself with the Zahedi government nor with the opponents of that

government. He was then asked if he would accept a proposal to join

the Hassibi, Sangabi, Zirakzadeh group now working against Zahedi.

Dr. Baqai replied that those men were traitors and that he would never

join them. He was then asked if he would join Makki against Zahedi

and he skirted that question.

8. Dr. Baqai made it clear that he did not identify his political fu-

ture with the present group surrounding Gen. Zahedi but that he was

still open to a move from Zahedi designed to bring him into closer

working relationship with the Prime Minister.

9. Conclusions by Undersigned

A. Dr. Baqai’s political future can quickly be ended by the prosecu-

tion of the Afshartus affair. The Military Governor of Tehran, Maj.

Gen. Dadsetan, stated on October 18th that he had proof certain that

Dr. Baqai was directly implicated in the murder of the former Police

Chief. That fact means that in order to be safe, Dr. Baqai and his men

must control the General Staff, the Police Department, and the Office of

the Military Governor. During the last two weeks Dr. Baqai’s men have

been attempting to capture those positions or to neutralize them. Gen.

Zahedi’s hands are momentarily tied in this matter because he has de-

cided to free all of the military officers who plotted against the life of

Afshartus and who executed him. At the moment, therefore, Dr. Baqai

may with impunity criticize the Zahedi administration. As an insur-

ance measure, however, his men continue to attempt to capture the

posts mentioned above.

B. Involved also in this whole business is the fact that Gens. Dei-

himi and Akhavi meet Maj. Gen. Arfa every Thursday night in Gen.

Arfa’s home. Maj. Gen. Guilanshah is of the opinion that Gens. Akhavi

and Deihimi are closer to Gen. Arfa than to Dr. Baqai. CAS did not nec-

essarily agree with that estimate but, nevertheless, the hand of the

British may very well be a part of this particular problem.

C. Dr. Baqai’s friends in the General Staff continue to insist that the

U.S. urge Gen. Zahedi to make Dr. Baqai his right-hand.

D. There can be little doubt that HIM the Shah is perfectly aware of

Dr. Baqai’s influence with the Army. Whether or not the Shah desires

that Dr. Baqai become the leader of Zahedi’s political opposition is not

clear at the moment.

E. CAS will know on Wednesday, October 21st, whether or not Dr.

Baqai accepts Makki’s offer to join him against Zahedi.

[name not declassified]

336.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–22878

Washington, October 20, 1953.

SUBJECT

1. Pledges made by Qashqai Khans to Zahedi Government

2. Intention of Government to Demand Capitulation of Qashqai Khans

SOURCE

[3 lines not declassified]

1. The Qashqai Khans and the chiefs of all the individual Qashqai

sub-tribes met with Ali Hayat, Zahedi Government representative and

the Governor of Fars, and with General Mir-Jahangir (fnu), Com-

mander of the Shiraz Garrison, at Shiraz on the evening of 14 October

1953.

2. At the meeting, the Tribal Council members pledged unani-

mously that their tribes would not attack Shiraz, and stated that the

Qashqais had no hostile intentions of any kind. The Council also pro-

posed to continue an orderly tribal migration to winter quarters.

3. Nasr Khan Qashqai rejected a proposal made ten days ago by

Hayat that Nasr Khan go to Tehran and pledge his loyalty to the Shah.

(Nasr Khan, suspecting a plot against his life, does not trust the Shah.)

4. The Qashqais are rejecting Tudeh Party overtures for an anti-

Zahedi coalition.

5. The reported refusal of Nasr Khan Qashqai to come to Tehran to

see the Shah and Prime Minister Zahedi has precipitated a decision by

the Zahedi Government, as of 15 October 1953, to force the Qashqai

leaders to capitulate or flee.

CS Information Reports 22870–22879. Secret; Security Information; Control—U.S. Offi-

cials Only.

September 1953–December 1954

6. Major General Seyfollah Hemat, an old enemy of the Qashqais,

has been designated Commanding General of the Shiraz military

forces. He is to confer with Zahedi on 17 October.

7. Zahedi intends to reinforce the Shiraz Garrison to a total

strength of 40,000. Small groups from four southern divisions are now

being moved into Shiraz.

8. Ten Thunderbolt planes are ready to be flown, except for bat-

teries. Zahedi requested the United States Army Mission in Tehran to

query Dhahran for batteries. Approximately 13 Hurricanes are immo-

bilized because of a lack of propellers. Zahedi sent priority orders to the

Hawker Company in England for 13 propellers and asked the United

States Embassy in Tehran to help expedite their shipment.

among Generals Abdullah Hedayat, Nadr Batmangelich, Hedayatollah

Guilanshah, Dadsetan (fnu), Bakhtiar (fnu), Reza Azimi, Morteza Ak-

havi, and Deihimi (fnu). Zahedi “laid down” the strategy while the

Generals listened. Zahedi plans to take heights surrounding the

Qashqais’ southern location and to demand their capitulation. He does

not expect the Qashqais to fight.

10. Two important Qashqai sub-tribal leaders who are now in

Tehran told Zahedi that they will lead opposition within the Qashqais

against Nasr Khan Qashqai if Zahedi will promise to furnish the Shiraz

Garrison with forces capable of overwhelming the Qashqais. On 14 Oc-

tober Zahedi gave his promise to furnish the forces.

11. Zahedi is quite calm concerning this situation, and he does not

anticipate a shooting conflict.

337.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

(Roosevelt)

Washington, October 22, 1953.

The following information from Tehran, Iran dated 16 October

1953, is evaluated at 2 (referring to reportorial accuracy). Source of this

information is an Iranian with wide political contacts (C). Subject of the

information is “Baghai’s Dissatisfaction with Zahedi Government”.

1. Dr. Mozaffar Baghai, head of the Toilers Party, stated on 16 Oc-

tober that he was very dissatisfied with the Zahedi government be-

cause of:

A. Razmara Cabinet hangovers—Dr. Jehanshah Salah, Ali Asghar

Hekmat, Abdollah Hedayat, Sharif Emami (now out).

B. Release by government of high Tudeh leaders like Ahmad Lan-

karani, Daud Noruzi, and Mahmud Hormuz, and arrest of many inno-

cent “little people”.

C. Opening of the Senate.

2. Baghai charged that Military Government officers were ac-

cepting bribes for the release of Tudeh leaders. “If this continues”, Bag-

hai said, “we are not going to be able to continue to support Zahedi”.

3. Baghai said that he believed that Iran had never profited from oil

and could live on “oilless economy”. He said that he would support

“an honorable settlement based on nine points of nationalization law”.

Baghai said that he had appointed a commission to study the oil ques-

tion and plans to print their report in his newspaper Shahed.

4. Baghai said that Mossadeq used the oil question to silence his

opponents and hopes that Zahedi would not do the same. He said that

Zahedi could force an oil settlement on the people but that, if Zahedi

did so, the people would repudiate the agreement.

5. Baghai is seriously thinking of an open break with Zahedi and

said that, if the government continued its mistakes, the country would

be ruined.

Misc. Correspondence—TPAJAX. Secret.

338.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans (Wisner)

to Director of Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, October 27, 1953.

SUBJECT

Iran; the present situation and the significance of an increased program of

military assistance

1. Attached hereto is a memorandum dated 27 October which has

been prepared by the NE Division as the result of your request, made

orally at a recent morning staff meeting, for a draft paper which would

be suitable for circulation to the Department of State, the Department of

Defense and possibly the JCS. It was your thought in requesting the

preparation of this paper that at some risk of having it appear that CIA

is involving itself in matters beyond the scope of its responsibilities as

an intelligence agency, you wished to point up the fact that despite the

coup in Iran and the removal of Mossadegh, the situation there is still

fraught with dangers and we cannot afford to divert our attention from

the very serious problems confronting the regime. I believe that I recall

your having suggested that we prepare the paper in the form of a brief

summary of the present situation and recent developments, to be fol-

lowed by certain suggested courses of action, including a program of

military assistance. The military assistance program which you visual-

ized was a relatively moderate one—not calculated to put the Iranian

military forces on a footing to defend themselves against substantial

Soviet military aggression, but enough to provide all the strength nec-

essary to insure internal security and stability as well as to provide a

very respectable frontier guard force.

2. Since I am not sure that the attached draft is exactly what you

had in mind, I believe that it would be helpful to the Division to have

your further comments and suggestions in attempting a redraft.

Frank G. Wisner

Iran 1951–1953. Secret; Security Information.

Attachment

Washington, October 27, 1953.

SUBJECT

Effects of Proposed Increase of Military Aid to Iran

1. It is the view of this Division that United States military assist-

ance to Iran on a scale designed to build the Iranian Armed Forces into

an effective defense force would have decisive influence in consoli-

dating Iran’s position on the side of the free nations. The Zahedi Gov-

ernment appears fairly well entrenched at this time, but already it is be-

ginning to be faced with problems similar to those which undermined

the Razmara regime three years ago and which led to the advent to

power of Mossadeq and the extreme nationalists and to the concomi-

tant upsurge of Tudeh influence.

2. We believe that an expanded military aid program would be

likely to have the following effects:

a. Immediately and on a long-term basis increase the prestige and

influence of the Shah, who we consider to be the most effective instru-

ment for maintaining and strengthening Iran’s orientation toward the

West. The principal source of the Shah’s power is the Army. We be-

lieve, therefore, that any strengthening of the Army will directly con-

tribute to the strengthening of Iran’s Western orientation.

b. Immediately strengthen the prestige of the Zahedi Government,

thus allowing it more opportunity to concentrate on basic social re-

forms and economic programs. Present leaders in the government are

now prepared to commit themselves to a pro-Western alignment and to

undertake a positive program of social reform and economic develop-

ment. However, because of the seriousness of the problems confronting

them and of their lack of experience, they are having great difficulty in

formulating and initiating a positive course of action. It is our view that

a military aid program would act as a catalyst and induce a program of

development in Iran far transcending the military sphere.

c. Have a profound psychological effect on the nation as a whole

by demonstrating United States confidence in Iran’s ability to play an

active role, similar to that of Turkey, in military defense against Soviet

imperialism. It would so bolster the morale of the people, the gov-

ernment and the army that under its impact Iran might well develop

into an asset, rather than remain a liability, in the cold war.

3. The manner in which a military assistance program is negotiated

with Iran will have a very important effect on its value to the United

States. We are convinced that for the United States to obtain full benefit

339.

Memorandum From the Near East and Africa Division,

Directorate of Plans to Director of Central Intelligence

Dulles

Washington, October 29, 1953.

SUBJECT

Certain Aspects of the Present Situation in Iran Which Appear to Require

Further Attention by the United States Government; the Significance and Value

of an Appropriate Program of Military Assistance

fective power may now definitely be considered as a success, there are

indications nevertheless that the position of the Shah and of his gov-

ernment is by no means secure. The Zahedi cabinet which was riding

high at the time of the announcement of American economic aid is cur-

rently hitting a squall of opposition engendered by disgruntled power

seekers (such as Mullah Kashani), Mossadeq supporters including the

Tudeh (who are making a desperate and possibly successful effort to

maintain their organization in being), and an increasingly larger seg-

ment of Bazaar merchants (whose business prospects seem to be threat-

ened by Zahedi’s “reforms”).

2. This opposition is making political capital of:

Iran 1951–1953. Secret; Security Information. There is no drafting information on the

memorandum, only the indication that it came from the Near East and Africa Division.

a. The government’s tardiness and apparent hesitancy in prose-

cuting Mossadeq and other nationalists or Tudeh leaders.

b. The government’s difficulty in using U.S. grant aid (problem of

converting dollars into rials) and the lack of progress in dealing with

economic problems.

c. The uncertainty over the outcome of the oil controversy.

3. In the opinion of CIA local observers, however, none of these

problems seem insurmountable:

a. Through U.S. advice and good offices, the Iranian government is

being encouraged in taking a firm stand against the opposition and is

conducting an intensive drive against the Tudeh.

b. Point IV reported on 13 October that the Iranian treasury

problem was being partially solved by an accounting procedure which

permits the printing of additional rial currency backed by American

dollars.

c. Finally, a well-conducted and subtle propaganda campaign is

underway preparing the ground for an attempted settlement of the oil

controversy; while at the same time the Hoover mission appears to be

making steady headway.

4. These same observers, however, stress that, despite the seri-

ousness of Iran’s economic condition, Iran’s problems today as yes-

terday are primarily political and psychological. No solution of Iran’s

economic or financial difficulties and no solution of the oil controversy,

however favorable to Iran, can have any character of permanency or

guarantee Iran’s alignment with the West unless the political and psy-

chological aspects of the problem are resolved in a manner favorable to

our position and interests. They believe that, despite the present Shah’s

well-known weaknesses, the most effective instrument for maintaining

Iran’s orientation toward the West over the longer pull is the mon-

archy. Although the Shah feels that at this time it would be dangerous

for him to enter into any formal alliance with the West, the fact remains

that the Pahlavis have everything to gain by a close understanding with

the West, and everything to lose by going toward Russia, or even by at-

tempting to remain neutral. These observers point out that Reza Shah

came to power with the Army and the support of the West, and that the

present Shah regained power last August with the aid of Army and

with the support of the West. They concluded that in order to consoli-

date the present regime and render possible a solution of Iran’s

problems it is essential to fortify the crown in its only real source of

power, i.e., the Army. While this in our opinion will not necessarily

lead to a permanent solution of the Iranian problem, it should stabilize

the Iranian situation in our favor for some time and thus give the U.S.

the opportunity to reassess its policy in the area.

5. We understand that a new U.S. military assistance program to

Iran is under consideration. It is our view that to be effective such a pro-

gram should have as its objective the development of the Iranian Army

340.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

1004. During talk which I had with Shah October 27, he told me he

would be grateful if I would request members Embassy staff Tehran re-

frain from political discussions with officers Iranian armed forces. He

anxious these officers not become accustomed discuss political matters.

I told him I would make request but would not be frank if I did not

point out Iranian Army officers frequently approached not only

members Embassy staff but myself to discuss political matters. For in-

stance, Batmangilich, Chief Staff, few days ago had urged me have talk

with Baqai, for whom he expressed greatest admiration, and even of-

fered make appointment for me with Baqai. I said Chief Staff and his

two deputies on various occasions had tried persuade members Amer-

ican representation Iran that Baqai one of great men of country who

Security Information. Repeated to London. Received at 9: a.m.

should have American support. It was being stated in army circles that

Shah himself had given orders for these officers to maintain contact

with Baqai.

2. Shah seemed somewhat embarrassed. He said true several years

ago he had used General Deihimi, one of Deputy Chiefs Staff, as con-

tact man with Baqai but was not doing so now. Deihimi seemed to have

become infected with urge engage in political intrigues. It might be nec-

essary transfer him other duties. He had on preceding day given strict

instructions officers Iranian Security Forces to cease engaging in polit-

ical activities any kind. He hoped that Americans would cooperate so

that they would not allow themselves be drawn into political discus-

sions with Iranian officers; he did not distrust Americans on my staff,

but feared if Iranian Army officers should form habit discussing polit-

ical matters with them they might be tempted enter similar discussions

with other foreign officials, including in certain circumstances even

those of Iron Curtain countries. I again promised convey his request to

American officials in Iran and expressed hope his officers would carry

out his instructions.

3. Last evening at Turkish reception, Generals Batmangilich and

Deihimi approached me. They referred to conversation which at sug-

gestion Batmangilich I had had with Baqai on October 24 and asked if it

had been helpful. I replied it had been interesting but I not sure it had

served useful purpose. Batmangilich asked if he could not arrange an-

other conversation. I replied it might be preferable for Baqai and me ar-

range our meetings direct. Deihimi said “we are afraid that unless we

help in this matter you will not see Baqai again and that you will drift

apart”. I made vague reply and changed conversation to generalities.

4. At same reception General Farzanegan, Acting Minister Posts

and Telegraphs, told me that earlier in evening at request Batmangilich

he had discussed Iranian political situation with latter and his two dep-

uties Deihimi and Akhavi. Three had tried enlist his support in pre-

vailing on Zahedi agree to appointment Deihimi as military governor

Tehran in place of Dadsetan. They had charged Dadsetan inefficient

and corrupt. They also had told him they knew there were rumors that

they were cooperating with Baqai but these rumors totally untrue.

5. Purpose this telegram illustrate kind of political intrigues taking

place in Iran and participation in them officers Iranian armed forces.

Dozen incidents similar those cited herein could be advanced. Difficult

ascertain role played by Shah. It seems quite clear it not entirely inno-

cent one. His desire that American officials refrain from having polit-

ical conversations with Iranian officers may arise more from concern

341.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 245

Tehran, October 30, 1953.

SUBJECT

Official Conversation With Dr. Mozaffar Baqai

There is enclosed for the Department’s information a memo-

randum of conversation which I had recently with Dr. Mozaffar Baqai

who has been the leading open critic of the Zahedi Government. While

the memorandum of conversation is self-explanatory, my purposes in

the course of the meeting were to ascertain Dr. Baqai’s point of view

toward the Zahedi Government and toward the United States and

Great Britain, on the one hand, and to make clear to him the policies

and view of the United States, on the other.

Loy W. Henderson

Ambassador

Information. Received November 15. The despatch was drafted by Melbourne. The at-

tached memorandum of conversation was drafted by Cunningham. A copy was sent to

London.

Attachment

Memorandum of Conversation

Tehran, October 23, 1953.

PARTICIPANTS

Loy W. Henderson, Ambassador

Dr. Mozaffar Baqai, Deputy to the 17th Majlis

Mr. Roy M. Melbourne, First Secretary of Embassy

Mr. Joseph H. Cunningham, Third Secretary

Dr. Baqai came to tea at the Residence at the invitation of the Am-

bassador about 6 p.m. on October 23. After the Ambassador and Baqai

had exchanged assurances that they would speak with complete

candor regarding their views on Iran’s problems, the Ambassador

asked Baqai to outline his estimate of and attitude toward the Zahedi

Government and its performance to date.

As a preface to his remarks, Dr. Baqai observed that his political

fate was inevitably closely allied to that of the new Government. He

had a long record of opposition to Mosadeq, had supported Zahedi for

some time, had defended him publicly at the time of his arrest in 1952,

and had helped bring the General to power. Thus, regardless of the fact

that he had not sought or been offered influence or position in the new

Government, its success would redound in the public mind to his credit

and its failure would be considered in some measure his failure.

Dr. Baqai said that he was frankly disturbed and disappointed by

the General’s record so far. He explained that whereas Zahedi could

have picked for his Cabinet trustworthy though politically unknown

officials or military men in whom he had confidence, he had instead ap-

pointed a group of politicians of long standing, whose inefficiency and

corruption and whose records as tools of Great Britain or Soviet Russia

were known to all. As a result, the people who brought Zahedi to

power in a violent reaction against the Mosadeq Government and who

had hoped for a new and more honest regime were disturbed and in-

dignant at the General’s choice of ministers.

Baqai pointed out that Mosadeq had come to power on a wave of

popularity unmatched in Iran’s history and had begun his term of of-

fice with virtually no opposition. In two years, however, his ineptitude

and the misdeeds of his ministers and subordinates had incited the

people to the violent overthrow of his regime. Zahedi, on the other

hand, came to power with three ready-made foci of opposition: the

Tudeh party, which as the core of Communist sentiment in Iran neces-

sarily attacks his every movement; the Mosadeq partisans, who are in-

September 1953–December 1954

evitably trying to frustrate and discredit the man who overthrew their

leader; and the elements who oppose in principle any Government

headed by a military man.

Dr. Baqai commented in passing that in normal times he would op-

pose the selection of a military man as premier. In view of the present

crisis, however, and in view of the fact that he himself had no desire to

assume the reins of Government and could see at present no alternative

to Zahedi, he had supported the General in his bid for power. Now,

however, he found himself in a very embarrassing situation, as he

could neither support, oppose, nor remain indifferent to the Zahedi re-

gime. He could not grant it support because it was acting contrary to

his expressed principles, was returning to power long-discredited poli-

ticians and was committing all over again the mistakes of the Mosadeq

Government. He could not oppose it, because he had helped bring it to

power and could only turn against it at the cost of admitting he had

made a mistake in preferring Zahedi to Mosadeq; furthermore, opposi-

tion to Zahedi would merely play into Communist hands. Finally, he

could not remain silent and profess indifference to the Zahedi Govern-

ment because his followers would ask him why he failed to criticize the

new Government when it repeated the mistakes of the old.

Dr. Baqai went on to say that Iranian and United States policies

coincided most closely in the matter of their identical opposition to

Communism and Communistic infiltration. Unfortunately, in this re-

gard as in others, the Zahedi Government’s performance has been

worse than poor. Of the 4,000 persons imprisoned as suspected Com-

munists, some 30 per cent are entirely innocent. Furthermore, the re-

mainder who are either Tudeh party members or Communist sympa-

thizers include only rank and file members and insignificant minor

functionaries; not a single member of the Central Committee of the

Party, not a single important Communist writer or pamphleteer, not a

single leading party organizer has been imprisoned. Instead of weak-

ening the Communist party in Iran, the Government’s inept perform-

ance is actually strengthening it; so long as the leaders remain free they

can always attract new dupes and sympathizers to replace those whom

the Government imprisons, while many of the innocent men arrested

on one pretext or another by the security forces become embittered by

the injustice of their treatment and turn to Communism for revenge.

Baqai emphasized that Communism, being an ideology, could not

be overcome by force alone, and pointed out that the Government was

even using force, its only weapon, incorrectly. While innocent men are

arrested at the whim of a police officer or Government functionary or in

the hope that they might pay a ransom for their release, the guilty are

all too often securing release or immunity from arrest by bribery or by

influence. In some cases politicians apparently seek to prepare for the

eventuality of a Communist regime in Iran by protecting from impris-

onment Communist party functionaries. These men obviously fail to

realize that, without exception, politicians who followed their example

in countries now behind the Iron Curtain have been liquidated along

with the rest by the Communist regime.

At this point Baqai said that he could if necessary cite numerous

examples to support his allegations. He mentioned the case of Ali

Ashgar Hekmat, Minister in the Zahedi Government Cabinet, who has

a long record of service to the British cause and who in recent years has

become increasingly involved in Iran’s Soviet cultural activities.

Hekmat’s brother, a professor at Tehran University and an active

Tudeh party member, is and will remain immune from arrest because

of his brother’s position. There have been, in fact, only three important

party functionaries arrested since the inauguration of the Zahedi re-

gime and all three of them were released within 48 hours of their

arrest.

At this point Ambassador Henderson asked Dr. Baqai if his dissat-

isfaction with the Zahedi Government resulted from fundamental dis-

agreement on policy grounds or merely from disappointment in

Zahedi’s implementation of his policies. He went on to point out that in

order to correct abuses and errors which Baqai had detailed, the Gov-

ernment would need an honest and efficient police force, which it did

not at present have and which would be difficult and time-consuming

to develop. The Ambassador asked Baqai just what he would do to im-

prove the situation and wondered whether he felt that the Zahedi Gov-

ernment was willfully mishandling its anti-Communist campaign or

merely falling into error through ineptitude and inexperience.

Baqai affirmed his support of Zahedi’s announced policies but

stated that what really counted was the way these policies were being

carried out and that it was in this connection that he differed with Gen-

eral Zahedi. He conceded that Zahedi’s personal aims were undoubt-

edly commendable and that he was attempting to pursue an effective

anti-Communist campaign, but contended that such attempts were

September 1953–December 1954

largely vitiated by the corrupt and venal politicians who surround him.

He felt that, since his own Workers’ Party had extensive information re-

garding the Communist organization leadership and activities in Iran,

the Security Forces undoubtedly had much more complete informa-

tion, as well as the means to use this information in suppressing the

party and disrupting its organization. Citing his five years of active op-

position to Communism, Baqai stated that this experience made him

one of the best qualified men in Iran to discuss Communist activities

and the best ways of combating them. Several times in this presenta-

tion, Baqai affirmed that he had made his position clear to General

Zahedi and that the General agreed with his estimate of the situation

but was prevented by his entourage from acting effectively.

When Baqai had completed his commentary on the Zahedi Gov-

ernment, the Ambassador asked him for his views on the recent state-

ment by Foreign Minister Anthony Eden of Great Britain regarding the

necessity for free intercourse between Iran and Britain and the

desirability of re-establishing diplomatic relations. The Ambassador

pointed out that General Zahedi had emphasized Iran’s desire to be

on friendly terms with all countries, and asked Dr. Baqai’s reaction to

this statement. Baqai said that he certainly agreed in principle6 with

Zahedi’s stand and felt that diplomatic relations with Great Britain

should by all means be re-established. However such recognition must

be proceeded by at least the beginnings of an oil settlement in order to

prevent the British from using their diplomatic mission to foist upon

Iran an unfair settlement and to exercise again improper influence on the

internal affairs of the country.

The Ambassador then turned to the concept of an oilless economy

for Iran, which Dr. Baqai’s newspaper Shahed has advocated editorially

on a number of occasions. He asked the Deputy if he really believed

that in present circumstances such an economy was desirable or even

feasible. Obtaining the Ambassador’s permission to explain his stand

in some detail, Baqai launched into an explanation of the history and

background of his advocacy of an oilless economy.

When the 16th Majlis was elected some four years ago and the na-

tional movement first came into prominence, one of the movement’s

major objectives as listed in Shahed was the settlement of the oil ques-

tion. By this, Baqai explained, he meant the reaching of an under-

standing with the AIOC if that company were willing to grant Iran a

fair share of the proceeds from its oil; otherwise, he advocated eviction

of the British and nationalization of the oil industry. British intransi-

gence unfortunately aroused public anger in Iran to such a pitch that

many people came to feel that they wanted no part either of the AIOC

or of the oil industry; in other words, they wanted to be rid of the oil

question completely. In line with this public feeling, Baqai had advo-

cated and still defended the oilless economy as an alternative to the sur-

render of Iran’s legitimate rights and the compromising of her national

honor. Although he felt that if possible Iran should profit from her oil

resources, he feared that the only way that Britain would allow it to do

so would be on the basis of a 50–50 division of profits, which would be

completely unacceptable to the Iranian people. Rather than accept such

a shameful settlement, he believed Iran should forget her oil and turn

to other sources of revenue.

The Ambassador thanked Dr. Baqai for his frank and detailed pre-

sentation of his views and said that his comments had been most

helpful and revealing. He then stated his intention to explain with

equal frankness and in some detail his own estimate, and what he be-

lieved to be the United States Government’s estimate, of Iran’s situation

with regard to the oil problem. Prefacing his remarks with a summa-

tion of the long-standing struggle among the Great Powers for influ-

ence in Iran, the Ambassador pointed out that the United States, in con-

trast, wanted nothing from Iran and desired merely to preserve the

independence and promote the prosperity of its people. Although cer-

tainly activated in part by self-interest in this matter, the United States

desired neither territory nor profit nor political influence in Iran. It was

no longer possible in the present world situation for Iran to seek advan-

tages by playing one great power against another as it had done so long

in the past. At this rather pointed comment on the traditional Iranian

policy which Baqai’s party has often advocated, the Deputy made no

reply.

Ambassador Henderson then went on to outline the world petro-

leum situation as it is today, emphasizing that present production was

more than adequate to meet world needs and that only through cooper-

ation among a number of the major oil companies of the globe could

Iran’s oil be distributed in appreciable quantities. He emphasized that

the sale of any Iranian oil would necessitate a corresponding reduction

in the production of other Middle Eastern countries, any one of which

could produce enough petroleum to satisfy the entire world demand

for Middle Eastern oil.

The Ambassador emphasized that, in view of these facts, Iran

could not expect to obtain a better price for its oil than the other coun-

tries of the region. In his view, the best solution would involve a provi-

sion akin to a most-favored-nation clause whereby Iran would be sure

September 1953–December 1954

to receive as high a proportionate revenue from its petroleum as would

the other oil-producing countries. Pointing out that Saudi Arabia,

Kuwait, and Iraq had all increased their production of oil in recent

years, the Ambassador suggested that such a most-favored-nation

clause would permit Iran to increase her revenue from oil at the same

pace as her sister nations. Were such a provision to go into effect, it was

likely that both the AIOC and Iran itself might lose much of their in-

terest in the question of compensation.

Underlining the extreme urgency of the situation, the Ambassador

stated that either foreign economic aid such as now proffered by the

United States or sizable oil revenues were absolutely essential to the

Iranian economy if it was to avoid complete bankruptcy. The emer-

gency aid program now under way had five more months to run; at the

end of that time Iran must find some other source of revenue. Al-

though personally willing if necessary to ask his Government for addi-

tional aid for Iran, the Ambassador felt very sure that, unless important

steps had been taken in the direction of an oil settlement, the United

States Congress would refuse to extend further assistance. Rightly or

wrongly, the American people would feel that a country which appar-

ently did nothing to utilize its own resources did not deserve support

from abroad.

At the close of the Ambassador’s presentation, Dr. Baqai said that

he thanked the Ambassador for his frankness and agreed in substance

with his estimate of the situation. However, he felt it necessary to point

out that the people of Iran must be psychologically prepared for an oil

agreement with Great Britain and that the real economic and political

reasons for such an agreement would have to be sugar-coated in order

to make them palatable to an uninformed public. He suggested that

when the United States decided for reasons of political or military ne-

cessity to intervene in Korea it had had to profess high-sounding and

possibly fictitious reasons for its action; in the same manner, the Iranian

Government could not be completely frank with its people as to the ne-

cessity for and the reasons behind an oil settlement.

The Ambassador took sharp issue with Baqai’s comments re-

garding the Korean intervention and emphasized that the United States

had acted solely in order to resist Communist aggression and to keep

its word to the free world. Baqai then modified his statement some-

what, conceding that possibly the United States Government’s explana-

tion of its action had not been given proper publicity in Iran, but reiter-

ated his contention that in his country and particularly in the case of the

oil question considerable psychological preparation of the people was

necessary.

Further detailing his position, Baqai stated that his party served as

a screen between the Communist Party and Iranians dissatisfied with

their country’s present situation. This was because the Worker’s Party

advocates many of the reforms demanded by the Tudeh without in-

sisting that they be carried out within the framework of Communism.

Many Iranian intellectuals, however, stood somewhere between the

Worker’s Party and the Communists, and in order to attract these indi-

viduals towards him and away from the Tudeh, Baqai had found it nec-

essary to profess on occasions a neutralism which he did not feel.

Pointing out that these intellectuals, if forced to chose between Britain

and Russia, would invariably turn toward the Soviet Union, and that

American policy in recent years had led them to suspect the United

States of collusion with British interests, Baqai stated that he was forced

to oppose the United States in print from time to time in order to avoid

the accusation of pro-Americanism and to preserve his hold over

the intellectual element, which he considered to be of the highest

importance.

The Ambassador commented that he would have no grounds to

complain if Baqai out of honest conviction would criticize the United

States or United States policies. He thought, however, it would be un-

worthy of a statesman to criticize a country trying to help Iran merely

for the purpose of trying to strengthen his political party. At this crit-

ical period of Iran’s history, it behooved such leaders of public opinion

as Dr. Baqai to assert their leadership to the fullest on behalf of Iran’s

interests and to explain the situation fully and frankly to their sup-

porters and constituents. By professing for reasons of political conven-

ience opinions which he did not hold, Dr. Baqai made it impossible for

the members of his party and their sympathizers to know precisely

where he stood; furthermore, he deprived them of the benefit of his in-

formed judgment and leadership.

To these remarks Baqai merely reiterated his opinion that the Ira-

nian people could not be dragooned into supporting an oil settlement

and must be prepared psychologically over a period of time for any

342.

Monthly Project Status Report Prepared in the Directorate of

Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

Summary

A. Mission: The mission of the project is to establish an effective in-

strument in Iran with which to work toward our political and psycho-

logical objectives. Individuals and groups that show a potential to orga-

nize and direct attacks against the Communists in Iran are supported

and used to contact and direct various religious, political, labor and

other leaders of important factions in Iran.

B. Plan: [5 lines not declassified].

C. Summary of PP Action: The immediate aims of the project are to

emphasize the Soviet sponsorship of the Tudeh Party, and hence its

danger to Iranian freedom, and to prevent the Communists from capi-

talizing on the present unstable condition of Iran.

[cryptonym not declassified]. Secret; Security Information. The report covers Operation

[cryptonym not declassified] for October 1953.

[6 paragraphs (34 lines) not declassified]

D. Effectiveness of Project: The Station continues to prepare and dis-

tribute anti-Tudeh articles and cartoons [less than 1 line not declassified].

In this way it is attempting to keep the Zahedi government aware of the

dangers of the Tudeh.

E. Methods and Standards: [8 lines not declassified].

F. PP Assets Acquired: none.

343.

Monthly Report Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

IRAN

October 1953

A. General Developments

1. The government of General Zahedi has engendered several

points of serious opposition represented by some old-time power

seekers, several groups of Mossadeq supporters including the Tudeh,

and several hundred bazaar merchants. These opposition factors have

found rallying points around the tardiness of the government in the

prosecution of Mossadeq and Tudeh leaders, delays in using impact

portion of U.S. emergency aid, and public uncertainty over the oil

problem.

2. The Shah and General Zahedi have proposed that U.S. military

aid be increased to permit the development of the Iranian Army as a

frontier screen of defense rather than only as an internal police force.

The U.S. Ambassador has endorsed the idea and our Station has urged

strong support by CIA as a potent factor in solidifying public opinion

behind the Zahedi government and scattering the opposition.

3. The major elements of opposition to the Zahedi government

have so far failed to present any insurmountable problem to the gov-

ernment since they have lacked any cohesive effort and no one element

is believed to have financial support capable of amounting to a positive

5, Monthly Report—October 1953—Country Summaries and Analyses. Top Secret; Secu-

rity Information.

344.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 263

Tehran, November 5, 1953.

REF

SUBJECT

Government Anti-Tudeh Campaign and Tudeh Countermeasures

Summary

In its campaign against the Tudeh the Government continues to

hold the upper hand. This was most recently demonstrated by the

peaceful transition of the celebrations for the Shah’s birthday and the

Sports Festival and by the Government’s announcement that it is aware

of and will take measures against a planned Tudeh bazaar strike be-

tween November 6 and 11. A few arrests are still being made in the

Ministries and in the Provinces, but in general the situation throughout

the country is quiet. The Shah and the administration are encouraging

the growth of quasi-military fascist-type groups as added insurance

against the possibility of further Tudeh mob actions. Nevertheless, the

Tudeh continues to attempt a minimal anti-Government campaign.

The content of Party propaganda has changed little during the past

month except to stress the contention that Mosadeq is the legal Prime

Minister and to enlist public support in the campaign to gain his

release.

Government Measures

Information based on Embassy, CAS and Armed Services Attache´

sources indicates that the Government’s security forces are continuing

their clean-up operations against the Party. General Dadsetan, Military

Governor of Tehran, in a press interview on November 3, announced

that, since August 19, 208 “Communist and anti-National” centers have

been uncovered and 842 arrests have been made in Tehran alone.

During the same period over 200,000 Tudeh leaflets were seized and

dential; Security Information. Drafted by G.D. King. Pouched to London and Moscow.

Received on November 13.

ability to conduct a “limited anti-Government campaign.” Even so, “Government secu-

rity measures . . . have risen to a new level of effectiveness in striking at the central orga-

September 1953–December 1954

caches of arms and explosives were uncovered and confiscated. Ac-

cording to a communique´ from the Ministry of Interior, released on the

day before General Dadsetan’s interview, a total of 1375 Tudeh Party

members were arrested in all of Iran during the Iranian month of Mehr

newspaper, Etela’at, took cognizance of the Military Governor’s inter-

view but pointed out that the authorities must distinguish between

people duped by the Tudeh and those who have been active in furth-

ering Tudeh aims, and called for Government efforts to insure employ-

ment for those elements in the population most susceptible to Tudeh

propaganda.

General Dadsetan indicated that the Government is aware of the

cooperation between the various pro-Mosadeq and Tudeh elements, al-

though he did not specifically mention the new Tudeh-inspired Na-

tional Resistance Movement. He did make the statement, however, that

Hosein Fatemi, ex-Minister of Foreign Affairs, Dr. Sanjabi, and Engi-

neers Hasibi and Zirakzadeh were using the funds which they had ac-

cumulated illegally while serving under Dr. Mosadeq to further the

cause of the Tudeh and allied pro-Mosadeq organizations.

The Military Governor’s office further demonstrated its efficiency

during the week of the Shah’s birthday, when it was generally expected

that the Tudeh would attempt to create difficulties. The actual birthday

celebrations on October 26 were well guarded and orderly. The Sports

Festival later in the same week was completely free of Tudeh activity.

At the same time the security forces issued a communique´ notifying

Tudeh members and sympathizers in several local factories that the

Government was aware of their plans for sabotage. Additional guards

have been stationed in the main power station, the Government silo,

the oil depot, and in the Government distribution centers for bread, oil

and electricity.

A number of correspondents have been invited by the General

Staff, Iranian Army, to witness the execution in Resht of “a very dan-

gerous member of the Tudeh Party in the North”, a certain Hadi Nazar

Mohammadi. The General Staff communique´ noted that the prisoner

had for some time been engaged in espionage activities for the Soviet

Government and has been found guilty of acts of sabotage in factories

in the northern provinces and of inciting the mobs on August 16 to

overthrow the Shah’s statues. According to newspaper reports a Soviet

spy called Alioff is also a target of Government security measures. De-

spite protests from the Soviet Embassy, the Government, armed with

“conclusive proofs establishing the charges brought against this dan-

gerous element”, plans to put him on trial in the near future.

Situation in the Ministries and in the Provinces

The situation within the various Ministries of Government ap-

pears to be quiet. The Ministry of Finance announced on October 25

that it was about to expel 150 employees who have been convicted of

working with the Tudeh Party and that an equal number of question-

able Ministry employees outside of Tehran would be placed on indefi-

nite leave. The Iranian Army G–2, according to a reliable source,

non-commissioned officers to date. The non-commissioned officers

have been summarily separated from the service, but the Army is in a

quandary over the disposition of the more important commissioned

detainees. G–2 is worried because the documentary proof of the com-

plicity of these officers in the Tudeh Party is now mysteriously missing

from the G–2 files, but the Army is very reluctant to release these men

to civilian life where they would be able to carry on Party activities

with perhaps greater facility. The Iranian G–2 stated recently that only

a small proportion of Party members and sympathizers in the Army are

known or have been apprehended.

There has been little change in the situation in the Provinces as re-

gards Tudeh activities. Newspaper reports from Abadan note that 300

persons were arrested there recently on the charge of writing anti-

Government slogans on walls in the city. Two hundred forty of these

have since been freed, but 30 soldiers and sailors and 18 civilians were

arrested and sent from Abadan to the prison at Falak-ol-Aflak. In this

connection, the Government in Tehran issued a circular in late October

to all provincial governors to notify them that any worker arrested by

provincial authorities and later dismissed as innocent must be rein-

stated in his job.

In Tabriz the Consulate has noted little Tudeh activity during the

past month. A few leaflets have been distributed, but on the whole it

appears that the Party there is preoccupied as elsewhere in the country

with its reorganization on a clandestine scale. The Consulate believes

that the Government’s security campaign has not been as extensive or

thorough in Azerbaijan as elsewhere in the country and thinks it prob-

able that important and sizeable Tudeh elements still exist in the

Province.

Anti-Tudeh Organizations

There are indications that within recent weeks the Shah and the

Government have been encouraging the growth of quasi-military

rightist parties to be used against the Tudeh in the event of further

street demonstrations. Among these are the Sumka, the Arya, and the

September 1953–December 1954

swastika-bedecked banners carried in perfect marching order. These

organizations enlist their members almost solely on the basis of intense

anti-Tudeh feelings, and almost certainly receive their excellent finan-

cial backing from the Shah and the administration.

Tudeh Countermeasures

Perhaps the most significant aspect of Tudeh Party activity in re-

cent weeks has been the dogged persistence with which the Party has

attempted to carry on its anti-Government campaign. In a perusal of

the total picture, it becomes apparent that the harm done the Party by

the Government’s security measures, despite their relative effec-

tiveness, has not discouraged nor prevented the remaining Tudeh

leaders from making constant efforts to achieve at least limited

objectives.

It would appear that the most important event during October was

the formation of the so-called National Resistance Movement. The

Tudeh has been working since before the fall of Mosadeq for the cre-

ation of a united front among pro-Mosadeq elements. In mid-October

they were successful in organizing the National Resistance Movement

from elements of the Iran Party, the Pan-Iranists, and the Third Force,

as well as remnants of the National Movement. Cooperation among

these diverse political units has been achieved by agreement on the

single objective of obtaining the release of Dr. Mosadeq. Tudeh leaders

are apparently satisfied with this degree of cooperation, but have urged

the other parties participating in the Movement to review the possi-

bility of further cooperation after the limited objective concerning Dr.

Mosadeq has been realized.

Reportedly, the Movement has recently been strengthened by the

receipt of a surreptitious message from Dr. Mosadeq in which the ex-

Prime Minister gave his blessing to the joint effort. The leaders of the

Movement, in conjunction with members of a pro-Mosadeq Bazaar

Committee, are making plans for a one-day strike in the bazaar and

downtown areas of Tehran sometime between November 6 and 11.

General Dadsetan is aware of the project and, in his press interview on

November 3, appealed to the people to collaborate with the security

forces in frustrating this attempt at subversion.

Potentially, this threatened bazaar strike could cause the Govern-

ment a great deal of embarrassment. The administration is entirely ca-

pable of dispersing any street demonstrations but the traditional

bazaar method of closing all shops as part of the strike would be much

more difficult to handle. Any heavy-handed security tactics might

serve only to enlist on-the-fence or pro-Government merchants on the

side of the National Resistance Movement. The situation could be fur-

ther aggravated if the Government initiates its counter-measures only

after the strike has begun.

The Tudeh is said to have obtained the agreement of the other

groups affiliated with it in the National Resistance Movement to manu-

facture and use crude bombs in a limited terrorist campaign. Money is

being collected to pay for these bombs and also for the financial aspects

of the “release Mosadeq” campaign. Although reports conflict con-

cerning the success of the collections, it would appear that the Tudeh

and the National Resistance Movement are having difficulties in accu-

mulating the quantity of money needed for such an operation. The

Tudeh is also attempting to collect enough capital to carry out its own

objective of procuring the release of those Party members still held in

custody. These releases are engineered, according to reports, not only

by bribery but also by the payment of bail.

Current Tudeh Propaganda

Other Tudeh activities have been concerned primarily with the

continuing dissemination of propaganda. Hand-printed leaflets are

still distributed at strategic points in the city (one set of tracts was scat-

tered on the street a block from the Embassy). Two weeks ago the anni-

versary edition of the Party newspaper Mardom appeared in Tehran

and, at about the same time, a new magazine called Mosavar with a

violently anti-American, pro-Soviet slant commenced publication. It

would appear also that the Tudeh is responsible for a current rumor

and whispering campaign against the United States in general and the

Embassy in particular. One rumor insists, for example, that Ambas-

sador Henderson is putting pressure on the Government to execute Dr.

Mosadeq forthwith. Other rumors spread by the Tudeh and by its com-

patriots in the National Resistance Movement attempt to foster the be-

lief that the British and Americans are following divergent policies in

Iran.

The content of Tudeh propaganda since the August 19 change of

administration has reflected the Party’s new status in the country.

During recent weeks the persistent central theme has been a demand

that Dr. Mosadeq be released, coupled with a constantly reiterated in-

sistence that Mosadeq is the legal Prime Minister. In conjunction with

this theme, the Party contends the present administration has usurped

the power of government by means of an illegal and treasonable coup

d’e´tat. Tudeh propaganda also reflects the extent to which its nation-

wide organization has been hit by the Government’s security measures.

In a recent leaflet the Party complained almost petulantly that the Gov-

ernment had no right to decree such severe measures as the death pen-

alty against “patriotic anti-imperialist combatants.”

In the few Party newspapers and magazines which have appeared

recently, the favorite topic continues to be a series of accusations

against the United States. Tudeh publications warned the local popu-

lace that the United States plans to make Iran a colony, that Iran is to be

345.

Letter From the Officer in Charge of Iranian Affairs, Office

of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, Bureau of Near

Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs, Department of

State (Stutesman) to the First Secretary of Embassy in Iran

(Melbourne)

Washington, November 6, 1953.

Dear Roy:

I consider myself an unusually fortunate Desk Officer in having

such close personal relationships with my more or less opposite

numbers in CIA. John Waller and [name not declassified] are men upon

whose judgment we can all rely without qualification and Arthur

Richards and I have been happy to observe that they go out of their

way to maintain friendly and close relations with us, asking our advice

often upon subjects which their organization might not normally

discuss with working levels in the Department.

Since the change of Government in Iran, we have had many

lengthy discussions here on the subject of action to take to exploit the

new and favorable situation there. To set my own thoughts in order I

divided the problem into four major segments:

1. Accomplishment of major policy objectives, involving definition

of short and long-range objectives, determination of size and nature of

economic and military aid, overt diplomatic action;

2. Settlement of the oil dispute, involving negotiations with the Ira-

nians, the U.K. and American oil companies;

3. Initiating U.S. political action in Iranian internal affairs;

4. Initiating a propaganda campaign, involving definition of objec-

tives and increasing the variety and effectiveness of our efforts.

Security Information; Official–Informal.

Naturally, all of these are almost inextricably interrelated; but, at

least from this desk, it seems that different lines radiate to each of these

major segments of the total Iranian problem. The first involves, in

Washington, the NSC and constant in-fighting with FOA and Defense.

The banner of the second is being carried at this moment by Mr.

Hoover. My efforts in regard to meeting the 4th (propaganda) problem

will be dealt with in another letter and involves close coordination with

Clary Thompson of USIA and a host of propaganda experts in other

crannies of Washington.

The third problem listed above has been the subject of much dis-

cussion with John Waller and Don Wilbur. The latter will be able to

give you first-hand reports upon our discussions and our difficulties.

The rest of this letter will be devoted to raising problems with you on

this specific subject.

First of all, as I know you already realize, we have such great admi-

ration for Ambassador Henderson and you that we have not sought to

give you more than general indications of our attitude on political as-

pects of the Iranian situation. For instance, you will note that we have

hardly expressed an opinion upon the question of whether to urge

Zahedi to fill up his rump Majlis or elect a new Majlis. We have such

confidence in the Ambassador that we feel it best to leave to his discre-

tion final judgment upon such tactical problems. Therefore we are in-

clined more to backing you up than to calling the signals.

However, the problem presents a different face to our friends

across the street. Without reflecting any lack of confidence in their sta-

tion, they feel, and I consider it understandable, that they cannot allow

much free-wheeling. They have already (and please treat this in confi-

dence although I would expect you to inform Bill Rountree and the

Ambassador) taken steps to pull in their horns a bit without any en-

couragement on our part, although Arthur and I know that this will

meet with the Ambassador’s approval. They wish to give rather spe-

cific instructions at least so far as objectives are concerned, and they

have asked for our advice.

We very much appreciate their consideration in seeking our advice

but we consider it necessary to ask your views upon the questions

which I shall raise below. Please let me have your informal advice. You

may wish to discuss this with CAS and you are certainly free to explain

the substance of what I have written above. Of course, I would like to

have the Ambassador’s opinion as well as Bill’s.

My basic assumption is that we cannot avoid a responsibility to be-

come involved in Iranian internal affairs. The grave risk we will run is

that we will become known as an intriguing power and lose our impor-

tant moral position as a nation dealing with other independent

members of the free world as equals. On the other hand, I fear that re-

September 1953–December 1954

fusal to interfere in Iran would not only be disbelieved but could be as

dangerous as refusing to stretch forth a hand to help an unstable man

walk along a precipice.

1. Army—It would seem essential that there be an organization of

preferably younger Army officers responsive to our guidance. This

would seem to me to be Target No. 1.

2. Government—Aside from the information to be obtained from

control of certain government employees, I do not see the advantage of

directing a major effort toward controlling Cabinet-level officers. The

British have apparently placed great reliance upon such measures, but

the success of this maneuver has not been very impressive during the

past four years in Iran. It is my present inclination to advise against

concentration of covert resources upon high-level government officers

since they are (a) generally undependable, (b) subject to many opposite

influences, (c) constantly changing. Naturally, I would not suggest re-

jection of any person amenable to our advice, and in fact would urge on

every occasion that we seek to further the careers of persons friendly

towards us while generally discouraging the rise of persons basically

unfriendly to us.

3. Majlis—Perhaps in contradiction to what I have said above, I

think it is desirable to support the election of certain men to the Majlis. I

do not delude myself that this would lead to the creation of any openly

pro-American group but I would suggest this as at least a secondary

target. However this leads to a larger question upon which I need your

advice. Should we encourage the creation of a party which draws polit-

ical influence from its closeness to the American Embassy? Is it to our

advantage to have a group of politicians suspected of being American

stooges? I can see some advantages and great disadvantages in an ef-

fort to encourage the creation of such a political group.

4. Potential opposition—Clearly there is a value in penetration of

communist groups, as well as having at least listening posts close to ex-

tremist groups. What attitude do you believe we should take toward

politicians and groups presently antagonistic to Zahedi? Should we

support any potential alternate to Zahedi? We would run the serious

danger of encouraging intrigue and antagonisms, and, in Iran, a land of

intrigue, I doubt that we could long keep any support of an opposition

group secret. However, and this I consider a most important point

upon which I need your advice, it seems to me that Zahedi must not be-

come our only arrow in the political quiver. Although we have never

raised the question on a high level here it is my frank belief that in any

show-down between the Shah and Zahedi, we can only side with the

Shah. We have gone already very far in the direction of becoming iden-

tified with Zahedi and I dread the day when his increasingly unpop-

346.

Despatch From the Station in Iran to the Chief of the Near

East and Africa Division, Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)

[text not declassified]–1472

Tehran, November 13, 1953.

SUBJECT

General—Operational

Specific—A Study of Electoral Methods in Iran

1. Introduction

Elections, as we know them in the West, have never been held in

Iran. In fact, one might almost call the process whereby a private citizen

becomes a Majlis deputy selection rather than election. And, unfortu-

nately, the voter is the least important person in the process. There are a

number of reasons for this state of affairs: a) Political parties, as we

know them, do not exist in Iran, b) 90% of the population is illiterate,

c) the majority of the population live in villages or tribal areas, far from

the centers of political activity and are ignorant of current political de-

velopments, d) due to a, b, and c above, many Persians are indifferent

and negligent in dealing with the problems concerning the fate of the

ruling class, e) the electoral law is full of loopholes which allow factors

other than “the man in the street” to exercise decisive influence over

elections. In addition to these reasons, that portion of the educated class

which is excluded from the ruling class, has a profound hatred of the

latter which is exploited by intensive Tudeh propaganda. At the same

time, due to lack of serious attention regarding improvement of the

country, on the part of previous governments, as well as the influence

and intervention in public affairs by the central government, the British

government and the AIOC, an atmosphere of despair and negligence

has been created, even among the more intelligent and educated class

of the Iranian Society, with the result that even they refrain from con-

structive participation in public affairs and are satisfied to pursue their

separate courses in search of personal interest.

The only organized group which is conducted along the lines of a

political party is the Tudeh. There have been other attempts at orga-

nized party activity, but the foundation of these various organizations

has always been a particular aim or motive, which, once having been

attained eliminates the reason for existence of the organization. The

best example of this is Qavam’s Democratic Party of Iran which was

Political Activities—Iran. Secret; Security Information. Sent for the attention of the

Deputy for Psych/Intel. The three enclosures to the despatch are not printed.

formed for the specific purpose of having a Majlis favorable to Qavam.

After the elections to the 15th Majlis, in which there were many

members of Qavam’s party, the organization disintegrated, and

members like Makki bolted. They had joined merely to gain a Majlis

seat. Their objective reached, they no longer had need of membership

in the organization. Regardless of how this sounds to the Western

mind, Persian political history is full of such examples.

2. The Dynamics of the Electoral Process

The major ingredients of the electoral process are: a. the gov-

ernment, b. the Shah, c. vested interests, and d. foreign intervention. To

get one’s fingers in the Majlis pie, a combination of these ingredients

must be available. However, the amount of each ingredient used is de-

termined by the location. There are, in general, three categories for

consideration:

a. The large cities. (Tehran, Tabriz, Meshed, Isfahan, etc.). It is al-

most impossible to control the vote in large cities. Voters are divided

into many groups, they have different political ideas and inclinations

and there are usually a good many candidates in the running. As a re-

sult, the only way the government can insure victory for its candidates

is to change the ballot boxes and this has been done with almost monot-

onous consistency in the past. The central government appoints the

governors of the various areas. They, in turn, appoint the Electoral

Commissions who change the ballot boxes or simply render the desired

decision by means of false figures. This commission also arranges to

stuff the ballot boxes in suburban areas subject to its jurisdiction by

means of cooperation from the local landlords. An example of this type

of “selectoral process” is as follows:

1) In the elections to the 17th Majlis, Mossadeq was extremely con-

cerned about the military moving in and changing the ballot boxes.

Since, in Tehran, the Electoral Commission must at least go through the

motions of counting votes, etc., it was important that the proper votes

be in the boxes when the time arrived for counting. Mossadeq therefore

instructed the Electoral Commission to set up all ballot boxes near

Mosques where possible. He then placed sentinels in the minarets.

When the Shah’s representatives (usually military) approached to

change the boxes, Mossadeq’s sentinels sounded the call to prayer. The

crowd was then led by professional agitators in a movement which

would cause the Army to lose face. Just before the close of balloting,

Mossadeq leaked the rumor that the Tudeh Party was going to attack

and burn the ballot boxes. Orders were issued for assembling all ballot

boxes at the Ministry of Education for safe keeping. While one truck

picked up the legal ballot boxes, another was loaded with “National

Front” ballot boxes. The latter arrived at the Ministry of Education. The

former disappeared. Makki was elected first Deputy of Tehran with

September 1953–December 1954

120,000 votes, Kashani was second with 100,000. The reason for this is

that, Mossadeq, although he had no objection to Kashani’s election, did

not want him to be first deputy. Electioneering agents of the National

Front were instructed to repeat Makki’s name on the ballots 20,000

times more than Kashani’s. (Every source utilized for this report main-

tains that Makki could not have gotten 5,000 votes fairly, while Kashani

is generally conceded to have 15,000 votes in the Bazaar.)

2) For a case study in changing ballot boxes, see Attachment A. Al-

though the Shah attempted to elect his candidate from Karaj, the area

was under civil government control and he was unsuccessful.

If the government cannot figure out a way to change the ballot

boxes, they may play safe and just stuff them. Government employees

of various factories and the railroad are granted paid leave for one or

more days and ordered to form queues in front of polling places. They

are instructed not to allow “outsiders” to join them. Qavam did this in

the election for the 15th Majlis. He did not want Kashani to be re-

elected and so he stuffed the ballot boxes. In addition, the electoral

boards were instructed not to stamp the identity cards of voters who

voted for the government list. The result was that the 12 deputies of

Tehran each got more than 40,000 votes while Kashani received only

15,000. One voter is known to have voted 132 times in this election.

Total figures for the election ran to 600,000 votes cast at a time when

Tehran’s population was roughly 750,000.

b. Tribal areas. In the areas occupied by tribes, the military usually

plays an important role. This means, of course, that the Shah has the

upper hand. His Majesty’s chief vehicles of influence are the Army and

the clerics. The royal influence is therefore exercised mostly in frontier

regions where the military holds sway, and in regions where the influ-

ence of religion is strong—such as in areas inhabited by Sunnites. Ex-

amples of the Shah’s influence are:

1) In the elections to the 17th Majlis the Shah wanted Mir Ashrafi to

be deputy from Meshgin Shahi. Mir Ashrafi is a former Army officer

who was expelled from the Army for being too corrupt. During the war

he acquired for himself the reputation of being one of the worst crooks

in the country. However, Meshgin Shahi is a region inhabited by

simple peasants who certainly had never heard anything of or about

Mir Ashrafi. Since the Army controlled the area, the Intelligence Bu-

reau of the General Staff communicated the royal desire to the Com-

manding officer at Meshgin Shahi. A few men were instructed to fill

thousands of ballots with the name of Mir Ashrafi and the peasants

were ordered to cast the ballots into the ballot boxes. It is probable that

the majority of “voters” never learned whose name was on the ballots

they cast. The whole thing was done so smoothly that even Mossadeq

did not know what was afoot until the results were published.

2) In the elections for the 17th Majlis at Mahabad the Shah had the

Imam Jomeh of Tehran elected. This is particularly significant when

you remember that Mahabad is inhabited by Sunnites and the Imam

Jomeh is a Shia high priest. Nevertheless, since the Sunni believes that

the Sovereign is the supreme spiritual and secular authority, the Shah’s

decision was accepted by the Sunni Imam Jomeh of Kurdistan and suc-

cessfully carried out. Mossadeq attempted to stop this operation, but

without success. Thus, from the capital of Kurdistan a non-Kurd, who

is a Shia, was elected.

3) For a detailed case study of the elections at Mahabad for the 15th

Majlis, see Attachment B. This case study is an example of how all op-

position to the Shah’s desires is futile, but it also illustrates principles of

action which are utilized throughout Iran.

Within this category, the element of foreign intervention often

crops up. Examples of this are:

(1) Hossein Farhoodi was elected to the 15th Majlis from Dashti-

Meshon in the Bani Toref region, then controlled by the AIOC. The

Shah did not want Farhoodi, Qavam didn’t want him, the military

didn’t back him, he had no money with which to bribe anyone, yet all

other candidates withdrew in deference to the AIOC.

(2) When Soviet troops were stationed in Iran during the war, the

Russians succeeded in sending eight Tudeh deputies to the Majlis.

They were supposed to represent the areas occupied by the Soviets. In

order to achieve this the Soviet Embassy in Tehran came to an agree-

ment with Ali Soheily, then Premier. Original Soviet demands were

much higher than eight deputies but Soheily only allowed eight Tude-

hites to go the 14th Majlis.

(3) Seyyad Zia Tabatabai was elected to the 14th Majlis on orders

from the British Embassy. The Vice-Consul at Yazd was informed that

Seyyid Zia was the British choice and despite the fact that the Shah was

then against him, he was elected.

It should also be noted here that in areas inhabited solely by tribes,

the Chieftains have control over elections. Cases in point are the

Qashqai region and Zanjan.

c. Non-tribal areas. This category is that which is neither subject to

military control nor to the type of influence exercised in big cities. It is

the area fairly close to the big cities but not in tribal districts. The most

important factors here are money and vested interests. Here, the gov-

ernor (Farmandar) is a key figure. In some cases, the government

allows the various candidates in a constituency to fight out their battle.

This happens when they find themselves confronted with several

equally non-objectionable candidates. Officials of the government ac-

September 1953–December 1954

cept bribes from all of them and promise each not to interfere with his

election. In such cases the candidate who spends the most money wins

the election. Influence of the land owners is also needed to make certain

of victory in these areas. In many cases, the large land owners, having

vested interests with the government do not object to the election of

total strangers from their area. Such tactics were used in Saveh, Dama-

vand and Shahrud. For example:

1) Shams Qanatabadi was elected to the 17th Majlis from Shahrud.

He had never been in the area before his campaign and he was totally

unknown in Iran. However, when Kashani joined the National Front,

he announced that he wanted Qanatabadi to be elected to the Majlis.

The request was communicated to Mossadeq who was working with

Kashani at that time and the necessary instructions were given to the

governor, the Chief of Gendarme´rie and the Chief of Police of that

area. It was the first that the people of Shahrud had ever heard of

Qanatabadi.

3. Conclusions

This information has been gathered in order to give us the proper

operational intelligence needed to draw up an election program of our

own. It is obvious from this study that we cannot hope to change the

methods of operation prior to the elections for the 18th Majlis, but in-

stead we must resort to the same methods, through the government

and the Shah for the election of a Majlis favorable to our purposes in

Iran. We are initiating election talks with the government on 14 No-

vember. We already have a list of declared candidates for the 18th

Majlis (Attachment C), and we are ready to do what we can to assist the

[name not declassified] in this matter.

It is imperative, from our point of view, that the Prime Minister

and the Shah agree on a list of candidates, thus eliminating harmful

conflict between these two elements. [name not declassified], at least,

shares this point of view. As far as pushing our own candidates is con-

cerned, we are attempting to place the names in [name not declassified]

mouth and thus avoid recommending but maintaining a role of concur-

rence. Details of our approach to this will be the subject of a separate

dispatch.

[name not declassified]

[name not declassified]

[name not declassified]

347.

National Intelligence Estimate

NIE–102

Washington, November 16, 1953.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN IRAN THROUGH 1954

The Problem

To estimate probable developments in Iran through 1954.

Conclusions

1. Relatively moderate governments are likely to continue in Iran

through 1954, although hampered by: (a) the indecision of the Shah;

(b) the irresponsibility of the diverse elements making up the Iranian

political community; and (c) the unruliness of the Majlis. The chances

that Zahedi himself will remain prime minister through 1954 are not

good.

2. Few significant steps toward the solution of Iran’s basic social,

economic, and political problems are likely to be taken during the pe-

riod of this estimate. The effectiveness of the government will largely

be determined by its success in dealing with Iran’s immediate fiscal

and monetary problems and in making some apparent progress

towards settlement of the oil dispute. An early and satisfactory oil set-

tlement is unlikely. Without further outside financial aid, an Iranian

government probably would manage to cope with its immediate fiscal

and monetary problems by resorting to deficit financing and other

“unorthodox” means. Under such circumstances, it would encounter—

and with difficulty probably keep in check—mounting pressures from

extremist groups.

3. The security forces, which are loyal to the Shah, are considered

capable of taking prompt and successful action to suppress internal dis-

orders and recurrent rioting if provided timely political leadership.

This capability will continue if, during the period of this estimate:

(a) security forces receive adequate financial support; (b) differences

between the Shah and top level leaders over control of the security

(NIE 102) Probable Developments in Iran. Secret. The Intelligence Advisory Committee

concurred in this estimate on November 10. The FBI abstained, the subject being outside

of its jurisdiction. The following member organizations of the Intelligence Advisory

Committee participated with the Central Intelligence Agency in the preparation of this

estimate: The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy,

the Air Force, and the Joint Staff.

September 1953–December 1954

forces are not seriously aggravated; and (c) strong public opposition to

the regime does not develop.

4. Tudeh’s capabilities do not constitute a serious present threat to

the Iranian Government, and the Tudeh Party will probably be unable

to gain control of the country during 1954, even if it combines with

other extremist groups. It will retain a capability for acts of sabotage

and terrorism.

5. Iran will attempt to maintain friendly relations with the USSR,

but will almost certainly resist any Soviet efforts to increase its influ-

ence in Iran’s internal affairs.

6. Failure to receive continued financial aid from the US or an ac-

ceptable oil settlement will probably result in a government coming to

power which will be less friendly to the US than the present one.

Discussion

I. Present Situation

Political and Military

checked the drift in Iran toward Communism and isolation from the

West. The authority of the Shah has been reasserted, and a moderate

government under General Zahedi is in power. This government is

committed to maintaining the constitutional position of the monarchy

and the parliament, suppressing the Communist Tudeh Party, and

launching an economic development program predicated on settle-

ment of the oil dispute. The accession of Zahedi to power has elimi-

nated neither the economic and social problems which have long

plagued Iran, nor the weaknesses and inadequacies of the Iranian polit-

ical system.

8. The armed forces are loyal to the Shah, who has taken prompt

action to re-establish himself as commander-in-chief in fact as well as in

theory. The morale of the security forces has improved, and they can be

expected to respond promptly in support of the government if given

timely political leadership.

9. Increasing friction and uncertainty are developing within the

Imperial General Staff because of the Shah’s tendency to by-pass

Zahedi on military matters and because of mutual efforts of Zahedi and

Chief of Staff Batmangelich to undermine each other and place their

own men in key positions. Although political maneuvering to this de-

gree is unusual, even in the Iranian high command, there is no evidence

that it has as yet impaired the effectiveness of the security forces.

10. The Zahedi government has taken vigorous action against the

Tudeh Party. The party’s organization has been at least temporarily

disrupted, and many of its most active members have been arrested.

Most of the known Tudeh members and sympathizers who had infil-

trated government agencies have been purged. The Tudeh Party has

also lost much of its popular support. Its immediate capabilities for

exerting pressure on the government are limited, even if current efforts

to obtain the cooperation of die-hard nationalist and extremist groups

are successful. Tudeh retains, however, a capability for acts of sabotage

and terrorism.

11. Outside the security field, the Zahedi government has made

little progress. The Majlis has lacked a quorum since the withdrawal of

pro-Mossadeq members in the summer of 1953. Hence the government

is presently unable to obtain legislation needed to carry out its an-

nounced program. Moreover, the regime has reached no firm decision

on how and when to reconstitute a functioning legislature. Although

the Shah and Zahedi agree on the necessity of holding elections, they

apparently fear that new elections may cause a resurgence of extremist

sentiment, are uncertain how to insure the election of a manageable

Majlis, and have not yet definitely scheduled the holding of elections.

12. Meanwhile, the government has done little to strengthen its po-

litical position in preparation for new elections. Zahedi has enlisted few

if any real allies among the politicians formerly associated in opposi-

tion to Mossadeq. The present cabinet is dominated by members of the

old ruling class, many of whom have little genuine sympathy for re-

form, command little political support, or are suspect because of former

identification with the British. Zahedi himself has had little success in

convincing the public that he will not compromise the basic objectives

of the National Front, especially with respect to oil nationalization. Fi-

nally, the strength and standing of the Zahedi government is being im-

paired by friction between Zahedi and the Shah.

13. These developments have hastened the breakup of the loose

array of politicians aligned against Mossadeq and have encouraged an

early revival of factionalism and intrigue. Public criticism of the gov-

ernment and preliminary maneuvering to undermine Zahedi are al-

ready beginning to emerge. Nationalist and extremist elements are

most active in these respects. However, National Front leaders who

supported Mossadeq until the end are still publicly discredited, and

open opposition to the government in other quarters is not united. The

government’s strained relations with the Qashqai tribes, which have

been traditionally hostile to the present dynasty and were closely asso-

ciated with Mossadeq, are under present circumstances an irritant

rather than a major threat.

Economic

14. The Zahedi government faces serious budgetary and monetary

problems. Mossadeq’s oil policy resulted in reduction of public rev-

September 1953–December 1954

enues by about a third, and he was able to meet government operating

expenses and keep the oil workers paid only by curtailing the develop-

ment program, reducing the level of imports, depleting the govern-

ment’s financial reserves, and illegally expanding the currency. Zahedi

has thus been left with a depleted treasury and a sizeable operating def-

icit. The emergency grant of $45 million extended by the US soon after

Zahedi took office will enable him to meet current operating expenses

until about February or March of 1954, provided that the government

takes effective steps to cope with its conversion problem.

15. Zahedi will also have to contend with economic dissatisfac-

tions engendered or aggravated by Mossadeq’s economic policies. Be-

cause of a series of good crops and the government’s success in main-

taining essential imports, the predominant rural sector of the Iranian

economy has suffered little from the shutdown of the oil industry, and

serious economic difficulties have not emerged elsewhere. To some ex-

tent, essential goods are being obtained by barter trade with the USSR.

On the other hand, foreign exchange for essential imports from other

countries has been maintained through a ban on the import of luxury

and semi-luxury goods. Politically active upper class groups resent this

ban and almost certainly will seek to have it lifted. The urban middle

and lower classes have been disappointed by a situation in which the

prospect for economic and social improvements has become more re-

mote and in which their already low level of living has gradually

deteriorated.

16. The Zahedi government clearly recognizes the importance of

settling the oil dispute and getting the Iranian oil industry back into op-

eration. It has indicated that it considers Mossadeq’s attitude toward

oil negotiations to have been arbitrary and unrealistic, and has already

made some halting efforts to prepare Iranian public opinion for a settle-

ment which might involve some retreat from Mossadeq’s demands.

The obstacles to solution of the oil problem nevertheless remain great,

mainly because the Iranians hope for greater control over oil operations

and higher financial returns than are likely to be acceptable to the inter-

national oil industry.

Foreign Affairs

17. The Shah and Zahedi are cooperating with the US and have in-

dicated their desire to improve relations with the UK. Although the

new government has signed the barter agreement with the USSR which

was under negotiation at the time of Mossadeq’s downfall, it has at

least for the present discontinued Mossadeq’s policy of attempting to

play the USSR off against the West.

18. The government’s interest in cooperating with the US and its

receptiveness to US advice are due in large measure to its current de-

pendence on US financial aid, and probably also to a belief that Com-

munism is the overriding threat to Iran’s independence. The gov-

ernment’s good standing with the US, as demonstrated by its receipt of

emergency budgetary aid, is at present one of its main political assets

within Iran. Anti-US agitation has died down except for spasmodic ef-

forts on the part of Tudeh.

19. The new government is conscious of the need for British agree-

ment in the revival of Iran’s oil industry. However, basic suspicions of

British intentions remain widespread. The government is still reluctant

to resume formal diplomatic relations with the UK before there is tan-

gible progress toward an oil settlement.

II. Probable Developments

20. Few significant steps toward the solution of Iran’s basic social,

economic, and political problems are likely to be taken during the pe-

riod of this estimate. The effectiveness of the government will largely

be determined by its success in dealing with Iran’s immediate fiscal

and monetary problems and in making some apparent progress

towards settlement of the oil dispute. We believe that relatively mod-

erate governments are likely to continue through 1954. Without further

outside financial aid, an Iranian government probably would manage

to cope with its immediate fiscal and monetary problems by resorting

to deficit financing and other “unorthodox” measures. Under such cir-

cumstances, it would encounter—and with difficulty probably hold in

check—mounting pressures from extremist groups.

21. If the Shah were assassinated, a confused situation might arise.

The succession to the throne is not clearly established, and disorders at-

tending his death might permit extremist groups, with or without

Tudeh Party collaboration, to gain power.

Economic

22. The Shah and the Zahedi regime are likely to be more reason-

able than Mossadeq in their approach to the oil problem, but an early

and satisfactory solution is not likely. The following generalizations

can be made:

a. The oil issue is still politically explosive in Iran and will be an

issue in the electoral campaign. The Zahedi regime will probably not

wish to reach a formal oil agreement with the British before the comple-

tion of the elections, which usually take several months. In any case no

Iranian regime could survive if it appeared to be compromising the

provisions of the oil nationalization law or retreating far from Mos-

sadeq’s basic demands. Once a Majlis is reconstituted, it can probably

be brought to ratify an agreement which does not appreciably violate

these conditions, but only after vigorous political pressure and public

propaganda by the government.

September 1953–December 1954

b. Although there appears to be general agreement that the mar-

keting of Iranian oil will have to be undertaken by a combination of

Western firms rather than by the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company alone, a

multiplicity of complicated legal, commercial, and technical problems

must be worked out before a definite proposal can be made to Iran.

Even if an oil agreement is reached and ratified, Iran will not reap size-

able financial benefits at once, unless through some form of advance

against future oil deliveries.

23. It therefore appears that sometime during 1954 Iran will en-

counter difficulties in meeting its budgetary expenses. After the present

US emergency grant is exhausted, the Iranian Government will either

require additional outside financial assistance or will be forced to seek

Majlis authorization for a resumption of deficit financing of the sort

that Mossadeq engaged in illegally. The Majlis would probably grant

such authorization, but with great reluctance, and only if there ap-

peared to be no hope of timely outside aid. Moreover, this course

would in the long run probably result in a progressive weakening of

Iran’s financial stability. Exports will probably continue to pay for es-

sential imports, and barring serious crop failure, general economic ac-

tivity is expected to continue at approximately the present level. If there

is an oil settlement, barter trade with the USSR is not expected to reach

significant proportions. However, in the absence of such a settlement or

continued grants of financial aid, Iran will be forced to depend heavily

upon USSR barter trade for essential items.

Political

24. Although Zahedi faces no immediate challenge, the chances

that his government will survive through 1954 are not good. Basic con-

flicts continue within and between the traditional governing groups,

who are eager to regain the position of privilege they held before Mos-

sadeq, and the urban middle and lower classes, who are demanding

economic and social reforms and greater participation in government.

These conflicts could flare out into the open at any time, particularly

during proposed elections or over such issues as the disposition of

Mossadeq or the oil dispute.

25. Mossadeq remains a problem for the regime. So long as he re-

mains alive, he will be a potential leader for extremist opposition to the

regime. On the other hand, if Mossadeq were executed in the near fu-

ture the resultant disturbances would be serious but could probably be

suppressed.

26. The necessity of reconstituting the Majlis poses a serious

problem for the Zahedi government. The new regime is firmly com-

mitted to a return to parliamentary government and appears unwilling

to face the consequences of deliberately postponing elections. It is likely

that elections will be held within the period of this estimate. However,

political instability is likely to be increased by the electoral campaign

and by the nature of the Majlis likely to be elected. Once the electoral

campaign begins, political groups now maneuvering covertly for posi-

tion will come out in the open, with increasing danger that popular

emotions will again become aroused and lead to mob violence.

27. The new Majlis will almost certainly be a heterogeneous body

including representatives of the traditional governing groups, tribal

leaders, former Mossadeq supporters, and ardent nationalists like

Mullah Kashani and Mozafar Baghai. Many members will be little in-

terested in stable government or will be basically unsympathetic to the

government’s reform program. Others will suspect Zahedi of too close

association with the traditional governing groups and will oppose set-

tlement of the oil dispute and rapprochement with the British. From

these disunited groups, representing a variety of conflicting interests,

Zahedi must put together majorities for controversial fiscal and mone-

tary legislation and such politically explosive measures as those re-

lating to an oil settlement.

28. These difficulties Zahedi will be able to surmount only so long

as he has the firm backing of the Shah, who has once again become a

key factor in Iranian politics. The Shah apparently feels that his restora-

tion to power is due to his high personal popularity with the Iranian

people, and he appears determined to assert his authority. There are in-

dications, however, that he is still unwilling to give strong backing to

any prime minister, and at the same time is not willing to assume the

role of dictator himself. His latent jealousy of Zahedi, his attempts to

appoint court favorites to key government posts, and his by-passing of

Zahedi in exercising his command of the armed forces might at any

time lead to a situation in which Zahedi would become ineffective. If

strong opposition to Zahedi develops in the Majlis, the Shah will prob-

ably jettison Zahedi and appoint a new cabinet, thus in effect returning

to the chronic governmental ineffectiveness and instability of the pre-

Mossadeq era.

29. The Shah would probably be successful in replacing the Zahedi

government with another relatively moderate one. However, if foreign

aid is substantially reduced and there is no oil settlement or reasonable

prospect of one, moderate governments would encounter greater pop-

ular opposition. The Shah would then be faced with the alternatives of

ruling by increasingly authoritarian means or making greater conces-

sions to extremist elements. If additional US financial assistance is not

forthcoming when the current grant is exhausted in the spring of 1954,

and if at that time Iranian public opinion were already greatly aroused

over such issues as Majlis elections or an oil settlement, a serious crisis

might develop. The Shah and a government enjoying his support could

September 1953–December 1954

probably survive such a crisis, although they would lose important ele-

ments of their following.

30. The Tudeh Party will probably be unable to gain control of the

country during the period of this estimate, even if it combines with

other extremist groups. It will nevertheless be able to capitalize on any

decrease in popular confidence in the government. It will also retain a

capability for acts of sabotage and terrorism. The strength of pro-Shah

anti-Tudeh sentiment in the armed forces, while at present a major de-

terrent to Tudeh assumption of power, will be weakened if there is a

marked increase in popular support for Tudeh.

Foreign Affairs

31. The hope of obtaining continued and increasing US aid, both in

restoring oil revenues and in providing funds in their absence, makes it

almost certain that the Shah and his governments will continue to co-

operate with the US. A sharp curtailment in US aid to Iran would not

only make Iran less receptive to US advice and influence, but would

significantly reduce public confidence in the government’s ability to

improve social and economic conditions and maintain internal secu-

rity. There will also be increasing pressure, particularly from the Shah,

for an expansion of US military aid. Even if the Shah should be offered

considerable inducement in the form of military aid, he would not

agree to join with the US in formal arrangements for defense of the

Middle East, since such a commitment would be strongly opposed by

many Iranians, would not obtain Majlis approval, and might, in his

mind, provoke the USSR into invoking the 1921 Treaty.

32. Iranian relations with the UK will largely depend on progress

in settling the oil dispute. Settlement of the dispute would almost cer-

tainly result in some gradual revival of British political and commercial

influence in Iran.

33. During 1954 Iran will attempt to maintain friendly relations

with the USSR and will continue efforts to settle questions in dispute. It

will almost certainly resist any Soviet efforts to increase its influence in

Iran’s internal affairs.

348.

Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

1141. Embassy has sought below to give its general appraisal of

Iranian situation at present and to project this estimate into 1954. This

survey has been concurred in by CAS and Armed Services attache´s.

1. Zahedi Government, as legally designated regime of Shah, ap-

parently will be able to stay for some time, despite opposition criticism,

if Shah does not permit it to be undermined and if he at same time

allows government to proceed with effective measures designed to

quell that opposition. Nationalist political forces remain disrupted and

no popularly recognized Nationalist political leader other than Mo-

sadeq seems available, and he in jail. Armed Services have for many

years been decisive political instrument in country although this fact

obscured under Mosadeq regime because of Shah’s unwillingness em-

ploy them contrary to Mosadeq’s wishes. Constitutional issue which

divided Mosadeq and Shah resolved in favor latter, because former

was not able maintain control over armed forces.

2. Zahedi attempting abide by constitution without full powers Dr.

Mosadeq possessed although confronted with serious conditions as af-

termath Mosadeq rule. In view of his constitutional and legal shackles

from which he apparently not willing free himself by extra legal ac-

tions, his regime not likely to effect significant social and economic re-

forms in country during 1954. Government continues campaign

against Tudeh, does not hesitate impose quasi press censorship and in-

sists criticism has some limits. Criticism any regime endemic in Iran

and present government getting its share which will be related to its fu-

ture effectiveness.

3. Prime internal political problem clearly continued good rela-

tions between Shah and Prime Minister. Shah may be expected, in tra-

ditional Persian manner, not to place complete trust in Zahedi or to

back him unqualifiedly. Current Mosadeq trial having some adverse

public effect upon government and being handled under authority

Shah. On other hand, Shah and Zahedi agree that because disruptions

parliamentary development under Mosadeq next Majlis elections

should be fully controlled and slate candidates mutually agreed upon.

Both affirm new deputies should come from areas where elected and

both assert they will be able by mutual compromise to arrive at accept-

able single list.

Security Information. Repeated to London and pouched to Meshed, Tabriz, and Isfahan.

Received at 1: p.m. The telegram is printed with redactions in Foreign Relations,

September 1953–December 1954

4. In next year it not believed political activity of various Iranian

social groups will change materially. Activities peasants and tribes,

aside from possible intrigues of Qashqais, may not be considered as of

decisive significance. Worker agitation for better wages and problem

unemployment may have to be met partially by government. Activities

of merchant class, particularly those benefiting from Mosadeq’s pre-

vious inflationary policies, will have to be channeled in direction of rec-

ognition benefits to be derived from improved economic conditions

flowing from an oil agreement. Familiar problem will remain of edu-

cated Iranians frustrated in securing suitable jobs because of Iranian

economic and political conditions. It believed best government can do

during coming year is to keep popular frustrations from mounting,

maintain anti-Tudeh campaign, and permit improved conditions stem-

ming from an oil settlement and resumption substantial Iranian oil ex-

ports to have their effect.

5. Without an oil agreement of some kind or, failing this, continued

American financial aid, it seems impractical to think any non-

Communist regime, no matter how authoritarian, can survive. Public

sentiment may be mobilized in behalf oil agreement or at least neutral-

ized if it considers such arrangement protects Iranian rights. Although

this broad concept, it will be necessary for Zahedi regime to publicize

fully it has safeguarded Iran’s interests in making settlement. Tudeh

Party has been seriously scotched by strong government actions taken

but its essential leadership and organization intact. In event no oil set-

tlement or foreign financial aid, Tudeh Party in alliance with malcon-

tent Nationalists could become in 1954 once again serious threat to con-

tinued independence of Iran.

6. Any regime fully determined to impose an oil settlement

without regard public reaction undoubtedly with army support could

secure temporary Iranian acquiescence but consent could be expected

to be brief. However it believed that Zahedi regime, despite its faults

for which certain remedial action can be taken, offers best available

means to achieve an oil settlement which under present volatile Iranian

conditions could have likeliest prospect of durability.

As well, it believed that Shah recognizes Zahedi in better position

to reach oil agreement than any potential Prime Minister now that Mo-

sadeq can no longer be considered. However, Shah might at some stage

wish replace Zahedi by another also opposed to extreme Nationalists.

Abrupt dismissal of Zahedi would be likely strengthen forces opposed

to an oil settlement as could undermine any oil arrangement already

made. Questions whether Zahedi is to remain in power and whether

Shah permits him sufficient leeway for constructive action may be an-

swered in part by ability United States and United Kingdom fully to co-

operate in Iran.

Henderson

349.

Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and Africa

Division, Directorate of Plans (Roosevelt) to Director of

Central Intelligence Dulles

Washington, November 20, 1953.

SUBJECT

Position Paper/Re: Recommendation Submitted by Ambassador Henderson that

NSC 136/12 be Amended With Regard to U.S. Policy Toward the Iranian Armed

Forces

REFERENCES

(2) Memorandum to the Director from NEA Division dated 29 October, entitled

“Certain Aspects of the Present Situation in Iran Which Appear to Require

Further Attention By the U.S. Government; The Significance and Value of an

Appropriate Program of Military Assistance”

1. Policy Recommendation Under Consideration:

In paragraph 1 of Embassy cable No. 1103 Ambassador Henderson

made the following policy recommendations:

Iran 1951–1953. Secret; Security Information. The memorandum is attached to a covering

memorandum from Wisner to Dulles, dated November 23, in which Wisner recalled that

the memorandum “was prepared for your proposed use in connection with your desire

to point up in conversations with members of the NSC and the military establishment

(particularly the Army), the fact that not all is serene in Iran and that further significant

action is required to solidify and exploit the advantages which were gained in August.

(Actually, the recommendations of the Embassy and the US Military Mission in Teheran

go well beyond what we were inclined to recommend at the end of last month.)” Wisner

then requested Dulles to allow him to communicate the views expressed in Roosevelt’s

memorandum to the NSC Planning Board. To the left of this request, Dulles wrote “OK”

by hand.

September 1953–December 1954

a) That the following sentence be added to paragraph 4 (E) (of NSC

“In this connection in order to strengthen the will and ability of the

government and people of Iran to suppress internal Communist activ-

ities and to resist external Communist pressure, the U.S. will accede to

the request of Iran to assist in reorganizing, rearming and retraining the

armed forces of Iran so that these forces will be capable of strong with-

drawal—delaying action if Iran should be invaded by the armed forces

of international Communism.”

b) And that paragraph 4 (H) be amended to read as following:

“Plan and execute the reorganization, rearming and retraining of

the armed forces of Iran for the purpose referred to in (E) above in such

a way as to facilitate eventually the employment of these forces in coop-

eration with the armed forces of other free Middle Eastern countries in

a common defense of the Middle East against international Communist

aggression in accordance with any regional defense arrangement

which may later be developed.”

2. Basis for Recommended CIA Position:

The situation in Iran is currently dominated by efforts being made

to reach an oil settlement. Therefore, from a short range point of view,

events in Iran, U.S. reaction to such events, and U.S. decisions regard-

ing Iran will be necessarily greatly influenced by this fact. From a long

range point of view, U.S. interest demands not only a going oil industry

but the permanently strengthened pro-West Shah in partnership with

an essentially friendly Iranian government possessing the will to pre-

vent domination by the Soviet Union or International Communism, as

well as the ability and financial wherewithal to do so. U.S. policy, tac-

tical decisions, and operations in Iran should be formulated to insure

this state of affairs.

Compatible with these immediate and longer range U.S. aims, the

NEA Division believes that an expanded and re-oriented military aid

and advisory program would:

a) Immediately and on a long term basis increase the prestige, in-

fluence and actual power of the Shah, who we consider to be the most

effective instrument for maintaining and strengthening Iran’s orienta-

tion toward the West, and resisting pressures from within or without

by international Communism.

b) Immediately increase the strength and confidence of the Zahedi

government which would further encourage this government to reach

an oil settlement in the face of opposition influences within Iran.

c) Contribute to building the Iranian Army into a force under the

leadership of the Shah which can unquestionably dominate the internal

situation so as to leave no doubt as to its ability to preserve order and

security.

d) Represent the first step in the ultimate creation of an Iranian

Army capable of delaying action in the event of an invasion, and which

can possibly contribute to any regional defense arrangement which

may later be developed. It is not anticipated that the Iranian Army can

reach this degree of competence in the near future and it may be over-

sanguine to believe it can ever do so. However, by increasing the power

of the Shah and insuring internal security, an improved Iranian Army

will help to create a condition in which such aspirations will at least

come within the realm of possibility.

e) Have a profound psychological effect on the nation as a whole

by apparently demonstrating U.S. confidence in Iran’s ability to play an

active role similar to that of Turkey in military defense against Soviet

imperialism.

Should the USSR become aware of a revised U.S. attitude toward

the Iranian Army, it can be expected to exploit this to the fullest in its

propaganda efforts through Communist and anti-West elements. Fur-

thermore, it is possible that the Soviet Union would take this occasion

to threaten Iran on the basis of the 1921 Treaty. However, it is estimated

that the Soviet Union would not go beyond such threats; and the ben-

efits derived from a strengthened Iranian Army would more than com-

pensate for the propaganda opportunity given the Soviets.

Opposition to an expanded military program may be expected

from other segments of the Iranian population; i.e., those who believe

economic improvement should take priority over military expansion;

neutralists who reject alliance with either East or West, and tribal ele-

ments which traditionally oppose central authority and the Army. Such

opposition is not, however, considered of serious proportion.

3. Recommended CIA Position:

When Ambassador Henderson’s proposals per paragraph 1 above

come before the NSC, it is recommended that you support them and

that you concur in the reasoning put forth by Ambassador Henderson

in reference Embassy cables No. 1102 and 1103.

Kermit Roosevelt

5 [name not declassified] signed for Roosevelt above Roosevelt’s typed signature.

350.

Letter From the First Secretary of Embassy in Iran

(Melbourne) to the Officer in Charge of Iranian Affairs,

Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, Bureau of

Near Eastern, South Asian and African Affairs (Stutesman)

Tehran, November 30, 1953.

Dear John:

The ideas that you clearly expressed in your letter of November 6

have, as you may imagine, been upon our minds as well. It is indeed a

knotty question as to how far our responsibility goes in Iranian internal

affairs and the extent to which we should interfere in them. While it is

true we have become involved in Iranian internal affairs to a great ex-

tent and cannot pull out of them entirely, it does seem that we should

resolve not to get into them any deeper and to withdraw at least par-

tially from what we may be doing on a tactical basis.

The peculiar environment of Iran and its propensity for sudden

changes would appear to justify as the most feasible general policy one

of exerting maximum pressures on vital issues and not in individual

tactical moves and intrigues which might destroy our usefulness and

waste our influence. To illustrate this, we do not think that we should

try to prescribe who should be in the Prime Minister’s Cabinet, since

we could not expect to understand the full ramifications of such ap-

pointments and the pressures upon a Prime Minister inducing him to

make them. However, if we felt required to do so, we could point out to

a Prime Minister (and that only so long as our Military, FOA and other

aid are being received) that he needed some men of stature and experi-

ence to give tone and capacity to his Cabinet, which under particular

circumstances it might not have. The important thing seems to us to be

that with the leverage we have through our aid we can employ a loose

rein on particulars and a tight one on basic policies.

Any attempt to build American directed organizations, no matter

how indirect the direction, within state institutions and outside, is

bound to be discovered and consequently suspected. Roger, for ex-

ample, can give you the details as to the difficulties we ran into with the

Shah through our support of the Workers’ Party and then of Maleki’s

Third Force because they were publicly anti-communist. It became

known to the Shah that we were giving the support, even at a time

when these organizations were critical of him. This served to encourage

Secret; Security Information.

his suspicions that the United States was supporting Mosadeq as

against him, thus reenforcing his innate irresolution. This is an example

of how one of our worthy objectives may help stymie another. There is

also a potential future complication in that Baqai and Maleki may never

believe, if we are not going along with them, that we are not covertly

supporting others.

All this is a preliminary to the points that you make as potential

targets of our activity:

1. Army. With the continued operation of the military advisory and

aid missions, as well as the Gendarme´rie mission, we believe that there

will be created through this very activity an ever-expanding influence

in the armed forces that will be to our advantage without the necessity

of creating a formal cadre organization. Such influence, as you rightly

say, is priority number one, and we think that it can only be maintained

through the activities and presence of these missions.

2. Government. We agree with you that covert sources need not con-

centrate upon high level Government officials, since when they reach

this point they are subject to the influences you describe. It is only

through the overt association with responsible American officials, such

as the Ambassador and his representatives with whom they are in con-

tact at the time, that they can be generally most influenced in our be-

half. By continuing to build upon the essential Persian confidence in the

basic goodwill of the United States toward their country and of Iran’s

material interests in cooperating with the United States we should have

a strong position through which to influence both Persian politicians

and bureaucrats. It would be only sensible that we put in a good word

as the opportunity offers to further the careers of those basically

friendly to us and the democratic point of view. At the same time, the

Persian mentality being what it is, if one expects a man to be signed up

for life as pro-American on the basis of material advantages from both

overt and covert types of operations, you will not secure those who in

the long-run will reflect credit upon us and, instead, they may even be-

come suspected by their own people.

3. Majlis. We think the last thing we should do would be to try to

create a Majlis party drawing political influence from a tie with Amer-

ican officials. The same arguments apply here as given previously. We

believe, for example, that in any elections in this country, if our own

policies stay on course, there will always be a sizeable group of dep-

uties who will be friendly toward us, with whom we can talk and influ-

ence through our counsel, and who would be more willing to take that

counsel without it being given under the handicap of directives from

the American Embassy.

4. Potential Opposition. Penetration of communist and extremist

groups, of course, is extremely important for covert intelligence. At the

September 1953–December 1954

same time to sponsor a potential opposition to Zahedi we think would

be a serious error. It would become eventually known, would en-

courage the Shah to intrigue against the Prime Minister, and would

paralyze the latter’s actions as well through becoming known to him.

By keeping on the best of terms with all pro-democratic and friendly

political groupings, as is our job and is perfectly feasible, we should be

able to accomplish our general objectives. Zahedi himself could take no

offense at such activities nor could they properly be interpreted as de-

signed to undermine him. We need not be inextricably tied to only one

arrow in the quiver of Persian politicians.

5. Tribes. We should, of course, maintain relations with the tribes,

but we think here those relations should not be at the expense of dis-

rupting our essential objectives in Iran.

FOA, through the TCI program for example, is being adequately

employed now in building up through actual performance a powerful

weapon in influencing Iranians simply by continuing to do a good job.

The TCI people are well acquainted with people and attitudes in their

respective regions, and are making friends for the United States. As

sources of information they can continue to be tapped, but we honestly

do not believe TCI can contribute anything in the provinces beyond

what it is actually doing in behalf of American policies. The intelligent

use of our TCI programs and of FOA economic aid can be further inte-

grated into our political objectives, and I think this can be done through

continued Embassy–FOA liaison in operations and planning.

Both the Ambassador and Bill Rountree have seen and approve

this letter.

All the best.

Sincerely,

Roy M. Melbourne

351.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Dulles

to Secretary of State Dulles

Washington, December 1, 1953.

Before Mr. Herbert Hoover, Jr., left for London we conferred with

regard to the question of “assurances” given by the British prior to the

undertaking of the recent operation in Iran which resulted in the

change of government. He suggested that this information might be

useful to you as background for Bermuda.

352.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 331

Tehran, December 15, 1953.

REF

SUBJECT

Official Conversation With Dr. Mozafar Baqai

There is enclosed for the Department’s information a memo-

randum of conversation of another conversation which I had recently

with Dr. Mozafar Baqai who has been the leading open critic of the

Zahedi Government. While, as in the previous instance, the memo-

randum of conversation is self-explanatory, my purposes in attending

this recent meeting were to learn Dr. Baqai’s current points of view

towards the Zahedi Government, the United States, the Iranian re-

sumption of relations with Great Britain, and upon the oil question.

Similarly, I wished to express to him clearly the policies and points of

view of the United States.

Loy W. Henderson

Ambassador

Security Information. The despatch was drafted by Melbourne. There is no drafting infor-

mation on the enclosed memorandum of conversation. Received December 28. Pouched

to London.

September 1953–December 1954

Attachment

Memorandum of Conversation

Tehran, December 4, 1953.

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Henderson

Mr. Roy M. Melbourne, First Secretary of Embassy

Dr. Baqai, Leader of Workers’ Party

TRANSLATOR

Mr. Christian Chapman, Third Secretary of Embassy

At the request of Dr. Baqai, leader of the Workers’ Party, Ambas-

sador Henderson received him on the evening of December 4, 1953. The

conversation was carried on in French, which the Doctor speaks quite

fluently, and lasted three hours.

Baqai excused himself to have to give a lengthy introduction in

order to explain clearly his position.

Everyone agreed, he said, that Iran was a sick country. Most gener-

ally this sickness is ascribed to a lack of education, or a lack of hygiene,

or to malnutrition, or to other similar causes. However, the more he

and his collaborators studied the problem, the more they became con-

vinced that the real problem lay in the psychology of despair which

grips the people. Iranians have lost hope for the future. This, according

to Dr. Baqai, is the real issue and it is to combat this mentality and atti-

tude that he organized his party. He feels he has been partially suc-

cessful in accomplishing this end. While previously all those who were

actively discontented with things as they were joined the Tudeh party,

more and more have come to join his. Thus, his party has acted as a

screen against the Tudeh.

His position towards Communism and towards Dr. Mosadeq, he

continued, is well enough known, so that he need not amplify on the

subject. However, he considers that the manner in which the trial of

Mosadeq has been handled by the military court, the press, and the

radio is a grave error. No difference is made between the two periods of

Mosadeq’s regime, between the first fifteen months which lasted until

July 1952 (the event surrounding the abortive Ghavam Government)

and the second period, which lasted until August 19, 1953. In the first

period, Dr. Baqai considers that Dr. Mosadeq accurately reflected the

national will or movement; he was a symbol of national resurgence. But

after July 1952 he became entangled with the communists and in the

last few days of his regime finished by committing treason. His connec-

tion with the communists, Dr. Baqai knows for a fact, because, through

reliable informants within the Tudeh, he received, in August 1952, a re-

port of the meeting Mosadeq held with four of the principal Tudeh

leaders. This meeting was alleged to have taken place on July 20, 1952.

At this meeting, the Tudeh leaders told Mosadeq that he now had the

opportunity of doing away with the Shah, the court, and the present

form of government, and of establishing a Republic with himself as

president. The Tudeh representatives argued that he had become a na-

tional symbol while they, on the other hand, represented a popular

party. They offered him, therefore, their collaboration to carry out this

plan. Mosadeq did not reject their offer outright but, on the contrary,

simply answered that the situation was not yet ripe for such a change.

Ever since that time, Dr. Baqai considers that Mosadeq has had an un-

derstanding with the communists.

In August 1952, after he had received the report of the meeting, Dr.

Baqai called on Mosadeq and argued with him at length about the

dangers of both the British and the Communists. Both, he told Mo-

sadeq, preyed on the weakness of Iran and therefore sought to perpet-

uate this weakness. If the British were to be expelled, he advised Mo-

sadeq, all Britishers should leave, not just those who carried British

passports, but also all their agents, even those who were Iranian na-

tionals. Otherwise, argued Baqai, the breaking of diplomatic relations

and the expulsion of the British would only delude the people. Mo-

sadeq did not take his advice and the result is that, even today, there

are British agents who are as active as ever in the country.

Now, continued Baqai, the question arises of the reestablishment

of diplomatic relations with Britain. He considers, and he has carried

out a long campaign in his newspaper on this subject, that if relations

are reestablished without some previous tangible evidence from the

British that they mean to change their attitude towards Iran, then this

reestablishment, taken together with the condemnation of Mosadeq’s

whole regime, will be interpreted in the popular mind as a condemna-

tion of the national movement. To Iranians, it will simply mean that

British colonial policy is reaping its revenge. The consequences of such

a disillusionment he foresees as most grave.

After this long preamble, he put the question to the Ambassador in

so many words: What reason is there against postponing the reestab-

lishment of diplomatic relations until the British have made some defi-

nite gesture (“a gesture of facts”), show their good faith, i.e. permitting

the sale of oil, delivering goods which had previously been paid for, or

other similar minor concessions?

The Ambassador answered that the British Government had taken

the position that diplomatic relations must be reestablished before any

conversations on the oil problem can be held. That Government be-

September 1953–December 1954

lieves that only direct negotiations can adequately settle the problem

and such negotiations can only be undertaken after diplomatic rela-

tions are established. Furthermore, the British Government insists on

separating the establishment of diplomatic relations from the differ-

ences which arise between governments. At the same time, the Ambas-

sador continued, he was afraid he differed on one point with Dr. Baqai

as he understood his position. Dr. Baqai, he thought, believed that the

Iranian economy could run without oil revenues. The Ambassador, on

the contrary, considered that oil was essential to the Iranian economy

and that, without the production and sale of oil, he could see no hope

for the economy and therefore the country. He appreciated the diffi-

culties which Dr. Baqai outlined regarding the resumption of diplo-

matic relations, but he could see no alternative. The British Govern-

ment had taken a firm position and if the Iranian Government took an

equally intransigent position, then he could only foresee the country

drifting hopelessly towards bankruptcy. Therefore, for the good of this

country, he considered the alternative of resuming relations as the

better.

To the above argument, Dr. Baqai made two points. First, since he

foresaw the possibility for Iran of remaining a number of years without

oil revenues, he thought that, for morale purposes, it was better to en-

courage the people to make them believe that doing without oil was

possible. His advocacy of an oilless economy has been dictated solely

for reasons of morale. He himself knows very well the importance of oil

to Iran and knows that, if the country is to develop as an independent

nation, it must obtain the benefits of its oil resources. Secondly, Baqai

did not see why it was not possible for the British to separate the ques-

tion of compensation from that of the sale of oil. He admitted that the

problem of compensation would have to be examined by direct negoti-

ations, but he failed to see why, as a proof of their good faith, the British

could not allow the immediate resumption of oil sales. What the Ira-

nian people wanted from the British was tangible proof that they were

in earnest regarding their stated intentions of pursuing a new policy

towards Iran.

The Ambassador answered that the unsuspected complexities of

the oil problem and the firmness of the British position had both led

him to consider that the two questions of the sale of oil and of compen-

sation were intimately connected. As things are, even if the British

agreed to let Iran sell her oil, only small quantities could be disposed of,

because no major oil company would touch this oil for two reasons.

First, because until the question of compensation has been settled, there

could be no security of title over the oil, and secondly, because to en-

courage the sale of oil before compensation had been agreed upon

would deal a serious blow to foreign investments throughout the

world.

Baqai let it be understood that he felt the American Government if

it so wished, could very well apply pressure on the large oil companies

to come to terms. In answer to this argument, the Ambassador strongly

emphasized the feeling of the American people against nationalization

without compensation and stated that, were the Government ever to

give such advice to the oil companies, there would be a wide outcry

throughout the country which would be echoed in Congress.

Dr. Baqai made a final point by stating that one of the principal

reasons why he felt it important that the British give proof of their good

intentions was that the speech delivered in the House of Commons by

Foreign Minister Eden a few days ago was a complete about-face of the

previous position of the British Government. Eden declared that it

would recognize the Iranian nationalization law on certain conditions.

Previously, on two occasions at least—once following the Harriman

mission, and another which he described as the “Middleton letter,”—

the British had formally declared that they recognized the nationaliza-

tion law and placed no conditions on this recognition. Now, Eden’s

statement was a definite reversal of policy and this action inspired se-

rious doubts as to the British professions of good faith.

The Ambassador disagreed with Baqai’s interpretation of the

former British position and pointed out that the British position was

that they had accepted nationalization only “in principle”, that they

had always qualified their recognition with certain reservations.

In conclusion, Dr. Baqai said that he could see that nothing could

be done to prevent the resumption of diplomatic relations, but he

wished to make a prognostication of what would follow. He could

foresee two consequences: one, politico-economic which he termed

“ordinary”, and about which he did not elaborate, and another which

he considered much graver. In view of the popular discontent which

would follow the resumption of diplomatic relations under present cir-

cumstances, General Zahedi would have to call for new elections to the

Majlis and to ensure a strong majority for the Government. He would

be impelled to control these elections. And, Baqai added, Zahedi is al-

ready half a mind to do just this now and is being urged to do so by his

advisers. Such a maneuver would increase the general discontent,

leading in turn to a strengthening of the Tudeh Party and a dangerous

increase in agitation. He was sorry United States diplomacy was again

making a grave mistake in Iran. Although he did not specifically so

state, he left the impression that he might, with regret, begin attacking

the United States as well as Great Britain during the course of his polit-

ical activities.

Salient Points of Conversation:

1. Dr. Baqai’s opinion of himself as a philosopher-politician, driven

to the dirty game of politic in pursuit of the “sublime”.

353.

Memorandum of Conversation

Tehran, December 22, 1953.

Memorandum Summarizing Conversation Between the Shah of Iran

and Loy W. Henderson, American Ambassador, on the

Afternoon of December 22, 1953

During a conversation which I had several days ago with Mr. Ala,

Minister of Court, I remarked that it had been two weeks since I had

seen the Shah and it might be useful for me to have another audience

with him. Mr. Ala telephoned the following day setting an appoint-

ment for the evening of December 22.

Mosadeq–Riahi trial

The Shah opened our conversation by referring to the trial of Mo-

sadeq which had terminated on the preceding day. His Majesty said he

was pleased that the sentence had been limited to three years in solitary

Drafted by Henderson. Transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 368

from Tehran, December 28.

confinement. He thought that if the sentence had been for a longer term

there might have been considerable public sympathy for Mosadeq. On

the other hand if the sentence had not called for “solitary” confinement

he would not have been in a position to commute the sentence to ban-

ishment to a remote place in Iran or to some foreign country which

would consent to receive him and prevent him from engaging in polit-

ical activities against Iran. In Iran a sentence to simple imprisonment—

not solitary confinement—is considered to be just as mild as banish-

ment, and therefore not subject to commutation to banishment. If Mo-

sadeq should subsequently show the right attitude it was the intention

of the Shah to commute the sentence to banishment.

The Shah said he was also pleased with the sentence of General

Riahi. He thought that General Riahi had behaved in a dignified,

manly, and constructive way during the trial and therefore should not

be punished too severely. The General was now being expelled from

the Army and in the opinion of the Shah should never be reinstated.

The Shah asked me if I had read the statement which he had sent to

the trial judge on the eve of the termination of the trial. In this statement

he had indicated that in his opinion Mosadeq had served the interests

of Iran by nationalizing oil and in fact during the first year of his Prime

Ministership had had the support of the Shah himself and that there-

fore the Shah held no personal grievance against Mosadeq for what the

latter had done during the last part of his Prime Ministership. The Shah

said that he had sent this message to the President of the Court for two

reasons:

a. He wanted to make it clear that he favored and still favored the

nationalization of oil. He thought this was wise in order that the nation-

alists in Iran would not think that their Sovereign had deserted them.

He considered that a certain amount of nationalism was necessary for

Iran and that it should develop under his leadership.

b. When it became apparent that the arrival of the British would al-

most coincide with the sentencing of Mosadeq it seemed important that

he should make it clear to all Iranians that he was still supporting Mo-

sadeq’s attitude towards the British during the first year that Mosadeq

was Prime Minister. He thought this was necessary in order to weaken

propaganda which the enemies of himself and of the Government

would be sure to disseminate to the effect that the sentencing of Mo-

sadeq to prison at the time of the arrival of the British in Iran showed

how completely the present regime of Iran was under the British

thumb. The Shah said he was well pleased with the results of his inter-

vention in the trial. He had caught Mosadeq off balance and had for the

time being disarmed Mosadeq’s adherents.

The Dissolution of the Senate and the Majlis and the Call for New Elections

I told the Shah that I was glad that finally the firman had been is-

sued dissolving the Majlis and calling for new elections. I was particu-

September 1953–December 1954

larly pleased that apparently there had been no important hostile

public reaction to this firman. The decision of the Shah and of the Gov-

ernment seemed to have been taken by the public as a matter of course.

The Shah said that if he had had his way this firman would have

been issued two months ago. He also was pleased with the way in

which it had been received by the public. There had been opposition in

certain circles to the dissolution of the Senate. It had been argued that

since the Senate would have a quorum when in due course the va-

cancies provided by law had been filled there was no reason to dissolve

it. He had considered it necessary to dissolve the Senate for two

reasons: (a) He himself had signed a firman under pressure from Mo-

sadeq and the Majlis in 1952 dissolving the Senate. He did not believe

that he could ignore his own firman without injuring the royal prestige.

This fact had influenced his decision to dissolve the Senate before it

would endeavor to enact any legislation. (b) The Senate had become ex-

tremely unpopular, partly as the result of propaganda carried on

against it and partly as the result of the incapacity or weakness of some

of its members. There was general feeling in the country to the effect

that the Senate was under British control. Undoubtedly there were cer-

tain members of the Senate who were more interested in pleasing the

British Government than in protecting the interests of Iran. He was of

the opinion that in general the members of the Senate were loyal and

capable. The dissolution of the Senate would, in his opinion, soften

some of the resentment among Iranian nationalists rising from the dis-

solution of Majlis. By including both houses in his firman he was

showing favoritism to neither. He thought that most of the former

members of the Senate would be re-elected or reappointed. Some

should be got rid of. He had noted with some satisfaction that appar-

ently Senator Nasser Khan, one of the leading Qashqai chieftains, had

already expressed concern at his loss of parliamentary immunity as a

result of the dissolution of the Senate. The Shah was not unhappy that

several of the Senators had lost their parliamentary immunity.

I asked the Shah how soon, in his opinion, elections would start.

He said as soon as possible; he hoped within the next two weeks. I in-

quired if he and the Prime Minister were in agreement with regard to

candidates. The Shah replied that he thought the Prime Minister was

cooperating in this matter quite satisfactorily. Both he and the Prime

Minister were in agreement that so far as possible the deputy from each

district in the country would be a well-known highly respected resi-

dent of that district—not someone imposed upon the district from

Tehran.

I inquired whether or not the Prime Minister was keeping him in-

formed regarding his lists of prospective candidates. The Shah again

replied in the affirmative. He said that the Prime Minister would not

dare try to deceive him in a matter of this kind. I remarked that I was

convinced of the complete loyalty of the Prime Minister to the Shah and

of the Prime Minister’s desire to keep the Shah fully informed re-

garding his actions. The Shah said he agreed that the Prime Minister

was loyal to him. The Prime Minister’s position depended upon his

complete loyalty. Nevertheless, there was always the temptation on the

part of a Prime Minister to attempt to put some of his own personal

friends into the Majlis. The Shah could understand this and would not

object if the Prime Minister should introduce perhaps a dozen personal

adherents provided they were men of good reputation and of ability.

The Shah thought it was imperative, however, that he should make

sure regarding the general high quality of the new Majlis and new

Senate.

The Visit of Vice President Nixon

The Shah remarked that the visit of the Vice President had been a

complete success. It had served to strengthen relations between Iran

and the United States and also to strengthen the position of the Iranian

Government. He hoped that the Vice President went away satisfied. I

replied that I was certain that the Vice President was happy at his re-

ception, at the manner in which he had been treated while he was here,

and what seemed to be the constructive results of his visit. I said I

would like to take occasion again to express the appreciation of the

Government of the United States for the hospitality and the numerous

friendly courtesies extended by the Shah, the Government, and many

sections of the Iranian people towards the Vice President. It was partic-

ularly gratifying that in spite of the delicate situation prevailing there

had not been a single disagreeable incident.

U.S. Military Aid to Iran

The Shah said he hoped I would not take it amiss if he should ask

me what, if anything, the Vice President might be able to do for Iran. I

said that I thought the understanding of Iranian problems which the

Vice President had obtained during his visit to Iran would put him in a

position to say an explanatory word sympathetic to Iran from time to

time when Iranian problems were discussed in the higher govern-

mental circles. The Shah asked if the Vice President had told me of their

last conversation relating to Iranian military needs. He said that he

will tour of the Far East and South Asia, which began on October 7 and ended upon his

return to Washington December 14. Extensive material regarding the Vice President’s

trip is ibid., 033.1100–NI.

September 1953–December 1954

had told the Vice President frankly that he would not be content to be

Commander-in-Chief of a police army; an army destined only for po-

lice purposes would not give Iran the self-assurance and confidence

necessary for the maintenance of Iranian independence. He had ex-

plained to the Vice President why it was necessary that the Iranian

Army should be remodeled so that it had sufficient defense capabilities

to engage in a delaying action if Iran should be attacked by the Soviet

Union. When the Vice President had asked regarding Iran’s attitude to

some kind of a military arrangement with Turkey and Pakistan he had

informed the Vice President that in his opinion such an arrangement

should come in due course if Iran would have an army of a character

which could contribute to regional defense. It was only natural that

Iran with a defensive army should have a military understanding with

Turkey and Pakistan. He thought that Iran might be able to enter into

an understanding of this strictly regional character without departing

from its long-standing policy of neutrality; that is without becoming a

member of the “Western bloc”. The Russians would object in any event.

Nevertheless Iran must have the right to enter into local arrangements

for the purpose of strengthening its security. Iran would not however

enter into discussions looking forward to arrangements of this kind

until it was in possession of an army capable of at least some kind of de-

fensive action.

He had discussed this problem on December 21 with Zafrullah

Khan, the Foreign Minister of Pakistan, and was glad to see that Zaf-

rullah Khan appeared to share his views. The Shah said he had been

deeply impressed with Zafrullah Khan; he had found the latter frank

and full of understanding. He thought that the visit of the Pakistan For-

eign Minister would in general be helpful in strengthening under-

standing between Pakistan and Iran.

Improved Position of the Iranian Government

I told the Shah that in my opinion the Iranian Government had

made greater advances in the political field during the month of De-

cember than it had made during the three previous months that it had

been in office. It seemed to me that hardly a day had passed by without

some significant, constructive decision having been made. I thought

that as a result of the new attitude of decisiveness and the display of

willingness to take action on the part of the Government it was now

moving forward with renewed confidence and was creating public

confidence in its ability to do things. I referred illustratively to the es-

tablishment of relations with the United Kingdom, to the dissolution of

the Majlis, to the decisive attitude adopted towards Kashani, Baqai,

Maki, et al, and to the outcome of the Mosadeq trial. The trial had come

out much better than I had anticipated. At one time I had been much

concerned at the way in which it was being handled. I was relieved that

it had now come to an end in a nonsensational manner. I hoped that

Mosadeq’s appeal could be disposed of without too much attendant

publicity.

The Shah agreed with my optimism. He said his chief concern at

the moment related to charges of corruption. He thought in general that

the rumors of corruption were grossly exaggerated. Nevertheless, it

seemed to him that the Prime Minister should show a greater interest in

investigating charges of graft. General Guilanshah, who had been

acting informally as an inspector for the Prime Minister, had recently

informed the Shah that he had found evidences of corruption in the

Customs Department and in the Ministry of Roads but had been in-

structed by the Prime Minister not to press investigations just now. The

Prime Minister had taken the position that investigations of graft

charges at this particular moment might divert the public mind from

thinking of constructive measures which must be taken. The Shah on

his part thought that the disclosure and prosecution of graft would

strengthen the prestige of the Government and obtain for it a wider

measure of public support. The Shah said that it was his understanding

that the corruption which Guilanshah thought he had discovered had

been in existence for more than two years. I suggested that it might be a

good idea to set up some kind of administration headed by prominent

men of of unquestioned integrity whose duty it would be to check and

approve every important governmental transaction involving an ex-

penditure of considerable sums. The Shah agreed and said that he

thought a person such as Ebtahaj or Allah-Yar Saleh might be useful at

the head of an administration of this kind.

354.

Monthly Report Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, undated.

IRAN

December 1953

A. General Developments

1. Relations between the Shah and Prime Minister Zahedi appear

to have improved during this month and opposition forces continue to

2, The Current Report—December 1953. Top Secret.

September 1953–December 1954

be kept effectively under control. It is reported that Chief of Staff Bat-

mangelich has lost out with the Shah in his fight for position vis-a`-vis

Prime Minister. The Government seems to have achieved enough soli-

darity and popular support to have confidence in its ability to cope

with a newly-elected Majlis and effect a satisfactory oil agreement. The

Tudeh Party was very little in evidence during this month although a

discouraging note appeared in a press report which stated that the new

military governor of Tehran has released the vast majority of arrestees

who were picked up as suspected Communists following the events of

eled to Tehran for the purpose of settling their differences with the

Shah and the Government. Nasr Khan had a pleasant but non-

committal interview with the Prime Minister and sent a message to the

Shah but received no reply. It was reported that the Shah had in the

meantime received separate pledges of allegiance from Qashqai sub-

chiefs and was prepared to banish Nasr and Khosrow from the coun-

try. [1½ lines not declassified]

B. Station Synopsis

[Omitted here are unrelated activities.]

9. The Shah and the Prime Minister are in agreement on a joint

slate of candidates to be supported for election to the Majlis. The Sta-

tion believes that in most constituencies the government supported

candidate will win and the Station has been very active in influencing

the composition of the government slate. [3 lines not declassified] Head-

quarters has begun a systematic analysis of all election information

with the intent of providing the Station with maximum support and

guidance during the electioneering phase. [2 lines not declassified]

[Omitted here are operational details.]

John H. Waller

355.

Statement of Policy by the National Security Council

NSC 5402

Washington, January 2, 1954.

UNITED STATES POLICY TOWARD IRAN

General Considerations

1. It is of critical importance to the United States that Iran remain

an independent nation, not dominated by the USSR. Because of its key

strategic position, oil resources, vulnerability to intervention or armed

attack by the USSR, and vulnerability to political subversion, Iran must

be regarded as a continuing objective of Soviet expansion. The loss of

Iran, particularly by subversion, would:

a. Be a major threat to the security of the entire Middle East, as well

as Pakistan and India.

b. Increase the Soviet Union’s oil resources for war and its capa-

bility to threaten important free world lines of communication.

c. Damage United States prestige in nearby countries and with the

exception of Turkey and possibly Pakistan, seriously weaken, if not de-

stroy, their will to resist communist pressures.

d. Permit the communists to deny Iranian oil to the free world, or

alternatively to use Iranian oil as a weapon of economic warfare.

e. Have serious psychological impact elsewhere in the free world.

2. Due to the events of mid-August, 1953, there is now a better op-

portunity to achieve U.S. objectives with respect to Iran. The Shah’s po-

sition is stronger and he and his new Prime Minister look to the United

States for counsel and aid. Some Iranian leaders now seem to realize

that Iranian oil is not vital to the world and that it must be sold in sub-

stantial quantities if Iran is to achieve stability. There is accordingly a

possibility for the United States to help bring Iran into active coopera-

tion with the free world and thus strengthen a weak position in the line

from Europe to South Asia. An essential step in this direction is the re-

ceipt by Iran of substantial revenues from its oil resources. In the ab-

sence of such revenues, Iran will be dependent on external assistance

which, if doled out only in minimum quantities to meet emergencies,

will do little to create real stability, permit development or avoid future

emergencies.

September 1953–December 1954

3. If the Shah cooperates, the Zahedi Government should be able to

stay in power for some time. However, the government is confronted

with many serious problems, springing primarily from the basic

changes taking place in Iranian society. Zahedi must cope with the

Majlis, composed of heterogeneous groups, motivated by self-interest,

upon whose support the enactment of essential economic and social

legislation will depend. The Communist and other opposition groups

will continue to pose a threat. The problem of Mossadegh must be

solved. Zahedi’s position is also threatened by the Shah’s inherent sus-

picions of any strong Prime Minister. Any non-Communist successor

government would encounter similar difficulties.

4. The United States now has an opportunity to further its national

objectives with respect to Iran by: (a) facilitating an early oil settlement

leading to substantial oil income from Iran at the earliest possible date;

(b) technical assistance and economic aid; (c) U.S. military aid.

Importance of an Oil Settlement

5. The Iranian economy is basically dependent upon agriculture.

Despite revenues from the oil industry, the great majority of the Iranian

people have lived in poverty. However, if it receives substantial rev-

enue from the renewed operation of its oil industry on a sound basis,

Iran should be in a position to establish a self-supporting, stable gov-

ernment, and carry out much-needed economic and social welfare pro-

grams. Without such revenues from the renewed operation of its oil in-

dustry, the Iranian Government will proceed from crisis to crisis,

thereby greatly increasing both Tudeh Party opportunities to cause dis-

order or to infiltrate the government, and pressures on the United

States for substantial aid. Even if Iran again receives oil revenues, there

will be the continuing problem of insuring their application to pro-

grams of permanent value, and minimizing corruption.

6. In recent months some progress has been made in clarifying the

positions of Iran and the U.K. toward a settlement. The resumption of

U.K.–Iran diplomatic relations removes one obstacle to a settlement.

However, the Iranian Government will continue to fear public reaction

to any apparent concessions, and the British may be reluctant to accept

necessary terms.

Economic Aid

7. In September 1953, the United States granted emergency assist-

ance of $45 million to permit the Zahedi Government to meet the oper-

ating deficit inherited from the Mossadegh regime and to initiate essen-

tial monetary reforms. This aid is believed sufficient to carry the regime

until May or June of 1954.

8. Until the oil revenues become substantial, emergency aid in

some form will have to be continued and may have to be increased. In

considering the timing and extent of such aid, the following factors

must be kept in mind:

a. Too long a delay in the institution of economic and social re-

forms in Iran may make it impossible to seize the opportunity pre-

sented by present circumstances to increase Iran’s political stability and

economic health.

b. Granting of other than emergency aid prior to an oil settlement

may make Iran less interested in coming to an early settlement and at

the same time harm our relations with the U.K.

c. The timing and extent of U.S. aid to Iran should not be such as to

encourage other nations to emulate Iran in nationalizing her oil

resources.

d. While the present Government of Iran has shown itself to be fa-

vorably disposed to seek an early settlement of the oil dispute, too great

or too obvious pressure from the outside may, because of internal polit-

ical reasons in Iran, have the opposite effect.

9. In addition to emergency aid, the United States has a limited

technical and economic assistance program for Iran of approximately

$23 million for FY 1954. Even when substantial oil revenues are real-

ized, it will be desirable to continue limited technical assistance to Iran

for a number of years. Insofar as such assistance may effectively be pro-

vided through international or private agencies, local fears of U.S. im-

perialism will be minimized.

Military Aid

10. Iran has thus far received approximately $46 million in military

aid from the U.S., and an additional $58 million is currently pro-

grammed. Inadequate training, maintenance and supply capabilities,

and low caliber personnel restrict Iran’s ability to absorb U.S. military

equipment, even at the present rate of delivery. At present, the Iranian

armed forces are capable of maintaining internal security against any

uprising short of a nation-wide tribal revolt. It is possible that Iran will,

in perhaps one or two years, be willing to move in the direction of re-

gional security arrangements, assuming: (a) an early oil settlement;

(b) continuation in power of a government friendly toward the West,

which has the Shah’s and widespread public support; and (c) a steady

increase in the capability of the Iranian Army. Iranian forces may be

able to improve their capability for guerrilla and limited mountain op-

erations, although it is unlikely that they could in themselves become

capable within the foreseeable future of effectively delaying a strong

Soviet thrust toward Iraq or the Persian Gulf. A long-range program of

improving the Iranian armed forces should be related to the progress

made toward effective regional defense plans which will provide Iran,

in case of attack, with military assistance from adjacent states.

September 1953–December 1954

11. However, military aid to Iran has great political importance

apart from its military impact. Over the long term, the most effective in-

strument for maintaining Iran’s orientation toward the West is the

monarch, which in turn has the Army as its only real source of power.

U.S. military aid serves to improve Army morale, cement Army loyalty

to the Shah, and thus consolidate the present regime and provide some

assurance that Iran’s current orientation toward the West will be

perpetuated.

12. Neither the solution of the oil problem nor U.S. moral and fi-

nancial support for Iran should be viewed as panaceas, but rather as

measures which may permit Iran to achieve a condition of stability in

which some modest progress may be made by Iran toward the working

out of its own underlying problems. However, it should be recognized

that physical execution of an economic development program, itself a

time-consuming process, will be hampered by (1) lack of qualified Ira-

nian administrative personnel, (2) the opposition of various vested in-

terests, and (3) historically engendered suspicion of the West. Iran’s

long frontier with the USSR and the Soviet-Iranian Treaty of 1921 may

affect the degree of Iranian cooperation, particularly military coopera-

tion, with the United States.

Objectives

13. An independent Iran free from communist control.

14. A strong, stable Government in Iran, capable of maintaining in-

ternal security, and providing some resistance to external aggression,

using Iranian resources effectively, and actively cooperating with the

anti-communist nations of the free world.

Courses of Action

15. a. Assist Iran again to obtain substantial revenues from its oil

resources.

b. Assist in every practicable way to effect an early and equitable

settlement of the oil controversy between the United Kingdom and

Iran.

c. If on June 1, 1954 such a settlement is still unachieved, and it ap-

pears likely that the negotiations will fail, review U.S. policy toward the

problem in the light of circumstances then existing, including giving

consideration to taking independent action with Iran, in order to bring

about a resumption of revenues from its oil resources as a stabilizing in-

fluence in the Government of Iran tending to obviate the need for U.S.

emergency economic assistance.

d. In implementing actions under b or c above, seek to avoid estab-

lishing any precedent which would adversely affect United States in-

terests in Middle East resources.

16. Pending the time when Iran shall receive substantial revenues

from her natural petroleum resources, provide emergency economic

aid, preferably in the form of loans, as necessary to the Government of

Iran, provided that it remains friendly to the U.S.

17. Continue limited technical and economic aid to Iran. Where ap-

propriate utilize such private institutions and international organiza-

tions as may provide technical assistance more effectively.

above, the United States should:

a. Maintain full consultation with the United Kingdom.

b. Avoid unduly impairing United States–United Kingdom

relations.

c. Not permit the United Kingdom to veto any United States ac-

tions which the United States considers essential to the achievement of

the objectives set forth above.

d. Continue efforts to have the United Kingdom and Iran agree to a

practical and equitable solution of the oil problem at the earliest pos-

sible moment and, at the same time, have the United Kingdom give full

support to the Zahedi Government.

e. Be prepared to avail itself of the authority of the President to ap-

prove voluntary agreements and programs under Section 708 (a) and

(b) of the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended.

19. Provide United States grant military aid for Iran designed to:

a. Improve the ability of the Iranian armed forces to maintain in-

ternal security and provide some resistance to external aggression.

b. Enhance the prestige of the monarchy and the morale of the Ira-

nian Government and military services.

20. The amount and rate of such military aid to Iran should take

into account:

a. The attitude of Iran with regard to this aid and with regard to

political, economic and military cooperation with the free world, in-

cluding Turkey, Pakistan, and possibly Iraq.

b. Iran’s ability satisfactorily to absorb military equipment and

training, and its willingness at an appropriate time to formalize neces-

sary contracts for military aid and training.

21. Encourage Iran to enter into military cooperation with its

neighbors as feasible, and to participate in any regional defense ar-

rangement which may be developed for the Middle East.

22. Recognize the strength of Iranian nationalist feeling; try to di-

rect it into constructive channels and be ready to exploit any opportu-

nity to do so, bearing in mind the desirability of strengthening in Iran

September 1953–December 1954

the ability and desire of the Iranian people to resist communist

pressure.

23. Encourage the adoption by the Iranian Government of neces-

sary financial, judicial and administrative and other reforms, including

provision for an orderly succession to the crown.

24. Continue covert measures designed to assist in achieving the

above purposes.

25. In the event of either an attempted or an actual communist sei-

zure of power in one or more of the provinces of Iran or in Tehran, the

United States should support a non-communist Iranian Government,

including participation in the military support of such a government if

necessary and useful, and should attempt to secure additional support

from other free world nations. Preparations for such an eventuality

should include:

a. Plans for military support.

b. Plans for covert operations.

c. Plans for UN action.

d. Liaison with United Kingdom, to the degree deemed desirable,

concerning each of these plans.

26. In the event that a communist government achieves complete

control of Iran so rapidly that no non-communist Iranian Government

is available to request assistance, the position of the United States

would have to be determined in the light of the situation at the time, al-

though politico-military-economic discussions leading to plans for

meeting such a situation should be carried on with the British Govern-

ment and with such other governments as may be appropriate. In this

contingency, the United States should make every feasible effort, par-

ticularly through covert operations, to endeavor to develop or maintain

localized centers of resistance and to harass, undermine, and if pos-

sible, to bring about the overthrow of the communist government.

27. In the event of attack by USSR military forces against Iran,

whether or not under guise of implementing provisions of the Soviet-

Iranian Treaty of 1921, the United States, in common prudence, should

proceed on the assumption that global war is probably imminent. Ac-

cordingly, the United States should then immediately:

a. Attempt to arrest the action and to restore the status quo through

diplomatic measures directed toward obtaining a prompt withdrawal

of Soviet forces.

b. If unsuccessful, decide in the light of the circumstances existing

at the time whether to treat the action as a casus belli.

c. Place itself in the best possible position to meet the increased

threat of global war.

d. Consult with selected allies to perfect coordinated plans.

e. Make clear through diplomatic and UN channels the aggressive

character of the Soviet action and the United States preference for a

peaceful solution, and, if appropriate, the conditions upon which the

United States would, in concert with other members of the United Na-

tions, accept such a settlement.

f. Attempt to obtain the authorization of the United Nations for

member nations to take appropriate action in the name of the United

Nations to assist Iran.

g. Consider a direct approach to the highest Soviet leaders.

h. Take action against the aggressor to the extent and in the manner

which would best contribute to the security of the United States.

i. Prepare to maintain, if necessary, an Iranian Government-in-

exile.

FINANCIAL APPENDIX

Expenditures

(Millions of $)

FY

FY

FY

FY

FY

FY

FY

Technical

Assistance

and Special

Economic

Aid

Emergency Aid

Military

Assistance

Total

September 1953–December 1954

NSC Staff Study on

CERTAIN PROBLEMS RELATING TO IRAN

SUBJECT

1. Interview between the Shah and Dr. Baghai

2. Alleged Statements of Dr. Baghai

REFERENCES

CS–278602

SOURCE

Paragraph 4: [2 lines not declassified]

zaffar Baghai, leader of the Toilers’ Party.

2. When Prime Minister Zahedi learned of this interview, he sent a

message to the Shah expressing disapproval of such interviews.

3. Zahedi has warned Baghai to “watch his step” since Zahedi in-

tends to jail Baghai if the latter gets out of line.4, Baghai promised to re-

frain from active opposition to the Government for six months.

4. Informant states that on 17 December Dr. Mozaffar Baghai made

the following statements to him:

a. Tudeh Party members and supporters of former Prime Minister

Mossadeq have been trying to induce Baghai to cooperate with them.

Supporters of Mossadeq proposed that, if Baghai refrained from at-

CS Information Reports 28660–28669. Secret; Control—U.S. Officials Only.

cember 6, Baghai had assured him of his “support but stated that he could not come out

openly in support of Zahedi. Baghai promised, however, that his newspaper, Shahed,

would gradually lessen its attacks on the Zahedi Government. On 13 December, Zahedi

told Source that he was through with Baghai because the latter’s newspaper attacks on

the Government were increasing rather than diminishing.” (Ibid., Box 32, Folder 7, CS In-

formation Reports 27860–27869)

357.

Letter From the Ambassador to Iran (Henderson) to the

Special Assistant for Intelligence, Department of State

(Armstrong)

Tehran, January 7, 1954.

Dear Mr. Armstrong:

With reference to your letter of November 27, 1953, the Embassy,

CAS, and the Service Attache´s have studied National Intelligence Esti-

mate 102, entitled “Probable Developments in Iran through 1954, and

find themselves in general agreement with the approach and conclu-

sions reflected in this document. We might, however, comment on cer-

tain points:

There are, of course, several paragraphs throughout the document

which have now been out-dated by developments in Iran since they

were written. For example, with regard to paragraph 11, the decision to

hold early elections has already been taken by the Shah and Zahedi,

and there is no present reason to believe that the elections will not be

held with reasonable orderliness and a new Majlis and Senate consti-

tuted in the very near future. In connection with paragraph 19, diplo-

matic relations between the UK and Iran have been resumed prior to

any tangible progress toward an oil settlement. Also, with regard to

paragraph 25, the first stage of the Mosadeq trial has been completed,

with his conviction and a three-year sentence which has now been ap-

pealed to a higher court. In this connection, I should point out that the

execution of Mosadeq never has been seriously considered, due to his

age.

The foregoing developments do not, however affect appreciably

the conclusions drawn in the Estimate. We believe these conclusions to

be sound in general, although the description and indicated life expec-

tancy of the Zahedi Government might be somewhat modified.

At the present time, and given conditions envisaged some months

ahead, no adequate replacement for the Prime Minister has appeared

on the horizon to challenge Zahedi. It seems unlikely to us that in the

absence of unforeseen developments the Shah would attempt to re-

place the Prime Minister until at least several months after the organi-

zation of the new 18th Majlis. Furthermore, it should not be ruled out

that foreign influence not entirely predictable at this time will have an

important bearing on the durability of the Zahedi regime and the

Shah’s attitude toward it. In this connection, it should be noted that the

Government is comprised of representatives of the traditional ruling

group of Iran who have been amenable to foreign, notably British, in-

fluence. Unless there are sharply unexpected developments such as the

Prime Minister’s assassination, the area for possible British and Amer-

ican influence upon the general direction of Iranian affairs, includ-

ing the retention in office of the Zahedi Government, should not be

minimized.

With reference to the solution of the oil problem, it seems to us that

the factors involved might be spelled out more fully. The chances for an

early and satisfactory settlement depend upon British as well as Iranian

attitudes. From our examination of the situation, we think that the

Zahedi Government is truly anxious for a settlement and is capable of

gaining support in the country which would offer honor and advan-

tages to both parties. It appears that the British are equally interested in

reaching a settlement at this time. We believe that it is vital to American

policy interests that an oil arrangement be satisfactorily concluded in

1954. Otherwise, we will be faced with the alternatives of subsidizing

Iran indefinitely or of running the grave risk that a pro-communist gov-

ernment will eventually come to power, no matter how authoritarian

any government without oil revenues might be.

Paragraph 6 of the conclusions in the Estimate recognizes this pos-

sibility; however, the relationship between this conclusion and the

second portion of paragraph two is not clear. In our judgment, failure

to reach an oil agreement in the course of the next several months, to-

gether with refusal of the United States to continue financial aid to Iran,

will involve psychological as well as economic problems which would

reach grave proportions during the period covered by the Estimate.

While it might theoretically be possible for the Government to cope

with the immediate fiscal and budgetary problems by resorting to def-

358.

Despatch From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of

State

No. 410

Tehran, January 11, 1954.

SUBJECT

Conversation with Prime Minister Zahedi

I have the honor to enclose herewith a memorandum of a conver-

sation regarding the Qashqai tribes which took place on January 7,

Drafted by Henderson. Received January 23. A copy was sent to London.

1954, between General Fazlollah Zahedi, Prime Minister of Iran, and

myself.

Respectfully yours,

Loy W. Henderson

Enclosure

Memorandum of Conversation

Tehran, January 7, 1954.

SUBJECT

Conversation with Prime Minister Zahedi on January 7, 1954, regarding present

status of the Qashqai Khans

During a conversation which I had on January 7th with General

Fazlollah Zahedi I asked him what was the latest development with re-

gard to the dissident Qashqai Khans.

The Prime Minister said he assumed that I was aware that Nasser

Khan, the former Senator who had been acting as chief spokesman for

the four brothers, had been in Tehran for some time. Following his ar-

rival in Tehran Nasser had approached the Prime Minister and in-

formed him that he would be prepared (a) to call upon the Shah if the

latter would receive him in order to promise upon his solemn oath that

he and his brothers would loyally serve the Shah and obey the laws of

the country, or (b) if the Shah would not receive him, in any event to

promise that he and his brothers would be loyal citizens of Iran, would

obey the laws of the country, and would live quietly in their tribal areas

in the south, or (c) to leave the country if the Shah should so desire. If

they were to leave the country they hoped that the Government would

be willing to purchase some of their possessions with foreign currency

so that they would have the means for supporting themselves abroad.

Nasser had insisted in talking to the Prime Minister that his

brothers were prepared to join him in pursuing any of the above-

mentioned courses which might be agreeable to the Shah. They would

prefer of course to be permitted to swear allegiance to the Shah and to

prove by their acts that they desired in the future to be loyal subjects

and law-abiding citizens.

Zahedi told me that he had discussed this matter with the Shah

who had taken the position that no matter what the Khans might

promise the Qashqais were not to be trusted, and that therefore three of

the brothers, Nasser, Khosrow, and Mahammed Hosein, should leave

the country. The Prime Minister said that he had imparted this infor-

September 1953–December 1954

mation to Nasser “this very morning”, and Nasser had taken the deci-

sion without any great display of surprise. Nasser had maintained that

he and his brothers did not have sufficient funds abroad on which to

live. He himself had only $17,000 in foreign banks. He had begged,

therefore, that they be permitted to sell some of their property and con-

vert the proceeds into foreign currency. Although the Prime Minister

had not given Nasser any definite answer he told him that it would be

extremely difficult to prevail upon the Minister of Finance to give for-

eign exchange for this purpose.

The Prime Minister indicated to me that he was happy that the

Qashqai situation was developing so favorably. Both the Shah and the

Chief of Staff in the past had insisted that the Iranian Army move

against the Qashqai tribes. The Prime Minister, however, had adhered

to the position that with patience and firmness the Qashqai problem

could be solved bloodlessly. The Government had succeeded in

breaking down Qashqai unity and gaining the support of three of the

most important subtribes. It was only when the Khans had discovered

that their tribal empire was crumbling and that the Tudeh was not

living up to its promises to them to stir up uprisings in various parts of

the country that they capitulated. He was proud of the fact that the

Government had won in its struggle with the Qashqai Khans without

firing a shot. Of course much work remained to be done before the

problem of the Qashqais could be said to be definitely eliminated.

Loy W. Henderson

359.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–28871

Washington, January 12, 1954.

SUBJECT

Situation in the Tudeh Party

SOURCE

[1 line not declassified]

On 21 December 1953 the responsible of a Tudeh Bakhsh Com-

mittee told Source:

a. that the imperialists spare no efforts to blow up the Tudeh Party

from the inside. A gap has been created between the Central Com-

mittee and the Tehran Provincial Committee. The Party is presently

being directed by the Tehran Provincial Committee;

b. that, because of developments following the events of 19 August

1953, the Party has been divided into several groups. The dissension is

so deep that everyone suspects his fellow-comrades; however, the

Party is exerting efforts to conceal this situation;

c. that ordinary Party comrades, who are unaware of this situation,

expect the Party to organize a revolt. The self-teaching of comrades

should be strengthened so that they may understand that under ex-

isting conditions it is impossible for the Party to seize power. Any re-

volt requires conditions which do not exist at present. The Party ought

to have influence among the peasants, but it does not. Talk among

members concerning a sufficient number of arms which are supposed

to be at the disposal of the Party is not correct. The Party had started to

collect arms only shortly before the events of 19 August 1953 took

place.

CS Information Reports 28870–28879. Secret; Security Information.

360.

Letter From the Ambassador to Iran (Henderson) to the

Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian,

and African Affairs (Byroade)

Tehran, January 16, 1954.

Dear Hank:

Yesterday morning I dictated a telegram summarizing some of the

comments made to me by the Shah during our conversation of January

14 with regard to Iran’s need for additional American aid. When I saw

the rough draft of this telegram I decided not to send it as a telegram

but rather to forward it as an enclosure to this personal letter to you.

I am sending this summary of conversation in this informal

fashion because I was afraid that if I sent it as a telegram it might make

too great an impression upon the Department of State and other inter-

ested Departments. Although the Shah plays a great role in Iran it did

not seem to me quite fair to Iran to disseminate throughout the Depart-

ment and other agencies of the Government statements disadvanta-

geous to Iran made by the Shah in one of his petulant moods.

During our conversation the Shah displayed considerable venom

as far as Zahedi was concerned. He accused the ailing Prime Minister

not only of bungling the elections but of taking a complacent attitude

with respect to corruption. He said that up to this time Amini, the Min-

ister of Finance, had not been guilty of corrupt practices but that he was

now convinced that Amini, as well as Panahy, who is at present in

charge of the Plan Organization, and Radji, Panahy’s Deputy, were out

to make as much money for themselves as possible.

He then launched a vigorous attack upon Wright, the British

Charge´ d’Affaires. He said, “I do not know why the British should have

sent as Charge´ d’Affaires a person who is no diplomat. Wright has had

no political experience. He seems to have been some kind of an econo-

mist.” The Shah further indicated that he expected to have nothing

whatsoever to do with Wright. When I defended Wright His Majesty

showed signs of temper and said it was not necessary for him to have

relations with a mere Charge´ d’Affaires. He is of course annoyed with

Wright because he sent Perron, behind the back of the Prime Minister

and the Foreign Minister, to Wright for purposes of intrigue. Wright

discussed the matter with the Foreign Minister who took it up with the

Prime Minister, who, in turn, took it up with the Shah. I personally

think Wright has done a noble job in this respect, but it would seem that

for a time at least he has incurred the vindictive hostility of the Shah.

Secret.

Since the pouch is going out in a few moments I will not have time

to elaborate in more detail in this letter regarding my conversation with

His Majesty. I believe I have written enough, however, to let you know

that His Majesty is not easy to deal with these days. On the other hand

this bad humor might be merely a reflection of internal troubles.

During our conversation reference was made to domestic troubles of

Amini whose wife the Shah told me with relish had been behaving

badly in Europe. When I remarked that I thought Amini had been

doing extremely well in the circumstances the Shah stated with em-

phasis that “no one could be having more family trouble than I en-

counter constantly”. I understand that among the members of his

family who are causing the Shah worry are not only his Mother but the

Empress herself.

I hope that the Shah’s outburst, as set forth in the enclosure, will

not cause anyone in the Department who sees it from considering

Iran’s need for further aid on any other than an unprejudiced sympa-

thetic basis.

With warmest regards, I am

Sincerely,

Loy W. Henderson

P.S. I am sending a copy of this to Evan Wilson in London. It is ex-

tremely important that the contents of this letter, particularly those por-

tions relating to Wright, not be brought to the attention of the British

Government.

Enclosure

Memorandum of Conversation

Tehran, January 14, 1954.

PARTICIPANTS

His Majesty the Shah of Iran

Loy W. Henderson, American Ambassador

At my request the Shah granted me an audience yesterday at the

beginning of which I presented him with a copy of Persepolis, as a gift of

the Oriental Institute of Chicago University.

September 1953–December 1954

During our conversation subsequent to the presentation the Shah

asked me again what the U.S. was planning to do for Iran, what kind of

report re economic and military aid had Vice President Nixon made to

the National Security Council, etc. The Shah, who appeared to be in a

petulant humor, commenced to complain re the state of the Iranian

budget. The available funds even with American emergency aid were

not sufficient to meet the urgent economic and security needs of the

country. What would happen after several months when emergency

aid was exhausted he did not know unless the U.S. could find some

way to supplement emergency aid at least until conclusion of the oil

agreement. Eden had expressed in a recent speech the hope that the oil

agreement would be achieved during the year 1954. That did not indi-

cate expectation on the part of the British for an early agreement. Even

if an early agreement could be obtained he could not believe that the

agreement or the oil flowing from it would provide Iran with adequate

budgetary funds for some time to come. Iran furthermore needed more

than budgetary funds. It must after the empty promises of many years

begin to do something concrete in the direction of economic devel-

opment. If not, a disillusioned population might be easy prey for

communism.

Stressing the needs of the Army the Shah said the Army budget

was so limited that it was not even able to transfer military stores from

one place to another. The funds available are barely sufficient to pay

salary, allowances, quarters, etc. There was nothing left for operations.

I remarked that perhaps with more expert management the Army

could within the framework of the present budget take care of elemen-

tary operational needs. General McClure in describing to me earlier in

the day a recent conversation which he had had with General Batman-

qilich, said Batmanqilich had declared solemnly to him that the Army

did not even possess personnel to distribute clothing and blankets

which the U.S. Government was giving to it. I said that a statement of

this kind on the part of the Chief of Staff was shocking to both General

McClure and myself. It seemed to us to denote lack of resourcefulness

and organizational ability. Shah said somewhat apologetically that he

was sure General Batmanqilich had made this statement merely in

order to impress General McClure with their military needs. Batmanqi-

lich would, of course, find means of distributing this material. He had

gram 1341 from Tehran, December 17, reported that the Shah had reiterated to the Vice

President his desire that a decision soon be made regarding “whether Iranian Army was

to be organized, equipped and trained to defend Iran in case of external attack from any

direction, or army was to be used merely for maintaining internal security.” For telegram

396). The Vice President reported to the NSC on his trip to the Far East, South Asia, and

been talking with General Batmanqilich a few moments before he re-

ceived me. General Batmanqilich, known for his administrative and or-

ganizational ability, was a loyal, honest, and capable military leader.

If he was experiencing difficulties under the present budget, no

successor was likely to be found who would not. Even without re-

organization the Army should have 10,000 more men, particularly

non-commissioned and junior officers to make it efficient. Re-

organization which would give the Army defensive capabilities would

require 15,000 more men. Needs therefore for a re-organized Army

were for 25,000 men in addition to the 125,000 already in uniform. This

required budgetary funds and no such funds were as yet in sight.

Turning to civilian needs the Shah asked if there was not some-

thing I could tell him re U.S. plans. Did Secretary Dulles’ speech on De-

cember 12 indicate a radical change in U.S. policy?4 Was the U.S. plan-

ning to call home its troops and turn the defense of the world against

aggression over to the United Nations? Had the U.S. Government de-

cided to refrain from giving further economic aid to Iran at this time

when Iran was in such need? The U.S. had helped Turkey and Greece to

get started in their economic development; was he to understand that

at the moment when Iran was in a position to use such aid, and was ur-

gently in need of it, the U.S. had decided to extend no more aid of a fi-

nancial and economic development character? If Iran was not to receive

any additional aid, the Government should know at once so decisions

could be made as to what, if anything, could be done.

I told the Shah that we had endeavored to make it clear when the

$45 million aid was granted that the grant was on the basis of emer-

gency; that it would be difficult to find additional funds for Iran’s

budgetary use; that it had not been easy to obtain funds wherewith to

give this emergency aid and that no additional funds were in sight. The

U.S. Government had, of course, hoped that by the time the emergency

funds had been exhausted there would be an oil agreement which to-

gether with fresh funds obtained by Iran locally would take care of

Iran’s most urgent needs. Shah interrupted to say that Iran was not en-

tirely to blame for delay in achievement of an oil agreement. I replied

that it was true that the present Iranian Government could not be en-

tirely to blame for this delay but that I was sure His Majesty would

agree with me that Iran as a country had primarily itself to blame for a

situation in which it now found itself. In fact, the U.S. Government had

spent many millions of dollars in order to help Iran out of a predica-

ment in which it had put itself. The Shah asked if he was to understand

that the U.S. did not intend to give Iran any additional financial aid re-

September 1953–December 1954

gardless of delays in achieving an oil agreement. I told him that I was

not in a position at this time to state what the U.S. might or might not

do. The Shah asked if he was to understand also that in the event an oil

agreement would be achieved the U.S. would consider it unnecessary

to give Iran financial or economic aid? I told the Shah that I was not in a

position to state at this time what the U.S. Government might or might

not do in circumstances which could not be foreseen. I knew the U.S.

Government hoped that Iran with funds obtained as the result of an oil

agreement could meet its budgetary needs and have a surplus for use

in economic development. The U.S. Government had in the past come

to Iran’s aid in time of great stress and I was sure that the U.S. Govern-

ment would not permit Iran to collapse financially or economically if it

should be convinced that Iran, although doing its utmost to make the

best use of its own human and natural resources, needed U.S. aid for its

survival. I was not, however, making any promises and I did not be-

lieve the U.S. Government was in a position to make any promises at

this time.

Reverting to Secretary Dulles’ speech I said that if the Shah had

read it carefully it should have given him encouragement. It indicated

that the U.S. was determined to hold the initiative in its struggle to

avert international communist aggression. It further indicated that al-

though the U.S. was willing to come to an understanding with the So-

viet Union it was not prepared to do so on the basis of division of the

world into spheres of influence or of sacrifice of interests of other coun-

tries. In my opinion, the speech showed more rather than less determi-

nation to oppose international communist aggression. I then discussed

certain aspects of the speech in some detail.

The Shah then reverted to a discussion of certain Iranian domestic

problems which were treated in a telegram.

361.

Memorandum of Conversation

Tehran, February 19, 1954.

SUBJECT

Iranian Political Situation

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Ernest Perron, Secretary to the Shah

Mr. Michael R. Gannett, Second Secretary of Embassy

Mr. Perron had the following points to make in a conversation

held on February 17, in which he did most of the talking:

1. Relations between Shah and Zahedi—Mr. Perron asserted that the

possibilities for differences to arise between the Shah and the Prime

Minister following inauguration of the new Parliament will be very

great and that steps should be taken now to prevent the two from

drifting apart. He asserted that for some time the Shah has not liked

Zahedi but was forced to accept the General’s leadership of the move-

ment to oust Mosadeq owing to the absence of any other person who

could adequately perform this task. He thought it highly possible,

given the Shah’s mentality, that intriguers could be successful in per-

suading the Shah to ditch the Prime Minister, especially after the elapse

of a few months when the inevitable cleavages within the Majlis and

the Senate will begin to develop. Mr. Perron hoped that the American

Embassy would exert its best efforts toward insuring the continuation

of an adequate working relationship between the Shah and the Prime

Minister. In this regard he thought it highly important that the Zahedi

regime be able to develop a popular following, in particular to secure

the support of the non-communist, nationalist elements which for-

merly had rallied behind Dr. Mosadeq. He recognized this would be a

difficult task but felt that unless some measure of progress could be

made in this direction, the prospects for the continued life of the Zahedi

Government would not be good. I assured Mr. Perron that we also re-

garded as essential the maintenance of smooth working relations and

mutual confidence between the Shah and Zahedi and that one cannot

Drafted by Gannett. This memorandum is attached to a letter from Gannett to Stutesman,

March 5, in which he commented that “I see Perron for tea most every week in succession

to a custom pursued in my time here by Eric Pollard and later Roy Melbourne. These ses-

sions usually consist of lectures from ‘Professor’ Perron on the Iranian scene as he sees it

and upon the shortcomings of the Shah as a leader of people. As these memoranda indi-

cate, it is usually my tactic to listen and to offer as few comments as possible.”

September 1953–December 1954

help being concerned over the gulf existing between the present Gov-

ernment and many segments of the Iranian people.

2. Perron’s desire to work with Zahedi—Mr. Perron said that unfortu-

nately he had not been able to develop a harmonious working relation-

ship with General Zahedi. He was most anxious for the General and his

Government to know of his good intentions in this regard but found

that he did not have an effective means of communicating them to the

General. Unfortunately, he was unable to communicate them through

Ardeshir Zahedi with whom he does not have a common language. In

view of the close working relationship between the American Embassy

and the Zahedi Government and particularly with Ardeshir Zahedi, he

hoped it would be possible for the Embassy to have it made known to

General Zahedi that he was available to be of every assistance. Mr.

Perron proceeded immediately to his next point without awaiting com-

ment from myself.

3. American efforts to support anti-communist groups—Mr. Perron

said he was aware of efforts by the American Embassy to encourage the

development of anti-communist groups within Iran. In this connection

he wished merely to call to our attention that Aramesh and Bahbudi are

highly dishonest persons and should not be treated with any confi-

dence. I observed that I also had heard of this reputation. Mr. Perron

went on to make a plea for forthright American intervention in the in-

ternal political affairs of Iran, in order to insure success for the anti-

communist movement. He asserted that Point Four and the Military

Mission engage daily in domestic political matters and obviously only

the Embassy was reluctant to do so. He thought this reluctance was

most unfortunate, as it would be in the common interest of both the

United States and Iran for the Embassy to take forthrightly a more ac-

tive part in this vital matter. I noted that it was not the intention of OMI

or the Military Mission to dable in local politics and that I thought it im-

prudent for any foreign government to seek to manage the local affairs

of another country. Mr. Perron recalled that to his knowledge in the

past the American Government had pursued policies in Iran of which

the Ambassador had not always been aware; to which I observed that I

could speak only of recent months but that I was sure that during the

period I had been familiar with Iranian matters the Ambassador has

been fully informed on American policy towards Iran.

4. Mr. Klein’s visit4—Mr. Perron said he wished to point out the

most unfortunate interpretation being placed upon the visit of Mr.

362.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,

Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, March 5, 1954.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL

INTELLIGENCE

(Draft for Board Consideration)

SUBJECT

The Outlook in Iran

1. Recent developments in Iran have been generally in accordance

with the analysis contained in NIE–102, “Probable Developments in

sion of NIE–102 at this time would contain some changes in emphasis

on certain points, we do not believe they would be sufficient to warrant

Memos for DCI (1954) (Substantive). Secret.

September 1953–December 1954

such a revision before the one now scheduled for the fourth quarter of

1954. The principal changes are summarized below.

2. Developments thus far are not inconsistent with the conclusion

of NIE–102 that “relatively moderate governments are likely to con-

tinue in Iran through 1954,” but will be hampered by the Shah’s indeci-

sion and inconstancy and by political irresponsibility and demagogery,

both in and out of the Majlis. However, NIE–102, particularly in the

Discussion, did tend to overstate the magnitude of these difficulties

and to understate the Zahedi government’s ability to cope with them.

3. The estimate in NIE–102 that Zahedi’s chances of holding on

through all of 1954 are “not good” does not take account of the re-

straining influence which has been exercised on the Shah thus far by his

recognition that a man of Zahedi’s caliber would be hard to find and by

his fear of incurring US–UK opposition. So long as the Shah continues

to believe that the situation requires a strong premier and so long as he

is convinced that the US and the UK feel it essential that Zahedi remain,

he will probably hesitate to go too far toward undermining the prime

minister’s position.

4. It also appears that the job of keeping the warring politicians

under control may be somewhat less formidable than was suggested in

NIE–102. The government appears to be getting through the critical

electoral period with far less difficulty than was anticipated. It has not

only been spared the increased political tension and instability which

was expected to develop out of the electoral campaign, but has also

been far more successful than was contemplated in NIE–102 in getting

an official slate of candidates elected. Admittedly, the level of ability,

honesty, and political reliability among the government-supported

deputies elected thus far is not high; the government will almost cer-

tainly have to bestir itself to hold a working majority together. More-

over, the current weakness and disunity of the government’s oppo-

nents and the passivity of the general public will not last forever.

Nevertheless, there is reason to believe that the government, having

seized the political initiative, may be able to hold on to it for some time

to come if it is sufficiently forceful.

5. In the last analysis the future of moderate leadership in Iran will

depend not only on the vigor with which it maintains itself, but also on

the success of the forthcoming oil negotiations, Western preparations

for which now appear to be reaching the final stage. One hopeful sign is

that the Iranians appear somewhat more amenable to a “realistic” solu-

tion than appeared to be the case when NIE–102 was completed. In

their present passive mood, the Iranian people appear prepared to ac-

cept almost any sort of agreement which makes some minimum provi-

sion for national pride. However, it is still unclear whether the oil com-

panies—particularly AIOC—are prepared to offer the Iranians an

363.

Memorandum Prepared in the Directorate of Plans, Central

Intelligence Agency

Washington, March 8, 1954.

CAMPAIGN TO INSTALL PRO-WESTERN GOVERNMENT

IN IRAN

AUTHORITY: Approved by the President, Secretary of State, and

Target

Prime Minister Mossadeq and his government

Objectives

Through legal, or quasi-legal, methods to effect the fall of the Mos-

sadeq government; and

To replace it with a pro-Western government under the Shah’s

leadership, with Zahedi as its Prime Minister

CIA Action

Plan of action was implemented in four phases:

1. Through direct pressure, applied by CIA’s representatives in

Iran, to strengthen the Shah’s will to exercise his constitutional power

and to sign those decrees necessary to effect the legal removal of Mos-

sadeq as Prime Minister;

2. Welded together and coordinated the efforts of those political

factions in Iran who were antagonistic toward Mossadeq, including the

powerfully influential clergy, to gain their support and backing of any

legal action taken by the Shah to accomplish Mossadeq’s removal;

3. Launched an intensive propaganda campaign intended to disen-

chant the Iranian population with the myth of Mossadeq’s patriotism,

Misc. TPAJAX Correspondence. Top Secret.

September 1953–December 1954

by exposing his collaboration with the Communists and his manipula-

tion of constitutional authority to serve his own personal ambitions for

power;

Simultaneously, conducted a “war of nerves” against Mossadeq

designed to reveal to Mossadeq and to the general populace that in-

creased economic aid would not be forthcoming and that the U.S.

viewed with alarm Mossadeq’s policies:

a. A series of public statements by high U.S. officials implying that

there was little hope that Mossadeq could expect increased U.S. aid;

b. U.S. press and magazine articles which were critical of him and

his methods; and

c. The induced absence of the American Ambassador, lending cre-

dence to the impression that the U.S. had lost confidence in Mossadeq

and his government.

4. Developed covertly and independently a military apparatus

within the Iranian Army which could be counted on to back up any

legal action taken by the Shah to remove Mossadeq.

Results

The original D-Day set by CIA misfired when Mossadeq, learning

of the plan through a leak in our military covert apparatus, took imme-

diate counteraction to neutralize the plan.

An intensive propaganda campaign, engineered and directed by

CIA, was launched in the interim period between the original and final

D–Days to educate the Iranian population to the fact that, in view of the

dissolution of the Majlis (effected by Mossadeq at an earlier stage to

prevent its voting him out of power) and the Shah’s decree removing

Mossadeq as Prime Minister, Mossadeq’s continued exercise of the

powers of that office was illegal and that authority to govern the people

rested solely and completely in the hands of the Shah.

The Nationalists and the Communists during this period inadver-

tently assisted our cause through their premature attempts to promote

a republican government. This theme was contrary to the public’s

opinion, whose sympathies were with the Shah. The Shah’s dramatic

flight out of the country served to further intensify his people’s sense of

loyalty to him.

These actions resulted in literal revolt of the population, whose

street demonstrations were touched off, aided and abetted by CIA’s

covert contributions. The military and security forces joined the popu-

lace, Radio Tehran was taken over, and Mossadeq was forced to flee on

364.

Memorandum From the Central Intelligence Agency

Representative on the NSC 5402 Working Group (Waller) to

the Special Assistant to the Director of Central Intelligence

(Jackson)

Washington, March 19, 1954.

SUBJECT

Summary of Action Taken By OCB Working Group (NSC 5402) at March 18

Meeting

1. The meeting on March 18 was almost exclusively devoted to

tions in London between the major American oil companies and AIOC

with regard to compensation had reached a deadlock, the OCB

Working Group drafted recommendations for action to be presented to

the next meeting of the OCB. The draft is worded essentially as follows

although minor editing was to be done before it was to be passed to the

OCB:

therein mentioned by which time consideration should be given to

taking independent action if a settlement has not been reached; and in

view of recent reports that a stalemate had been reached in London in

oil company discussions, the 5402 Working Group has today consid-

ered alternate lines of action which might be adopted:

(a) U.S. Government purchase Iranian oil in the absence of a settle-

ment of the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute. While this would have the

advantage of providing substantial income to Iran, there are serious

obstacles:

(1) The U.S. Government has stated publicly that it would not pur-

chase Iranian oil while the title is in dispute.

(2) U.S. Government subsidization of Iran’s expropriation of a for-

eign investment would have ill-effect upon American investments

abroad.

(3) It would have a serious adverse effect on U.S.–U.K. relations.

(4) Problems of disposing of significant quantities of oil by the

United States would be almost insurmountable.

(b) U.S. private companies to buy Iranian oil in the absence of a set-

tlement of the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute. There are serious obstacles:

(1) It is questionable whether the U.S. Government is in a position

to force private American oil companies to take such action.

(2) It can be expected that major American oil companies capable

of handling sufficient Iranian oil to provide significant revenues to the

Iranian Government would strenuously oppose the establishment of a

precedent making expropriation without payment of compensation a

profitable course of action for foreign countries.

(3) Although there have been certain indications of interest by

American “independent” oil companies in purchasing cheap Iranian

oil at distressed prices, in the absence of a settlement of the Anglo-

Iranian oil dispute, it is improbable that even a group of them could

market sufficient oil to provide early and substantial revenues to the

Iranian Government.

(4) Lack of clear title discourages any private purchase.

(5) The only markets presently available to independent oil com-

panies are in the U.S. and importations of large quantities of oil to this

market would seriously affect U.S. domestic oil producing industries.

(c) Subsidize the Iranian Government by grants of economic aid in

the absence of a settlement of the Anglo-Iranian oil dispute. There are

serious obstacles:

(1) Congress may object to covering the budget gap in Iran

($5,000,000 per month) for an indefinite period.

(2) Subsidization removes to some extent economic pressures

upon the Iranian Government to come to an early settlement of the oil

dispute.

(3) The psychological and political repercussions from Iran’s in-

ability to dispose of its oil and develop its own source of income will

certainly adversely affect maintenance of stability in that country.

(d) Use exceptional pressures to induce the British to offer a rea-

sonable proposal for an early settlement. In addition to such direct

pressures take psychological actions overt and/or covert to further im-

press the British with the seriousness with which the United States is

considering independent action in the Middle East.

The foregoing (d) course of action is recommended by the 5402

Working Group. Although it is recognized that the group is not compe-

tent to judge whether the dangers of such exceptional pressures to the

Anglo-American alliance are sufficient to out-weigh the dangers of

failing to achieve an early oil settlement in Iran.

It is recommended that the Chairman of the OCB consider sending

a telegram along the following lines to Mr. Hoover at London:

“Consideration is being given to psychological pressures on the

British Government. Request your advice regarding ways in which

365.

Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,

Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, March 29, 1954.

PROBABLE CONSEQUENCES IN IRAN OF FAILURE TO

ACHIEVE AN EARLY OIL SETTLEMENT

1. In the long run, satisfactory solution of the oil problem is a pre-

requisite for continuing stability in Iran. Until substantial oil revenues

are restored, the Iranian Government will be dependent on foreign sub-

sidies not only for developmental outlays to meet growing popular de-

mands for economic betterment but even for a substantial portion of

regular government operating expenses. Iran’s present moderate lead-

ership has clearly recognized the overriding necessity of an oil settle-

ment and has in effect staked its future on the hope that such a settle-

ment will be forthcoming. In turn, popular and business confidence in

the government is in large measure based on the expectation that the

moderates can succeed where Mossadeq failed in deriving adequate

benefits from Iran’s oil resources.

2. Thus far the situation has developed favorably for the present

leadership. With the aid of $51 million in US emergency grants, Iran’s

treasury has been restored for the time being to reasonable order. Ultra-

nationalist and Tudeh elements, the chief opposition to the government

and its present policies, remain weak and divided, and the general

public is at least passively aligned with the government. The new

Majlis just elected is almost completely made up of government-

supported candidates and under present circumstances can probably

be prevailed on to ratify any oil settlement acceptable to the gov-

ernment and within the framework of the existing oil nationalization

law.

3. However, the government’s ability to maintain this favorable

position depends in a considerable measure on its ability to obtain an

early solution of the oil problem. The government now has a degree of

control over internal affairs which it will find difficult to maintain. The

Majlis, despite its hand-picked character, contains few men who can be

fully relied on to stand by the government in event of difficulties, and

the forces of latent nationalism remain strong.

4. Consequences of Delay in Achieving an Oil Settlement. Even in the

brief period remaining before present US emergency aid is exhausted

in June, any undue delay in moving toward a settlement, by providing

opportunities for irresponsible discussion of the oil question by the

Majlis, might lead to a weakening of the government’s will and ability

to accept a realistic settlement. In the light of present Iranian expecta-

tions of an early settlement, such a delay would also encourage the ul-

tranationalist and Tudeh opposition.

5. If US emergency aid were allowed to run out before a settlement

had been reached or was immediately in prospect, Iran’s present mod-

erate leadership would be in serious trouble. The budgetary deficit

now covered by US aid could be met only by deficit financing tech-

niques which the Majlis would be reluctant to authorize and which if

long continued would probably lead to a progressive weakening of

Iran’s financial stability. The withdrawal of US financial support would

also seriously damage the government’s morale and prestige, would

lead to widespread popular discouragement about Iran’s future, and

would be likely to result in a resurgence of extremist pressures. Indeed,

the failure to continue US budgetary aid to Iran would be looked on as

indicating lack of US confidence in the Zahedi government. Zahedi

September 1953–December 1954

would almost certainly have to resign, and while the Shah would prob-

ably be able to retain relatively moderate elements in power for several

months or more he would probably find it increasingly difficult to do

so. In the end it is likely that there would be a return to the chaotic con-

ditions which prevailed under Mossadeq.

6. Even if US emergency aid were continued, prolonged delay in

achieving an oil settlement would probably lead to a gradual but pro-

gressive narrowing of the government’s freedom of action in dealing

with the oil question. Opposition elements would have further oppor-

tunities to criticize the settlement terms under negotiation, attack the

UK and US, and ridicule the government’s expectation that it could do

business with them. Although the government would at first seek to

avoid friction with the UK and US, it would become increasingly dis-

couraged about the prospect for a settlement and would tend to be-

come more and more bitter over the failure of AIOC and the other oil

companies to provide a plan satisfactory to Iran and over US failure to

compel them to do so. Eventually, the declining morale and prestige of

the Iranian Government and the rising strength and vigor of the oppo-

sition might create a situation in which conclusion of any kind of a set-

tlement would be impossible.

7. If it became apparent, as a result either of a clear-cut breakdown

of negotiations or of cumulative delays and disappointments, that there

was little or no real hope of a satisfactory settlement, the position of the

moderate elements in Iran would be seriously weakened. If US emer-

gency aid were continued, it would most likely enable the moderates to

retain control at least initially, but Zahedi himself might have to be

dropped as a scapegoat, and the ability of the moderates to retain some

degree of popular support would be lessened. Moreover, without addi-

tional US economic assistance, the moderates would be unable to fi-

nance the economic development activities with which they had

planned to counter growing popular dissatisfaction with the status

quo. Finally, failure to resolve the oil problem would result in growing

uneasiness about Iran’s future, particularly in the business community.

Continuation of a month-to-month dole from the US would probably

be increasingly ineffective in overcoming this uneasiness. Under these

circumstances, there would be increased likelihood of a return to ex-

treme nationalist governments in Iran.

8. Consequences of a Separate Oil Arrangement with the US. If con-

vinced that there was little chance of reaching a satisfactory settlement

with the British, the Iranian Government would welcome and probably

actively seek US assistance in marketing Iranian oil without British par-

ticipation. Even assuming that such an arrangement could actually be

made, its consequences would depend primarily on the extent to which

366.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 29, 1954.

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Murphy, Deputy Under Secretary of State

Mohammed Hosein Qashqai

John H. Stutesman Jr., Officer in Charge Iranian Affairs

Through the introduction of Ambassador William Donovan, Mo-

hammed Hosein Qashqai called on Mr. Murphy at the Department of

State on April 28. He said that he represented his tribe and wished to

present to officials of the American Government the nature of a very se-

rious problem which was facing the Qashqais.

First he reviewed the history of the tribe, fighting mountain

nomads who were moved, some four hundred years ago, by the Safavi

monarch, Shah Abbas, from the Caucasus mountain area to the moun-

tains of southwest Iran. The tribe has been involved in trouble and

fighting its entire history, and, as Mohammed Hosein concluded, “Is

now again in trouble”.

He said that the Shah was personally antagonistic to the Qashqais

and desired to have the tribe disarmed and the leading family (four

brothers, of whom Mohammed Hosein is the third in succession) de-

ported from Iran. Mr. Qashqai interjected at this point that Prime Min-

ister Zahedi is not antagonistic to the Qashqais and is in fact respon-

sible for the comparatively calm relations which have existed during

dential. Drafted by Stutesman.

September 1953–December 1954

the past eight months between the Government authorities and the

tribe.

Mohammed Hosein said that the tribal people have long looked to

his family for leadership. He and his brothers were raised in the tribal

mountains, love their people and could not be happy even in the finest

places of Europe for longing toward their homeland. He said that if the

Shah wanted guarantees that the tribe would not be a source of unrest

they could give such guarantees. He expressed the fear that the Shah

was interested not so much in the maintenance of peace as in demon-

stration of his personal antipathy for the Qashqai leaders. He said that

if the Shah pursued this policy without hope of some temporizing be-

tween the tribe and Government authorities, “There would be trouble

in the end”.

He described the tribe as some 30,000 people who formed one of

the few united forces in Iran. He said the tribe was firmly and logically

anti-Communist since the Communists would obviously seek the de-

struction of the tribal leadership and probably of the tribal pattern of

life. He pointed out somewhat wryly that this objective seemed to be

similar to that sought by the Shah.

In response to a question from Mr. Murphy, he stated that the tribe

did not seek a semi-autonomous status but in fact only wanted to live

like other citizens of Iran. He pointed out that they presently pay sub-

stantial taxes to the Iranian Government.

He concluded his presentation by expressing the hope that the

American Government, through the mouth of its Ambassador in Iran,

could make some representation to the Shah which would result in

amelioration of the Shah’s present antagonistic attitude. This would fit

within the American objectives in Iran of maintaining stability and

peace. Mr. Murphy replied that he was most interested in this problem,

as described by Mr. Qashqai, and would consult with interested of-

ficers in the Department upon the matter. He then asked Mr. Qashqai

to show on a map where the tribe lived in Iran, and the conversation

broke up with the usual courtesies after Mohammed Hosein had de-

scribed with some pride the extent of territory covered in tribal

migrations.

367.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–40139

Washington, June 14, 1954.

SUBJECT

Corruption in the Zahedi Government

SOURCE

Paragraph 4: [1 line not declassified]

Appraisal of Content: [less than 1 line not declassified]

1. The Shah believes that the popularity and power of the Zahedi

Government is at a low ebb as the result of widespread corruption. This

situation is further aggravated by activities of the Tudeh Party, which

has exaggerated the extent of the corruption, thus contributing greatly

to the growing storm of popular dissatisfaction with the present Gov-

ernment. The Shah stated that this situation must be stopped and ex-

pressed the opinion that the Government can be held in office only so

long as he lends it his strongest support.

2. Despite the conviction that the swelling flood of rumors con-

cerning corruption in the Zahedi Government is strengthening the

communist hand in Iran and weakening the Shah’s own position, the

Shah decided to continue giving “strong” support to the present Gov-

ernment. His decision was based on the fear that any show of friction

between the Shah and the Government might have an adverse effect on

the oil negotiations.

3. After reaching this decision, the Shah called in the entire Cabinet

on 2 June and administered a firm rebuke, calling for immediate re-

forms and stern action to control corruption at all levels.

4. The Shah received Ardeshir Zahedi in audience on 3 June, fol-

lowing the latter’s return from Europe on 2 June. When Ardeshir

emerged from the audience, he was in tears and remarked bitterly,

CS Information Reports 40130–40139. Secret

September 1953–December 1954

“Why wasn’t I told how bad things are? I could have been here to help.

My father is a good man: His Majesty knows that he is a good man.”

This is a continuing project which was originated in 1951, re-

sulted from CIA responsibility under NSC 10/2 (superseded by NSC

approved 2 January 1954 which authorizes covert action to direct Ira-

nian nationalist feeling into constructive channels thereby strength-

ening the ability and desire of the Iranian people to resist Communist

pressure.

The project also conforms to the Letter of Instructions to the Chief

b. The project originated in the field.

[cryptonym not declassified]. Secret. The covering sheet indicates that the project was re-

viewed by Chief of the Near East and Africa Division [name not declassified] on June 28.

Waller reviewed the outline as well.

3. Situation:

This project was originally approved at a time when Iran was

facing a severe economic crisis, was plagued by pressure from foreign

nations, and was evidencing to an increasing degree alarming symp-

toms of insecurity and instability.

At this time CIA was presented with the opportunity of under-

taking a large-scale propaganda warfare/political action program, [2½

lines not declassified]. From the approval date of the project on 11 August

1951 until August 1953, the major portion of the PP work in Iran was

carried out [1½ lines not declassified] in the following general fields:

a) subsidizing publication media; b) producing and distributing propa-

ganda material; and c) influencing religious leaders, Majlis deputies,

Senators, and other government officials. Their primary target was the

Tudeh Party, the Communist party of Iran.

Although the immediacy of the threat of a communist takeover in

Iran has been reduced since the inception of this project, the task of de-

feating Communism within Iran is by no means accomplished. The

membership of the Tudeh Party may have declined slightly in the past

year, and the party is no longer free to operate openly and without re-

straint. However, the hard core of the party remains intact, and despite

its losses the Tudeh Party must still be considered the best organized

and most effective communist force in the Near East. Tudeh control of

the Iranian government would greatly strengthen communist capabil-

ities in neighboring countries and threaten the position of the western

powers throughout the area.

In contrast with the opportunities of 1951, CIA is now in a much

better strategic position, has gained the services of many additional

agents and assets, and most important, has established a close relation-

ship with the Shah and the present government. The fall of the Mos-

sadeq government in August 1953 and the installation of the Zahedi re-

gime created a situation containing greatly broadened potentialities for

effective action against the Tudeh Party and in the interest of political

stability. The Shah and the Prime Minister, cognizant of the need for

assistance in their effort to capitalize on the present situation, have be-

come willing collaborators with CIA.

[1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified]

In addition to support for the Department of Press and Propa-

ganda the [5 lines not declassified].

[1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]

The problem facing the Iranian government and CIA is the sup-

pression of the Tudeh Party and the establishment of a strong, popular,

progressive government, one that is in harmony with the throne, which

serves as the strongest factor of stability in the political scene.

September 1953–December 1954

4. Proposal:

It is proposed that CIA contract for the services of, and subsidize

the activities of individuals hereinafter described, and others who may

be recruited in the future, to support a political action/Psychological

warfare program in Iran with the following objectives:

a. to establish and maintain a stable, progressive government;

b. [1 line not declassified];

c. [2 lines not declassified];

d. to formulate and give active guidance to an intellectual move-

ment designed to promote progressive nationalism at all levels and in

all significant facets of the Iranian society; and

e. to combat Tudehism/Communism.

5. [1 line not declassified]

a. [1 line not declassified]

6. Coordination:

a. Relation to other projects.

This project is viewed as the parent project from which sub-

projects will be drawn for the sub-tasks listed in 5 a.

b. Extent of coordination.

Coordination within the Division and among the Senior Staffs con-

cerned will be accomplished. There is no necessity for coordination

with other agencies or with extra-government organizations.

7. Budget Data:

Total CIA funds required for Fiscal Year 1955: [dollar amount not de-

classified]. This amount was requested in the NEA Division Operational

Program for FY 1955.

369.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–40518

Washington, June 17, 1954.

SUBJECT

Government Offer to Khosrow Khan Qashqai

REFERENCES

CS–362012

CS–336333

SOURCE

[1 line not declassified]

1. Prime Minister Zahedi and his Cabinet members agreed on 10

June 1954 to offer tribal leader Khosrow Khan Qashqai two million

Rials (approximately $25,000) to leave Iran.

2. This action was taken following Khosrow Khan’s refusal to leave

the country, as ordered by the Shah, on the ground that he lacked funds

to live abroad and had no choice except to fight if his expulsion by force

were attempted.

3. In deciding to offer cash, the Iranian Government agreed that it

was cheaper to pay Khosrow Khan than to send a military force against

the tribal stronghold near Firuzabad.

CS Information Reports 40510–40519. Secret; Control—U.S. Officials Only.

Iran, and that “the Qashqai leaders at present enjoy a friendly relationship with Prime

Minister Zahedi, but they continue to be suspicious of the Shah and Army Chief of

Staff General Nadr Batmangelich.” (Ibid., Box 40, Folder 15, CS Information Reports

the Zahedi government. According to this report, Nasr Khan agreed to remain in Iran

during the summer tribal migration, to be led by Malek Mansur Qashqai, but Mo-

hammad Hoseyn Qashqai and his family would leave Iran for Eruope. (Ibid., Box 38,

September 1953–December 1954

370.

Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

CS–40723

Washington, June 17, 1954.

SUBJECT

Details of Opposition to Zahedi Government

REFERENCES

CS–403542

SOURCE

[2 lines not declassified]

The following is a summary of events which reflect the thinking

and agitation of various segments of the political arena in Iran con-

cerning opposition to the Government of Prime Minister Zahedi:

ernment had received an eleventh hour reprieve through:

a. the accidental death of General Mohammed Hoseyn Jahanbani

on 30 April 1954, which precluded the exposure of a major scandal con-

cerning government corruption, in which Jahanbani was involved, and

b. the Shah’s appeal, transmitted by Minister of Court Hoseyn Ala,

for strong Majlis support of the Government in the interest of an oil

settlement.

2. On 5 June, Military Governor Timur Bakhtiar stated that he was

not sure that the Government would last through the oil negotiations,

despite the Shah’s support.

3. On 8 June, Manuchehr Eqbal approached Princess Ashraf for her

support of a movement to replace Prime Minister Zahedi with Minister

of Court Hoseyn Ala, to be followed by himself (Eqbal). Princess

Ashraf refused on the basis that Ala was too weak.

4. General Hasan Arfa stated on 7 June that Prime Minister Zahedi

must go and that, if a non-military figure is desired to replace Zahedi, it

should be Hoseyn Ala; if it is to be a military figure, he, Arfa, should be

selected. Arfa feels sure of United States and British support and is con-

fident that their preference is for a military figure.

CS Information Reports 40720–40729. Secret.

the replacement of Prime Minister Zahedi. The report also stated that Zahedi was aware

5. On 9 June General Hasan Akhavi was still in Tehran on two

months’ leave.

aganda so as to make more effective the government propaganda pro-

gram of: 1) preparing public opinion for an oil settlement, 2) convincing

the people that the policy of the Mossadeq government was destructive

and dangerous in its communist collaboration and usurpation of

power, and 3) increasing public support for the Shah and Zahedi. In ad-

dition to continued broadcasting, publishing, and film production, a

popular Tudeh song was given anti-communist lyrics and was broad-

cast frequently over the Tehran and provincial radio stations.

[5 paragraphs (24 lines) not declassified]

2. Summary of Results:

The considerable amount of propaganda put out over the principal

informational media has probably increased the chances of public ac-

ceptance of an oil agreement, if one is concluded. Propaganda and po-

litical action has helped Zahedi retain the premiership in the face of

strong pressure from rival political factions.

[2 paragraphs (6 lines) not declassified]

Folder 4, Quarterly Report April–June 1954. Top Secret.

372.

Editorial Note

In a memorandum to Secretary of State Dulles, July 30, 1954,

Acting Special Assistant for Intelligence Fisher Howe discussed the po-

litical prospects for Iran. He wrote that political power in Iran was exer-

cised by the Shah and the landowning classes. If the Shah were assassi-

nated or removed, the possibility existed that the army would

intervene. Iran’s power structure was maintained by the continuance of

martial law, the enforcement of strict press censorship, the work of the

security forces, the provision of U.S. emergency aid, and the expecta-

tion of an oil settlement favorable to Iran. Howe wrote that “this bal-

ance is likely to be broken by the persistence of fundamental political

and social trends which neither the Shah nor the landowning groups

will be able to alter. The new urban groups, for example—especially in-

tellectuals, professional men, merchants, and workers—will probably

grow in importance as the force of traditional social relationships and

beliefs diminishes in the continuing encounter with Western mod-

ernism.” For the full text of this memorandum, see Foreign Relations,

485).

373.

Editorial Note

In a statement issued in Tehran on August 5, 1954, Dr. Ali Amini,

Chairman of the Iranian delegation to the oil talks, and Howard Page,

Chairman of the negotiating group representing the oil company con-

sortium, announced an agreement “which will restore the flow of Ira-

nian oil to world markets in substantial quantities.” Under the agree-

ment, two operating companies would be formed to run the oil fields

and refinery in Iran on behalf of the NIOC (National Iranian Oil Com-

pany). The NIOC would in turn sell crude and refined oil to an interna-

tional consortium of oil companies. The agreement would remain in

force for 25 years, with the possibility of three 5-year extensions there-

after. For the text of the announcement, see Department of State Bul-

374.

Quarterly Report Prepared in the Directorate of Plans,

Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, October 12, 1954.

IRAN

July–September 1954

I. Summary of PP/PM Action

[6 paragraphs (30 lines) not declassified]

II. Summary of Results

[1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]

The 28 Mordad celebration was an outstanding success and con-

tributed materially to enhancing the prestige of the Zahedi Govern-

ment. It also gave the public further evidence of harmony between the

Shah and Zahedi at a time when rumors that “Zahedi would be re-

placed” were impeding the effectiveness of the present government.

Large-scale propaganda exploitation of the Tudeh roundup has re-

sulted in reducing some of the public’s previous antagonism towards

Folder 5, CS Quarterly Report, July–September 1954. Top Secret.

September 1953–December 1954

the Zahedi government’s security measures and has heightened public

recognition of the Tudeh menace.

III. Significance of Results

While the expected passage of the oil ratification bill successfully

culminates a major Station effort, it remains to be seen whether opposi-

tion to Zahedi will continue to mount. The Shah has stated that he will

continue to support Zahedi if the latter takes steps to raise the general

standard-of-living in Iran and pushes through necessary government

reforms. Active “politicking against Zahedi by some cabinet members,

certain high military officials and various Majlis and Senate members is

increasingly evident, but it is the consensus that, barring unforeseen

circumstances, Zahedi can remain in power as long as he continues to

receive the Shah’s support.

While the uncovering of the Tudeh plot has temporarily increased

the prestige of Zahedi’s government, any direct evidence substanti-

ating rumors that the government is utilizing this expose´ for “political

assassination,” will boomerang strongly against the government.

In sum, although the probable ratification of the oil agreement has

greatly enhanced the chances of maintaining political stability in Iran,

such basic issues as the low standard-of-living, corruption in govern-

ment, and nationalist resentment of foreign influence and strong gov-

ernment measures against any form of political opposition, are all

factors threatening the continued stability of Iran. The Government’s

success in coping with these issues will to a large extent determine its

fate in the coming months.

[name not declassified]

Chief, NEA–4

375.

National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, December 7, 1954.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN IRAN THROUGH 1955

The Problem

To estimate probable trends in Iran in the light of the oil settle-

ment, with particular respect to: (a) the prospects for continued control

by Zahedi or other moderate leaders; (b) the outlook for economic and

political stability; (c) the probable extent of Iran’s will and ability to

contribute to US-backed regional security programs; and (d) the extent

to which continuing US assistance and influence will be important

factors in the situation.

Conclusions

1. Since Mossadeq’s downfall, political power in Iran has largely

reverted to the Shah and the conservative traditional ruling group. The

principal new features of the situation are: (a) the extent to which au-

thoritarian means have been used to curtail opposition; (b) the emer-

gence of the US as an acknowledged major influence in the situation;

and (c) the re-emergence of British political and economic influence.

2. Zahedi’s chances of survival through 1955 are considerably less

than even. We believe that the most likely time for his replacement will

be shortly after the Shah’s return to Iran in February–March 1955. Iran

will probably remain, at least through 1955, in the hands of predomi-

nantly conservative governments acceptable to the Shah and Western-

oriented. Now that the oil dispute has been resolved, however, there is

likely to be a marked increase in political ferment which may weaken

the effectiveness of the government and facilitate a revival of extremist

influence. Moreover, even if the conservatives succeed in retaining con-

trol beyond 1955, they will remain vulnerable to a Tudeh or nationalist-

inspired flareup of popular feeling unless they make some progress in

satisfying popular grievances and in reducing popular distrust of the

gence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelli-

gence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army,

the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. All representatives of the IAC concurred with

the exception of the Atomic Energy Commission Representative and the Assistant to the

Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained on the grounds the subject was

outside their jurisdiction.

September 1953–December 1954

3. The Communist Tudeh Party, having suffered a series of set-

backs, will be in no position to challenge the government seriously in

the next 12 to 14 months. Indeed it may be hard pressed to maintain an

effective organization. Nevertheless, it is the only political opposition

group in Iran which has some organization and discipline, and it is

likely to re-emerge as an active threat unless the government both con-

tinues effective suppression and succeeds in allaying popular griev-

4. The resumption of oil production, together with interim US aid,

will provide Iran with substantial funds for an economic development

program which could do much to meet popular aspirations. However,

the ultimate effectiveness of any such program will depend not only on

the money available but also on the way in which the government

tackles the managerial and political problems involved, and on the

Shah’s willingness to provide firm support. This, in turn, is likely to de-

pend on the ability of the US and UK to work together effectively and

influence the Shah and other Iranian leaders against allowing the pro-

grams to be unduly weakened by corruption, mismanagement, and po-

5. In any event, Iran is likely to remain for a number of years a bas-

ically unstable country, plagued with continuing economic and finan-

cial difficulties. Its underlying social and economic problems are of a

sort which can be solved only over a relatively long period of time and

which, in the process, will generate new tensions and strains. The dis-

ruptive potential of popular discontent acompanying such tensions

and strains will probably be increased unless the ruling group adjusts

to a sharing of power with growing middle class elements. (Paras. 27,

30)

6. In time Iran will almost certainly seek increased participation in

the management and profits of the oil industry. However, the oil ques-

tion is unlikely to re-emerge as a burning issue so long as oil company

policies pay due heed to Iranian sensitivity and aspirations and Iran re-

mains reasonably stable and pro-Western in outlook. (Paras. 32–34)

7. The Shah and many Iranian leaders are convinced that Iran must

maintain close ties with the West if it is to avoid isolation and eventual

Soviet domination. They are probably genuinely interested in eventu-

ally participating in a Western-backed regional defense arrangement.

However, they are unlikely to make such a commitment until: (a) the

Iranian forces have been substantially strengthened, and (b) they are

confident that such a move would not encounter serious opposition

within Iran. Neither condition is likely to be met within the next year or

two. (Paras. 56–57)

8. So long as the Iranian Government continues to expect US eco-

nomic, financial, and military assistance, it will remain responsive to

US influence. As oil revenues are restored and US aid is reduced, how-

ever, Iranians may become increasingly determined to manage their

own affairs and more resistant to US guidance. (Para. 56)

9. At present the Iranian armed forces have extremely limited ca-

pabilities even for a short-term delaying action. Capabilities in this re-

spect could be improved, but this would require outside aid in the form

of equipment, training, and financial support for military purposes. To

increase Iran’s defense capabilities so that Iran could contribute sub-

stantially to Middle East defense would be difficult and time con-

suming. Such a program would require extensive outside aid, a drastic

improvement in the professional standards of the officer corps, the de-

velopment of a will to fight on the part of Iran’s conscript forces, and a

government resolute to resist aggression. (Para. 52)

10. In the short run, the chief effects of an expanded US military aid

program would be political. Such a program would strengthen the self-

confidence and pro-US orientation of the Shah, army leaders, and other

key elements in Iran. If accompanied by improved pay and living con-

ditions, such a program would also tend to lessen the vulnerability of

the armed forces to Tudeh appeals and thereby to improve their long-

term reliability. (Para. 53)

11. The USSR would almost certainly regard it as provocative if

Iran joined a Western-backed regional defense organization, and

would probably respond with strong diplomatic protests and increased

subversive and propaganda efforts. The USSR might also threaten to

invoke the 1921 Irano-Soviet Treaty, which it interprets as permitting it

to introduce troops into Iran in case of threatened invasion from Ira-

nian territory. If establishment of Western bases on Iranian soil ap-

peared to be in prospect, the Soviet reaction would be stronger and

would probably include shows of force along the border. In this case,

the USSR might claim comparable base rights in Iran which would re-

sult in the movement of Soviet forces into Iran. (Para. 61)

12. Iran, under any foreseeable leadership, will continue to resist

Soviet attempts to interfere in Iranian affairs. At the same time it will be

careful to maintain superficially correct relations with the USSR, to

avoid giving Moscow solid grounds for intervention. (Para. 62)

Discussion

I. Political

Present Situation

13. Since the overthrow of Mossadeq in August 1953, political

power in Iran has largely reverted to those who controlled the country

prior to the oil nationalization crisis of 1951. The Shah has been con-

firmed in his central role in the governmental power structure; as the

September 1953–December 1954

most important focus of prestige and political influence in the country;

and, through his continuing personal control of the armed forces, as a

powerful force in political affairs. The mixture of zealots, demagogues,

and reformers who rose to prominence in the Mossadeq era have been

forced into the background along with the mobs they led, leaving the

traditional landowning, commercial, and military groups once again in

control of the offices and perquisites of government. The tribal situa-

tion is quiescent, except for the currently strained relations between the

Shah and the four principal Qashqai leaders who are powerful in

southern Iran.

14. The principal new features of the present power situation are:

(a) the extensive use of authoritarian means—martial law, censorship,

and prosecution or repression of opponents—to curtail opposition to

the regime and to the government; (b) the emergence of the US, which

many Iranians hold responsible for effecting Mossadeq’s downfall and

which has since been the chief financial backer of the government, as

an acknowledged major influence in the situation; and (c) the re-

emergence of British political and economic influence.

15. Under General Zahedi, reasonably orderly and stable gov-

ernment has been established in Iran. The Majlis and Senate have been

reconstituted, and as yet there has been no resumption of the irrespon-

sible bickering and obstructionism which has marked the legislative

process in the past. Zahedi has sought and successfully retained the

support of the Shah and has thus been able to stave off various emer-

gent political conspiracies to replace him. The government has recog-

nized its probable inability to appease the extremists and has generally

dealt firmly with them. It has made a conscientious effort to crush the

Communist Tudeh Party, and through a lucky break leading to the un-

covering of a Tudeh ring in the armed forces has probably given the

Communists a serious setback. It has pushed through legislation for re-

forming the currency, has set up a Planning Council to control the allo-

cation and expenditure of development funds, has presented new anti-

Communist legislation, and has promised measures for land reform

and reduction of corruption in government.

16. Most important of all, the government pressed ahead with an

oil settlement, which was agreed to in principle in August 1954 and fi-

nally ratified, with only slight opposition, in late October. While the

one-sided vote for ratification was mainly the result of strong pressure

by Zahedi and the Shah, the government has apparently succeeded in

convincing a considerable part of the public, at least for the present,

that some form of oil settlement was necessary and that the present one

was the best obtainable under existing circumstances.

17. Despite these achievements, a real basis for lasting stability is

still lacking. The events of the last year have not eliminated the strains

and discontents which accounted for much of the success of Mos-

sadeq’s nationalist appeal (and for much of the appeal of the Tudeh

Party). Extreme nationalism itself has been repressed rather than de-

stroyed as a major political force. The government has failed to achieve

widespread support and at best appears to be accepted as one which

has restored law and order, which may with US support and oil rev-

enues be able to provide some benefits for the country, and which in

any event presently has the will and ability to put down opposition. It

has not succeeded in checking inflation or in making much tangible

progress toward economic and social betterment—two points of partic-

ular importance because of their impact on the potentially politically

influential urban middle and lower class elements.

18. Because of the traditional practice of using public office for pri-

vate and family gain, many officials, including Zahedi himself, have

been accused of the same graft and corruption which have long encour-

aged popular cynicism about the government. The use of authoritarian

methods has tended to create some adverse reaction of its own: it has

probably generated opposition and may drive some moderate refor-

mists into the arms of Tudeh or other extremist groups.

19. Moreover, despite Zahedi’s success to date in retaining the sup-

port of the Shah and in obtaining the cooperation of the Majlis and

Senate, he has few reliable supporters in either body. His success is

largely due to general recognition that an oil settlement was necessary

and that the removal of Zahedi would have jeopardized the settlement

and incurred the disapproval of the US and the UK. Many legislators

probably also reasoned that Zahedi could be made the scapegoat in

case the political atmosphere changed and opposition to the oil settle-

ment became active and widespread.

20. Now that the oil settlement has been achieved, it is uncertain as

to how long Zahedi himself is likely to remain in office. There is also the

more basic question whether, under Zahedi or any likely successor,

Iran will develop a basis for political and social stability.

Probable Developments through 1955

21. At least through 1955, we believe the government will remain

in the hands of predominantly conservative forces acceptable to the

Shah and willing to continue with a Western-oriented policy. Despite

the Tudeh Party’s continuing long-range potential, it will be in no posi-

tion to challenge the government seriously during the next 12 to 14

months and may indeed be hard pressed to maintain an effective orga-

nization. So long as Zahedi is Prime Minister, the government will al-

most certainly continue a fairly firm policy of repression. This will in-

hibit the effectiveness of such violent critics of pro-Western policies as

Mullah Kashani, Mozzafer Baghai of the Toilers Party, and the leaders

September 1953–December 1954

associated with the pro-Mossadeq National Resistance Movement.

Some of these, however, may be able to develop contacts and influence

among dissatisfied elements.

22. There is likely to be a marked increase in political ferment. The

settlement of the oil dispute has removed an important deterrent to re-

sumption of the political maneuvering and intrigue characteristic of the

pre-Mossadeq era and has probably increased the desire of deputies

and senators, many of whom paid heavily to insure their election, to

benefit personally from the oil settlement. The efforts of the govern-

ment to move ahead with an internal reform and development pro-

gram are likely to encounter strong opposition from some deputies and

senators and indifference from many others. At the same time the gov-

ernment is likely to be confronted with demands, sincere and other-

wise, for speedier action to control inflation and improve living

standards, for improvements in education, public health, working con-

ditions, and for restoration of freedom of the press and assembly. Per-

sonal antagonisms and rivalries are also likely to come to the surface

and provincial and tribal resentments against the government may be

intensified.

23. Zahedi could probably survive these difficulties if he had the

strong support of the Shah, since the various aspirants for his job are

likely to remain too weak and divided among themselves to bring ef-

fective pressure for his removal without active encouragement from

the Palace. The Shah’s continued willingness to provide such backing,

however, is uncertain. His underlying distrust of any strong person-

ality, his predilection for political intrigue, and his tendency to vacillate

all militate against his supporting Zahedi on a sustained basis, particu-

larly now that the oil settlement has been achieved. Moreover, the

probable increase in political activity in the months to come is likely to

make it easier for Zahedi’s rivals to persuade the Shah, who is keenly

sensitive to political currents within Iran, that Zahedi no longer is ac-

ceptable to the political community and should be replaced. The Shah

may be dissuaded from making an early switch by the difficulty of

finding a satisfactory replacement, by fear of losing US or UK support,

or by concern over the future of the reform and development program.

However, his personal inclinations appear to be in the direction of

eventually replacing Zahedi.

24. Zahedi’s chances of survival through 1955 are considerably less

than even. We believe that the most likely time for his replacement will

be shortly after the Shah returns to Iran in February–March 1955. Par-

liamentary maneuvers to unseat him may develop during the Shah’s

projected three months trip to Europe and the US beginning in De-

cember 1954 but would be unlikely to succeed in view of the Shah’s

probable desire to have no change of government during his absence.

Zahedi’s position will be open to further attack if he goes through with

his plans to go to Europe for necessary medical attention following the

Shah’s return. Moreover, the possibility of assassination is always

present. Finally, the terms of the entire Majlis and one-third of the

Senate will expire in the spring of 1956, and toward the end of 1955 the

Shah may take the occasion to remove Zahedi and install a “service”

government for the electoral period as has been done frequently in the

past. On the other hand, should the Shah still be prepared to back

Zahedi as the year ends, the latter’s position would be strengthened,

since he would presumably have some part in deciding which candi-

dates would obtain the all-important support of the government and

the Shah.

25. Zahedi’s removal would not necessarily lead to any significant

change in the over-all stability and orientation of the government, since

the Shah would remain the most influential single figure in the gov-

ernmental structure and since the present government’s major policies

are as much his as Zahedi’s. However, a successor might not be as

willing as Zahedi to use force to maintain order. Furthermore, suc-

cessful efforts to remove Zahedi would encourage similar attacks on

his successor and might accelerate the return of extremist groups to po-

sitions of political influence. Such a development would tend to revive

the pre-Mossadeq pattern of political instability. In this situation, each

prime minister in turn would secure a temporary majority in parlia-

ment by promising a redistribution of spoils. Sooner or later, however,

he would no longer be able to meet the continuing demands of his sup-

porters and would be forced out in favor of someone else who was

willing to promise more. If, in the meantime, the Shah had not taken ac-

tion in the face of a succession of weak governments, a possibility of a

coup by a strong military leader would have been created.

26. None of the leading candidates for Zahedi’s position has any

solid political support and, moreover, none shows any great promise as

a national leader. The most prominent current candidate is Senator Ma-

nuchehr Eqbal, an experienced government official, believed to be par-

ticularly well-disposed toward the British and to have the confidence of

the Shah. The Shah might also appoint his Minister of Court, Hosein

Ala, as an interim prime minister. In any case, the effectiveness of any

successor to Zahedi would depend on the willingness and ability of the

Shah and the Prime Minister to cooperate.

September 1953–December 1954

Long-Range Problems and Prospects

27. The conservative elements now in power will probably be able

to retain their control beyond 1955 if they remain prepared to continue

the authoritarian methods now in effect. However, unless they make

some progress in satisfying popular grievances and reducing popular

distrust of the government, they will remain vulnerable to the sort of

flareup, under Tudeh or nationalist auspices, which was touched off by

Razmara’s assassination and the oil issue in 1951. In the long run, more-

over, unless the traditional landowning group adjusts to a sharing of

political power with growing urban middle class elements, there will

probably be an increase in the disruptive potential of popular discon-

tent. While the armed forces will constitute a fairly reliable instrumen-

tality for coping with popular disturbance, they are not immune from

grievances common among civilians. A marked decline in popular ac-

ceptance of the present ruling group may therefore have an adverse ef-

fect on the reliability of the security forces.

28. The Shah appears to recognize the need to attack these prob-

lems before popular disappointment with the government reaches dan-

gerous proportions. However, many difficulties will be encountered

before even a modest start can be made. The government’s current at-

tempts to curtail corruption and build up public confidence in the bu-

reaucracy will make little progress without the active support of the

Shah. Even if government and military salaries are raised sufficiently to

provide a decent living, corruption will remain a major characteristic of

Iranian political life until such time as a tradition of public service has

become established. Efforts to spur social reform will almost certainly

encounter strong resistance from vested interests. Moreover, as the

government may fail to recognize, the development of greater political

stability will probably require, in addition to material advances, greater

effort to enlist the support of the opinion-forming intellectual and re-

formist elements. So long as these elements remain excluded from ef-

fective participation in political affairs and prevented by censorship

from expressing their views freely, they are likely to maintain an atti-

tude of strong opposition.

29. We believe that progress will be made on the strength of the oil

revenues and the impetus provided by US aid. In view of the resistance

likely to be encountered, however, the extent of that progress will prob-

ably depend on the willingness of the Shah to provide active, con-

tinuous, and consistent support. Given the Shah’s personal character-

istics, this willingness in turn is likely to depend on the ability of the US

and UK to convince the Shah of the necessity of such support and to

keep his attention focused on the problem.

30. In any event, however, Iran is likely to remain a basically un-

steady country for a number of years. Iran’s underlying social and eco-

nomic problems are of a sort which can be solved only over a relatively

long period of time and which, in the process, generate new tensions

and stresses. With oil revenues in process of being restored and a bene-

ficial relationship with the West established, Iran is in a better position

to attack these problems than it was before. However, they will be suc-

cessfully solved only through a continuous and sustained effort.

The Succession to the Throne

31. In view of the key role of the Shah in the Iranian political

system, the death of the present monarch could be a serious blow to Ira-

nian stability, particularly since he has no male heirs of his own and has

refrained from openly designating a successor. His death would at

least create an opportunity for extensive political bickering over the

succession, in which Tudeh and the ultranationalists might revive their

demands for a republic. Should the Shah’s death take place in the

present political environment, the conservative elements now in the as-

cendancy, with the military high command taking a prominent part,

would probably succeed in stabilizing the situation. If the Shah were

assassinated, the present leadership’s ability to maintain control would

probably be enhanced by popular revulsion against the assassins. Even

if the succession were quickly established, however, the new Shah

would have to establish his authority, and initially, at least, his ability

to exercise the positive leadership which Iran needs would be less than

that of the present monarch.

The Future of the Oil Issue

32. The recent oil settlement, though not a complete victory in Ira-

nian eyes, involved sufficiently substantial concessions to Iran’s aspira-

tions to generate a significant momentum of good will and sense of

achievement. Moreover, the oil settlement removes a political irritant,

which for three years has stultified or diverted efforts to solve other ur-

gent social and economic problems, and enables Iranians to hope for

improvements both personally and nationally. The settlement will

probably also improve relations between Iran and the West. The mo-

rale of most Iranian leaders will be improved not only by the revenues

in prospect, but also by somewhat greater Iranian participation in the

control and operation of the industry and by the apparent elimination

September 1953–December 1954

of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company’s ability to interfere in internal Ira-

nian matters.

33. With the passing of time and the strengthening effect of oil rev-

enues, however, difficulties may arise over the oil question. Iran will al-

most certainly share the desire of other Middle East producers for in-

creasing oil revenues and for exercising a growing voice in oil policy

and operations at the expense of the oil companies. It will be extremely

sensitive about real or apparent slights to its prestige and independ-

ence by foreign oil interests, particularly British, and Iranian politicians

may attempt to play off the consortium members and interested gov-

ernments against each other. Finally, the oil settlement may arouse ex-

cessive hopes of benefits which cannot be achieved.

34. These dangers do not appear imminent, however, and in any

event the risks to the consortium and to the Western Powers in future

oil operations are probably not now significantly greater than those in-

volved in Western oil operations in other Middle East countries. If the

consortium members and the interested Western nations pursue pol-

icies which take into account Iranian sensitivity and aspirations, and if

the country maintains a reasonable degree of political stability, pros-

pects for satisfactory oil operations with accompanying benefits to all

concerned are good.

The Outlook for the Tudeh Party

35. The Communist Tudeh Party is currently at one of the low

points in its history, though it remains the only political opposition

group in Iran that has some organization and discipline. Strong pop-

ular opposition to Tudeh flared up at the time of Mossadeq’s downfall,

and since then the party has been subjected to severe governmental re-

strictions and uninterrupted press and radio attacks. These develop-

ments have almost certainly taken a heavy toll among its sympathizers

and have probably cut into its membership as well. The uncovering in

August 1954 of a Tudeh network in the armed forces and the subse-

quent arrest of hundreds of persons who were implicated has been a se-

vere blow. The discovery and confiscation of the clandestine printing

plants of Tudeh and of its youth organization has been a further set-

back, as has been the recent intensification of government efforts to root

Tudeh members and sympathizers out of the bureaucracy. For the

present, in the face of government plans to introduce stringent laws pe-

nalizing Communist membership or activities, the party is almost cer-

tainly primarily concerned with attempting to maintain an effective

organization.

36. The recent spy ring discoveries have not yet established the ex-

tent of Tudeh penetration of the Iranian armed forces, and Tudeh

strength in the bureaucracy remains unknown. Even at a minimum,

however, indications are that Tudeh penetration of the armed forces

was sufficient to carry on an effective intelligence collection effort, to

develop a capability for strategic sabotage and political assassination,

to acquire weapons and equipment, to protect Tudeh members from

the police, and to facilitate clandestine transit across Iran’s borders of

Soviet and Iranian Communists. The extent of this Tudeh penetration

of the armed forces reinforces previous indications that various minis-

tries, notably Justice and Education, also have been infiltrated. It also

points up both the weakness of Iranian security against espionage and

the success of the Communists in recruiting Iranian personnel for their

covert operations. The fact that the Tudeh ring in the armed forces ap-

parently confined its efforts to espionage and the development of a sab-

otage potential suggests that in present circumstances the USSR recog-

nizes that its program must be confined to developing assets rather

than fostering an early attempt to seize control of the armed forces.

37. At least for the short run, recent stringent measures against the

Tudeh Party have reduced its ability to promote overt opposition to the

oil agreement and the Western position in Iran and have stimulated

public and official awareness of the Tudeh threat. If these measures are

continued against Tudeh adherents and not used to harass political op-

ponents, the dependability of the armed forces and the bureaucracy

will increase. On the other hand, the severity of official action against

Tudeh members may adversely affect popular attitudes toward the

government, which is already condemned in many quarters for oppres-

sive measures, and as a result may enable the Tudeh Party to share in

popular sympathy for other opposition elements which also have been

targets of the government crackdown. The government’s long-range

chances of success in its anti-Tudeh measures will depend both on its

readiness to remain consistently firm and alert, and on its ability to

make some progress in allaying social, political, and economic griev-

ances which make Iranians vulnerable to Tudeh exploitation. The gov-

ernment’s effectiveness, in both of these respects, will in turn depend

on firm backing from the Shah.

II. Economic

Present Situation

38. The chief economic accomplishment of the Zahedi government

has been the agreement between Iran and a consortium of eight

September 1953–December 1954

Western firms for restoration of Iran’s oil industry. This agreement,

which calls for development of Iranian oil production by the end of the

third full year of operation to a level yielding the Iranian Government

revenues of approximately $175 million a year, will provide Iran with

substantial funds for a program of economic rehabilitation and devel-

opment. Although the oil companies have made no further specific

commitments, they have formally indicated that they expect Iran’s rev-

enues to average out at least that level for the remainder of the 40-year

contract period. In addition, Operating Company purchases of rials for

local operating expenses will add approximately $34 million annually

to Iran’s foreign exchange income. The resumption of oil production

has relieved the government of the cost of meeting the NIOC payroll

and will also have various indirect economic benefits in the southern

oil areas.

39. In other respects, the Iranian economy has done little more than

mark time in the period since Zahedi’s advent to power. The provision

of $70 million in US emergency assistance has enabled Zahedi to pay

the government’s running expenses, and the oil settlement has bol-

stered general business confidence and Iran’s foreign credit standing.

On the other hand, there has been little development activity other than

that undertaken in connection with the $23. million US technical

assistance program. Moreover, during the past year the urban cost of

living has continued to rise sharply, thus increasing the already heavy

economic pressure on government employees, factory workers, and

others in the fixed income groups. In addition, the government’s finan-

cial position has been weakened by a wave of uncoordinated credit

purchases this summer from foreign suppliers eager to cash in on the

expected resumption of oil revenues. These credit deals, involving

rails, buses, and other items, are estimated to total up to $100 million.

40. The government has obtained US pledges of an additional

million for direct budgetary support. In addition it has taken some

steps, in part at US urging, to improve its future financial management.

Currency reform legislation was pushed through in July 1954, pro-

viding the government with increased flexibility in monetary matters.

Following the wave of profligate government buying this summer, an

Economic Council, made up of the director of the Plan Organization,

the governor of the Bank Melli, the Ministers of Finance and National

Economy, and the Prime Minister, was established to plan, coordinate,

and control government finances and developmental expenditures.

The government’s program also calls for prompt reorganization of the

government tobacco monopoly and of the customs and income tax

administration.

Probable Developments

41. With the achievement of an oil settlement the government is

now faced with the task of setting up and carrying out an economic re-

habilitation and development program which will be effective in

raising general living standards. Promises of economic development

have been bandied about ever since World War II, but no substantial

progress has been made. Moreover, continuing inflation has worsened

the economic position of the politically most volatile and articulate ele-

ments of the population, while at the same time hopes have been

raised, first by oil nationalization and more recently by the solution of

the oil dispute. While economic grievances are not the only factors af-

fecting popular attitudes toward the government, there will almost cer-

tainly be a serious rise in unwillingness to accept the regime unless

some tangible progress in economic development is made.

42. Over the long run, Iran will have substantial oil revenues

which could be devoted to financing a development program. In the

first full year of operation, however, Iran will obtain only about $60

million in oil revenues, and much if not all of this may be used up in

meeting current operating expenses. Although projected US aid for

cover the current rate of deficit—pressures for an increase in salaries of

government workers, who have been particularly hard hit by inflation,

will almost certainly become stronger. After the first year of operation,

however, oil revenues will rise, levelling off at about $175 million in the

third year, and by then the government’s efforts to curtail waste and

corruption and to increase other revenues may be bringing in some re-

turn. Plan Director Ebtahaj hopes, probably somewhat optimistically,

that these latter measures will enable the government to support itself

out of ordinary revenues by March 1956, thereby freeing the entire oil

income for developmental use.

43. In any event, the ultimate effectiveness of any development

program will depend not only on the amount of money available but

also on the manner in which the government tackles the managerial

and political problems connected with it. Since most economic devel-

opment projects are slow in getting underway and even slower in pro-

ducing their full economic effects, there is a danger that without pro-

grams which have an immediate social or economic impact public

confidence in the over-all program may be dissipated. These difficulties

will be compounded if lethargy, corruption, and mismanagement are

September 1953–December 1954

allowed to delay the program or to divert its funds to private pockets or

unproductive ventures. Moreover, the desired political effect will not

be obtained unless special care is taken to assure sufficiently broad par-

ticipation in the benefits of these projects.

44. The Shah and Zahedi appear convinced of the need for an effec-

tive development program and have some capable men associated

with them in this effort. However, the problems ahead cannot be solved

without effective US and UK guidance and support. Given such guid-

ance and support, the Economic Planning Council may be able to

commit the government to worthwhile projects which, though unpop-

ular with certain vested interests, would be difficult for subsequent

governments to repudiate. Iran will also have continuing need for tech-

nical assistance in carrying out projects in the field.

45. Finally, while the economic development programs currently

envisaged should eventually result in a significant increase in over-all

output and a rise in the general standard of living, Iran will continue to

be plagued by recurrent economic and financial problems which will

require firm government action. Unless carefully managed, the devel-

opment programs may themselves contribute seriously to inflationary

pressures.

46. In general, however, Iran will probably make some gradual

and uneven progress in improving its economic position. Both public

and private foreign trade is likely to increase, particularly in view of the

strong and growing desire of Japan, Germany, and Italy to participate

in the Iranian market. Barter trade with the USSR may increase in abso-

lute terms, though its relative importance is likely to decline in view of

Iran’s expanding relations with the Western world.

III. Military

47. Iran’s present armed forces, numbering over 150,000, are orga-

nized primarily for control of the tribes and other internal security

duties. Their traditional loyalty is to the Palace rather than to the gov-

ernment as a whole, and all but the Gendarme´rie report directly to the

Shah as Commander-in-Chief rather than through any civilian min-

ister. The recent uncovering of a widespread Tudeh ring within the

armed forces indicates that they have been vulnerable to subversive in-

fluences. However, most of the currently disloyal elements appear to

have been eliminated or identified and we believe that the armed forces

can be presently considered fairly reliable.

48. Since 1950 the US has assisted in efforts to modernize and im-

prove the armed forces through maintenance of military missions to

the Army and the Gendarme´rie, and through provision of military

equipment. Of the $110 million in such equipment aid allocated thus

far, about $76 million had been shipped by mid-1954. The mission to

the Army is to be augmented by five US training teams at brigade or di-

vision level in early 1955.

49. While some improvements have been effected through these

programs, the Iranian military establishment is still of generally poor

quality. Although it is generally capable of fulfilling its primary mis-

sion of maintaining internal security, it would be unable to offer signifi-

cant resistance to a Soviet attack. Only a start has been made at devel-

oping adequate standards of leadership and tactical proficiency.

Because of a general lack of technical skills and experience and a poor

logistic system, Iran has had difficulty in absorbing even the limited

amounts of US equipment thus far made available. Low pay and the

general atmosphere of slackness, graft, and favoritism have weakened

morale, particularly among the junior officers; these factors were prob-

ably in large measure responsible for Tudeh’s success in winning sup-

porters among the armed forces. Finally, Iran’s potential for defense

against a Soviet attack is weakened by its lack of a modern martial tra-

dition and of any strong popular sense of national loyalty.

50. The development of the “northern tier” concept of a regional

defense system based on the Turk-Pakistani agreement has empha-

sized the potential importance of the Zagros Mountain chain in Iran as

a major barrier to any Soviet military advance into the Middle East. If

an Iranian military force could be developed which was capable of ef-

fecting substantial delay in the Zagros passes, it would constitute an

important asset in defense of the area.

51. An effort to create such an Iranian military capability would re-

quire a long-term program involving US expenditures very substan-

tially in excess of present levels. The first and basic requirement would

be to provide Iranian combat units with sufficient modern equipment

and technical and tactical training to bring them up to adequate stand-

ards of combat effectiveness. Moreover, for such a force to function ef-

fectively additional outlays would be required for redeployment of

troops and military installations from their present exposed positions

to more defensible points in the Zagros Mountains area; the relocation

or new construction of military stores, arsenals, and factories; and the

construction of a number of military roads linking strategic defensive

points. Increased pay for the armed forces would almost certainly be

required if morale were not to remain a major problem. A program on

September 1953–December 1954

this scale would also require collateral economic aid since, even with

the oil revenues anticipated in the next three years, Iran will be unable

to afford the construction and development involved, for example, in

moving military facilities and industries or in building military roads.

52. At present the Iranian armed forces have extremely limited ca-

pabilities even for a short term delaying action. Capabilities in this re-

spect could be improved, but this would require outside aid in the form

of equipment, training, and financial support for military purposes. To

increase Iran’s defense capabilities so that Iran could contribute sub-

stantially to Middle East defense would be difficult and time con-

suming. Such a program would require extensive outside aid, a drastic

improvement in the professional standards of the officers corps, the de-

velopment of a will to fight on the part of Iran’s conscript forces (which

would in turn depend largely on the over-all state of national morale),

and a government resolute to resist aggression.

53. At least in the short run, therefore, the chief effects of an ex-

panded US military aid program would be political. Such a program

would strengthen the self-confidence and pro-US orientation of the

Shah, Army leaders, and other key elements in Iran and would demon-

strate to them that the US has not written Iran off militarily. If accompa-

nied by improved pay and living conditions, such a program would

also tend to lessen the vulnerability of the armed forces to Tudeh ap-

peals and thereby to improve their long-term reliability.

IV. Foreign Affairs

Relations with the US

54. Under the Zahedi government, and with the strong support of

the Shah, Iran has moved toward alignment with the West, particularly

the US. The timely extension of US support and guidance has made the

US the dominant Western influence in the Iranian Government. The

present leaders of Iran appear to welcome this relationship.

55. The Shah and other important leaders have shown themselves

generally responsive to US advice over settlement of the oil issue, re-

sumption of relations with the UK, methods of improving the armed

forces, and certain internal matters such as economic planning and ad-

ministration. Iran has generally supported the US in issues before the

UN and tends to follow US advice in its relations with other Asian

states. Morever, since the signing of the Turk-Pakistani agreement and

the start of US military aid to Pakistan and Iraq, Iranian leaders, partic-

ularly the Shah as Commander-in-Chief, have expressed growing in-

terest in eventual participation in US-backed regional defense prepara-

tions. Iran has maintained a firm position in the face of Soviet protests

over the prospects for its defense cooperation with the West, and the

government has risked Soviet displeasure by firm measures against the

Tudeh Party and Communist subversion.

56. So long as the Iranian Government continues to expect US eco-

nomic, financial, and military assistance, it will remain responsive to

US influence. As oil revenues are restored and US aid is reduced Ira-

nians may become increasingly determined to manage their own af-

fairs and more resistant to US guidance. We do not believe, however,

that developing Iranian self-reliance is likely to alter significantly the

conviction of the government, and of the Shah in particular, that Iran

requires Western support and friendly relations if it is to avoid isola-

tion and eventual Soviet domination. The Shah is especially desirous of

building up the army and regards the US as the only feasible source of

the military assistance required to do so. He may also believe that ob-

vious US concern about Iran gives him a favorable bargaining position.

Even if he is unsuccessful in obtaining assistance on the scale he be-

lieves necessary to give Iran effective forces, his urgent desire for such

assistance as he can get will continue to give the US bargaining power

with him. The willingness of Iranian Government leaders, including

the Shah, to make firm commitments to the West is likely to be limited,

not by indifference to the Soviet danger but rather by the proximity of

Soviet power, by public distrust and dislike of undue foreign influence,

and by uncertainty as to the effectiveness of Western military support

in the event of war.

Iran and Regional Defense

57. The Shah and many Iranian leaders would like to participate in

a regional defense arrangement backed by the West, and they will

probably continue to advance the idea both for motives of prestige and

as a means of securing maximum US military aid and defense support.

Under present circumstances, however, they would probably be reluc-

tant to join any regional grouping until: (a) the Iranian military estab-

lishment had been substantially strengthened, and (b) they were confi-

dent that such a move would not encounter serious opposition within

Iran. Neither condition is likely to be met within the next year or two at

least. However, Iran might engage in informal staff talks with Iraq and

possibly Turkey or Pakistan within this period.

Relations with the UK

58. Iranian-UK diplomatic relations have been resumed and, with

the oil settlement, tension between the two governments has subsided.

However, widespread suspicions of the British persist. Because of the

fact that most Iranian leaders now tend to look more to the US than to

the UK for support and guidance, the expansion of UK diplomatic in-

fluence is likely to be slow, and the UK will not, in the foreseeable fu-

ture, regain its former position as the dominant Western power in Ira-

September 1953–December 1954

nian affairs. Nevertheless, many prominent Iranians have long-

standing British ties, and their responsiveness to British influence is

likely to increase with the revival of British commercial activity. At

least some restoration of former British commercial and banking con-

nections with Iran, which were close and mutually profitable, will al-

most certainly take place, particularly since more than half of Iran’s oil

revenues will not be transferable into dollars. The British are also likely

to make a comeback in construction and engineering, although they

will probably encounter increasing competition from the West

Germans in this and other business fields.

59. The UK currently agrees with the US on the desirability of

Zahedi’s remaining in office. However, various differences are likely to

arise between the US and UK. The most likely source of major US–UK

differences concerns Iran’s role in Middle East defense. The UK not

only has a low opinion of Iran’s military potential and reliability, and

looks with considerable reserve on the Shah’s military aspirations, but

also appears to believe that Iranian participation in a defense arrange-

ment would unnecessarily provoke the USSR without adequate com-

pensating benefits to the West. Moreover, the UK is apparently less

convinced than is the US of the urgency of the need to allay widespread

social and economic grievances in Iran. Other US–UK differences will

probably arise over commercial and financial conflicts of interest.

Relations with the USSR

60. The Zahedi government’s actions and policies with respect to

the oil dispute, resumption of relations with the UK, desire for in-

creased US military aid, the uncovering of Tudeh sabotage and espio-

nage rings, and firm action against the Tudeh Party have almost cer-

tainly appeared to Soviet leaders as a setback to their interests in Iran.

Nevertheless, the USSR is unlikely to respond with force, estimating

that such action would almost certainly provoke a violent Western re-

action. The USSR will probably continue its propaganda efforts to dis-

credit the oil consortium and US influence in Iran, and will be alert to

exploit any opportunities for subversion and internal disunity in Iran.

At the same time, it will probably continue its trade with Iran so long as

commercial and political advantages seem to warrant it, and may make

further conciliatory gestures toward Iran. It has, for example, now initi-

ated an agreement with Iran on boundary disputes and on the restora-

tion of gold and foreign exchange which the USSR has owed Iran.

61. The USSR would almost certainly regard it as provocative if

Iran joined a Western-backed regional defense organization, and

would probably respond with strong diplomatice protests and in-

creased subversive and propaganda efforts. The USSR might also

threaten to invoke the 1921 Irano-Soviet Treaty, which it interprets as

permitting it to introduce troops into Iran in case of threatened inva-

sion from Iranian territory. If establishment of Western bases on Ira-

nian soil appeared to be in prospect, the Soviet reaction would be

stronger and would probably include shows of force along the border.

In this case, the USSR might claim comparable base rights which would

result in the movement of Soviet forces into Iran.

62. Iran, under any foreseeable leadership, will continue to resist

Soviet attempts to interfere in Iranian affairs. At the same time it will be

careful to maintain superficially correct relations with the USSR, to

avoid giving Moscow solid grounds for intervention.

Appendix

Summary of the Terms of the Oil Agreement between the

International Oil Consortium and the Government of Iran,

Signed 30 October 1954

Operation of the Oil Industry

The operation of the Iranian oil industry, including production

and exploration as well as operation of the refinery at Abadan, will be

conducted by two Dutch-registered companies formed by the Interna-

tional Oil Consortium. Each of the operating companies, one of which

will be responsible for production and exploration, and the other for re-

fining, will have seven directors, two of them nominated by Iran. The

companies will enjoy “beneficial use” of the former Anglo-Iranian in-

stallations and properties in Iran, with the exception of the Kerman-

shah refinery, the Naft-i-shah field, and internal distribution facilities

which will be operated exclusively by the National Iranian Oil Com-

pany. Legal title to all former Anglo-Iranian Oil properties is trans-

ferred immediately to the government of Iran.

Scope of Concession Rights

The exclusive exploitation rights of the Consortium over an area of

100,000 square miles will run for twenty-five years, with provisions for

three five-year extensions. After the initial twenty-five year period, the

Consortium must surrender 20 percent of its total area with each five-

year extension of the concession term.

September 1953–December 1954

Satisfaction of Claims

To compensate the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company for the Kerman-

shah, Naft-i-shah, and internal distribution facilities, and for the losses

and damages arising from nationalization, Iran will pay the Company

the equivalent of $70 million in 10 equal annual installments, without

interest, beginning 1 January 1957. (By a collateral agreement, the

Anglo-Iranian Oil Company will receive the equivalent of $600 million

from the other Consortium members as payment for their participating

interests.)

Guaranteed and Target Levels of Production and Refining

The Exploration and Producing Company guarantees to produce

during the first three years of the agreement the following:

1955—17,500,000 cubic meters of crude oil

1956—27,500,000 cubic meters of crude oil

1957—35,000,000 cubic meters of crude oil

The Refining Company will strive, but does not guarantee to refine

the following:

1955—7,500,000 cubic meters

1956—12,000,000 cubic meters

1957—15,000,000 cubic meters

Anticipated Revenues

Iran will receive 50 percent of the net profits of the Consortium and

will receive its payments in sterling, 40 percent of which, under a sepa-

rate and secret UK-Iranian convertibility agreement, will be convertible

to dollars. It is estimated that after the initial starting period of three

months, oil revenue for Iran during the first three years will total the

equivalent of $385 million at present prices and costs: $60 million in the

first full operating year, $150 million in the second, and $175 million in

the third. In a supplementary note the Consortium stated that it ex-

pected oil revenues thereafter to remain at or above the third year level,

though it could make no firm commitment to that effect.

Financial Benefit to Iran of Present Agreement

as Compared With Past Agreement

The highest level of oil production, and of direct oil revenue to

Iran, was reached in 1950; AIOC then produced about 35 million cubic

meters of oil and paid to Iran in taxes and royalties about $44. million.

Iran’s receipts for the same level of production, which is guaranteed for

1957, will amount to an estimated $175 million.
