723.2515/1663: Telegram
[Document 242]
The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, October 31, 1925—1 p.m.
For Pershing: Your telegram October 29, 8 p.m. See my telegram of Oct. 29, 5 p.m.
The following has just been received from Ambassador Collier dated October 30, 1
p.m.:
This morning Minister for Foreign Affairs informed me that Chilean Cabinet
yesterday decided to make every sacrifice necessary to avoid rupture of
plebiscite; that wide divergence of views exists between Edwards and
Government; that Edwards will be summoned to Santiago at once; and that if
he does not then agree with Government’s policy he will be replaced.
Minister also informed me that, as General Pershing had expressed opinion
that Chile ought to have no officer in province of higher rank than colonel,
present commanding officer would be called to Santiago very soon and
would not be sent back to Tacna. Minister also said that present intendente
would probably be replaced this coming week and would probably be
succeeded by former Minister for Foreign Affairs, Jorge Matte. The Minister
strongly requests that you instruct General Pershing to postpone action on
proposed resolutions for week or so until Government of Chile can carry out
foregoing program. In deference to difficult situation of Government here
and its manifest desire to carry the award into effect honorably, and also in
view of its difficulties with jingoistic element and with extreme national
sentiment of population of Arica, I sincerely hope that you can grant
Minister’s request.
Today at noon I replied to Collier that you are on ground with full knowledge of local
conditions and with authority to carry out fair and free election as provided in award;
that you possess my full confidence and that of Arbitrator; that it is impossible under
the circumstances for me to give you instructions and directions about details of
manner in which award is to be carried out; and that I will transmit for your
information and careful consideration the request of Chilean Minister for Foreign
Affairs.
KELLOGG
