874
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
to them.3 (Our previous discussions of this program [less than 1 line
not declassified] have been limited [1 line not declassified].) Additionally,
we would suggest that in the policy-level approach, the sensitivity of
this arms supply program be stressed and [less than 1 line not declassified]
be urged to coordinate any covert arms support through us.4
Stansfield Turner5
3 Carter drew a vertical line in the left margin beside this sentence.
4 At the bottom of the page, Carter wrote: “Let us move to carry out Zia’s request,
maintaining requisite secrecy” and initialed “J.” In his attached October 15 memorandum
to Turner, Brzezinski noted that messages from Carter requesting this assistance on
behalf of Zia had been sent to Giscard and Thatcher; [text and 1 line not declassified]. Also
attached but not printed is a draft message to Giscard and Thatcher; Carter made two
minor corrections and crossed out a sentence that read: “I think we agree that it is
important for the Soviets not to conclude that the Afghans can be easily crushed, and
it is also important for the Pakistanis not to feel isolated.” In the upper right corner of
the draft, Carter wrote: “Zbig, ok” and initialed “J.”
5 Turner signed “Stan Turner” above his typed signature.
329.
Editorial Note
Two telegrams reported on Afghan President Babrak Karmal’s first
official visit to the Soviet Union and the broader issue of the ongoing
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. On the eve of Karmal’s arrival, in
telegram 16143 from Moscow, October 15, 1980, the Embassy noted:
“the Soviets are not particularly optimistic about their Afghan adven-
ture. They profess to be looking for a political settlement that could
lead to a Soviet troop withdrawal and an improvement of relations
with the United States. The initiation of talks between Pakistan and
the Babrak Karmal government is seen as the first priority in moving
toward this political settlement, with the aim of such talks being to
halt passage of aid to the insurgents. They are not, however, willing
to sacrifice Babrak Karmal at this point and there is no hint of excessive
concern or dismay in the Soviet presentations.” (National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800492–0389)
Karmal was in Moscow October 16–17. A dinner speech by Brezh-
nev and a joint Soviet-Afghan statement signed on October 16 reiterated
the Soviet position that it would not withdraw its forces until the
insurgency ended. (Kevin Klose, “Brezhnev Renews Backing Of Afghan
Government, Says Time on Its Side,” Washington Post, October 17, 1980,
