North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978 1009 If you approve these recommendations I will assume that no further significant changes in the US negotiating position are intended, and direct that our negotiations about the Common Fund be conducted accordingly. 319. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, October 21, 1978 SUBJECT Invitation from Prime Minister Manley to Attend a North/South Summit: December 28–29, 1978 Prime Minister Manley has sent you two letters (Tabs B and C),2 inviting you to Jamaica on December 28th and 29th to meet informally with Chancellor Schmidt, Prime Ministers Fraser, Nordli, and Trudeau and a few leaders of developing countries, including Nyerere and Perez. After weighing the pros and cons of your attendance, the State Department recommends against your participation.3 We agree with 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Jamaica: Prime Minister Michael Norman Manley, 5/77–12/78. Confidential. Aaron initialed the memorandum on Brzezinski’s behalf. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Retype. J.” An unknown person wrote below that: “retyped 10/25/78.” 2 Tab B, attached but not printed, is an October 4 letter from Jamaican Ambassador Alfred Rattray to Carter transmitting a message from Manley. Carter initialed at the top of Rattray’s letter and wrote: “Nice regrets.” Tab C, attached but not printed, is an October 13 letter from Manley to Carter. Carter initialed at the top of Manley’s letter. 3 In an October 14 memorandum to Brzezinski, Tarnoff discussed the Department of State’s “view that it would not be in the best interests of the United States for the President to participate in a mini-summit on the North/South dialogue without detailed advance preparations—something the Jamaicans clearly do not have in mind. In addition, we are uncertain how Jamaica’s fellow members in the Group of 77 feel about Manley asserting himself in a leadership role, especially now that Tunisia has replaced Jamaica as leader of the New York contingent of the G–77. The meeting could foster negative reactions among the non-invited major economic powers, particularly Japan and France. It also seems unlikely that the President would be able to announce enough changes in U.S. positions to improve the atmosphere of the North/South dialogue.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Jamaica: Prime Minister Michael Norman Manley, 5/77–12/78)
