Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 2. Our German strategy also offers the FRG something it wants: a mid-July Summit in Bonn, with a Presidential visit to Germany thrown in. And it makes clear that they are most likely to get this outcome by adopting policies that will create better growth prospects in Germany. You made this point implicitly in your last letter to Chancellor Schmidt;2 the Vice President and I indicated to Lambsdorff that it would not make sense for any of our countries to go into a mid-July Summit unless the spring review of the Summit Preparatory Group indicated a good growth outlook in key countries. He got the point and did not take offense.3 3. State (Dick Cooper), Treasury (Tony Solomon), and CEA (Charlie Schultze) agree with this strategy. I believe the French will favor it. The British may too. I will be in touch with my opposite members in these countries to that end. 4. This strategy needs to be pursued quietly and with tact. If Schmidt were made to feel that he was being overtly or publicly threatened, he could well over-react. We should avoid public or private lecturing of the Germans on economic policy. It’s unnecessary; it makes them resistant to change; and it worsens US-German relations. You may want to speak in this sense at an early Cabinet meeting.4 2 Apparently a reference to Document 93. 3 In a February 13 letter to Stoessel, Owen noted that Lambsdorff responded to this approach by saying “that although the German Government was taking the public position that there would be no further German governmental stimulus measures, in fact there would be an internal review of German economic prospects in the spring and a decision then as to whether further stimulus measures were needed. I urged him to ensure that this internal German review was completed in time for its results to be reflected in the Preparatory Group’s report to heads of government, and in the heads of governments’ decision about Summit timing.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
