Chapter 4, February–April 1990  661
causes your reaction to be a rejection, there are certain limits we cannot 
overcome. Let us try to find matchups within these packages and see if 
these cannot be resolved. That is the path to a solution.
Bartholomew: If I say, as Secretary Baker did, that while we see 
movement here these proposals frankly don’t advance us as far as we 
had hoped, that does not mean I do not recognize that they represent 
work on your part. I want to be clear on that. You must also understand 
that we have our own real situation to deal with. I think I can say at 
the end that Secretary Baker appreciated the way your Minister has 
engaged the process, and that this visit has been useful.
Shortly after Karpov and Omelichev left, Bartholomew reached 
Karpov by phone to ask a follow-­up question:
Bartholomew: I have one last question that I need to clear up. Last 
night I noted there is no mention whatsoever of counting in START 
tactical aircraft that are equipped with conventional ALCMs over the 
range threshold. Am I correct in assuming that has gone away.
Karpov: In para 11 I believe it says if a bomber is equipped with 
non-­nuclear ALCMs, it should be counted against the 100 non-­nuclear 
aircraft.
Bartholomew: That is not the problem. Let me put it as a question. 
Suppose we agree the range threshold is X. Are you saying if I have a 
conventional ALCM with range above X, and put it on an F–16 like the 
one on my table, that F–16 conventional fighter with that conventional 
ALCM above X is not counted as a strategic bomber in START? Karpov: 
No, it should be counted in the 100 non-­nuclear bombers. If a bomber 
is equipped with non-­nuclear ALCMs above the range it is included in 
the 100 level.
Bartholomew: Your para 11 addresses heavy bombers converted 
to non-­nuclear ALCMs. We are not talking about heavy bombers. 
Akhromeyev said, and this is totally unacceptable to us, that if we took 
a non-­nuclear ALCM and put it on a fighter airplane, all of a sudden 
even though this is a tactical aircraft and a conventional missile, it 
counts as a heavy bomber. This is preposterous.
Karpov: What we suggest is the 100 should comprise all bomb-
ers whether converted to non-­nuclear or bombers that were not 
equipped with long-­range conventional cruise missiles above the 
agreed range. If such a bomber is equipped with cruise missiles, it 
should be counted there in the 100 bombers equipped with non-­
nuclear cruise missiles.
Bartholomew: I do not understand. Paras 10 and 11 speak of heavy 
bombers converted for non-­nuclear purposes. The issue I am raising 
is not about conversion of heavy bombers. I am talking about conven-
tional missiles on tactical fighter aircraft. That doesn’t make the airplane
