858  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
general terms as suggested by PRC draft of December 1. Chou En-­lai 
listed three reasons why US insists upon mentioning Formosa while 
avoiding reference to Foreign Ministers’ conference: (a) they wish to 
show superficially to world that declaration has softened tension in For­
mosa area while actually it would freeze situation there; (b) they wish 
to tide over election year and have no (repeat no) intention of agreeing 
on Foreign Ministers’ conference; (c) they wish to increase their armed 
strength in Formosa area under pretext of helping Chiang Kai-­shek. 
Chou En-­lai said present American tactics hidden conspiracy to cheat 
and deceive China. PRC have seen through plot and would not agree to 
“their designs.” PRC position is that US can accept either of two Chinese 
drafts: (a) draft of last October or, (b) draft of December 1. In case of US 
continuing obstructive tactics PRC intends releasing entire proceedings 
of discussions of second item of agenda.
Following is memorandum given to Cooper for delivery to Nehru 
re release Nationals: “At time the Johnson-­Wang negotiations began 
in Geneva on August 1, 1955 there were 41 American civilians being 
detained in China, 29 in prison or under house arrest, and 12 being 
denied exit permits.
“On September 16 Chinese announced release of the 12 exit-­
permit cases. Therefore only the 29 prison and house arrest cases were 
under discussion between Wang and Johnson at the time the agreed 
announcement was made on September 10. On that day the Reds 
announced the release of 10 of these imprisoned Americans. This left 
19 (18 in prison and one under house arrest) subject to the terms of the 
agreed announcement.
“Today exactly 6 months after this public commitment was made 
to expedite the departure of these Americans only 6 of the 19 have been 
released. The British Charge in Peiping has been able to see only one of 
the 13 still held and has received letters from only 5 others. He has been 
unable to establish contact with the remaining 7. In his discussions at 
Geneva, Wang Ping-­nan has virtually admitted that these Americans 
are being held as political hostages, stating that “review of cases” will 
be governed by “state of relations” between US and Communist China.
“Our records show that 114 Chinese have returned to the Mainland 
from the US since our negotiations began on August 1. 102 of this num­
ber have returned since the agreed announcement of September 10.
“With reference to Chinese Nationals in the US the Chinese 
Communists first demands concerned only students. They later asked 
for list of all Chinese in US thus seeking to establish position of being 
lawful representative of all Chinese in America.
“All of the approximately 5,000 students in US at time of 
Communist takeover of Mainland in 1949 held National Government
