Dominican Republic 495 DR–16. Memorandum from Edwin N. Clark to President Eisenhower1 New York, March 21, 1960. Re: TRUJILLO A. PROBLEM: Increasing opposition both from within and without may lead to a collapse of the Trujillo regime in the Dominican Republic. Such a downfall, with bloody, chaotic conditions would bring further trouble for the United States in its relations in Latin America, and might be a prelude to the establishment of another Communist regime. B. OBJECTIVES: To induce Trujillo forthwith to take the necessary steps to insure a transition to constitutional government, with the effective prevention of any possibility of the establishment of a Communistic, Castro-­ like regime. This transition would be accomplished through the good offices of the United States, if possible utilizing the Organization of the American States. C. BACKGROUND: 1. The dictatorship of Generalissimo Raphael Trujillo has been in power in the Dominican Republic since 1930. During these years, although high standards of living have been created within the republic, Trujillo has amassed a large fortune for the Trujillo family. Most of this fortune is invested within the Dominican Republic, although 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series. This memorandum was transmitted to Eisenhower under cover of two letters, both dated March 21, 1960, the first addressed formally to “Dear Mr. President,” the second a longer letter addressed to “Dear Ike.” In the second letter, Clark stated in part, “You probably remember the various steps which I took in 1955 to receive favors from Generalissimo Trujillo for the United States. Consequently, Generalissimo Trujillo knows that I have the privilege of personal friendship with you. Due to my unique position, I believe that I may, as a private citizen, be able to work out a solution with Generalissimo Trujillo which would redound to the great interests of the United States as well as to the people of the Dominican Republic. If I fail, no harm done, Hence my memorandum to you.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series) The reference to Clark’s private services in 1955 is unclear. The President forwarded Clark’s memorandum to Herter under cover of a letter dated March 21, 1960 which stated in part, “Please let me know what you think about the matter. I suppose that Rubottom ought to be the one to study this, but I would like to keep it as confidential as possible.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series). A handwritten notation on the source text indicated that it was shown to Rubottom on March 22, 1960.
