Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 677 250. Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1 Washington, April 11, 1980, 11:30 a.m.–1:19 p.m. PARTICIPANTS The President The White House The Vice President Zbigniew Brzezinski Jody Powell State Deputy Secretary Warren CIA Christopher Adm. Stansfield Turner Defense Secretary Harold Brown JCS General David Jones MINUTES The President: The likelihood of hostage release is remote. We need to review our options. Diplomatic moves not likely to be productive. We need to decide our actions and to set a timetable. I will go around the table and solicit opinions. Warren Christopher: There are some non-belligerent options we should consider: no more exports/imports of any kind; blacklist Iranian ships; blacklist airline companies that service Tehran; embargo telecommunications; remove all items from pipeline; go back to the UN. We need to give the Europeans some time to respond to our request for embargo.2 (Then discusses the down side of the blockade mining option for Americans, Europeans—it does not resolve the hostage issue.) Harold Brown: The proposed diplomatic initiatives are not impressive. Moreover, they will push Iran toward Soviet bloc. For example, Aeroflot could step in. There are punitive military options, but a blockade could complicate relations for us with the Gulf states and even the 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 7, Iran 4/80. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the White House. At the top of the page, Carter wrote: “Susan, My top secret pers file. J.” Susan Clough was Carter’s personal secretary. Vance was on vacation in Florida. (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pp. 492–493) Jordan also attended this meeting and for the first time learned of the rescue operation. (Jordan, Crisis, pp. 249–251) In his memoir, Carter quoted from his April 10 diary entry: “The Iranian terrorists are making all kinds of crazy threats to kill the American hostages if they are invaded by Iraq—whom they identify as an American puppet.” He then wrote: “We could no longer afford to depend on diplomacy. I decided to act. On April 11, I called together my top advisers.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 506) 2 See Document 246.
