1979 551 important, he still thought that if a nuclear war ever got started, it was very likely to quickly become an all out war. (TS) Secretary Vance asked how many weapons might be shifted from urban industrial to military targets if the study’s recommendations were adopted. (S) Secretary Brown answered that only a small percentage change would occur because we have always emphasized targeting military forces in the SIOP. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski asked Secretary Brown to elaborate on Mr. Keeny’s point. He noted the proposal to change how we target industry and asked what war supporting industry really is. (S) Secretary Brown attempted to go back to his original line of argument by noting that if in the course of a war between the US and the Soviet Union, we did not destroy Soviet general purpose forces, they might use these forces to capture the European industrial base and use it to aid in their own recovery. He said that this sort of possibility motivates his interest in being able to destroy moving Soviet general purpose forces. He argued that being able to destroy such forces can serve as additional deterrent to nuclear war, but questioned how we could convey the deterrent message to the Soviets. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski answered by noting that if we display sufficient flexibility to do this sort of thing, the Soviets will get the message. (S) Mr. Keeny then argued that the study says that the Soviets may be more deterred from starting a nuclear war if we shift our targeting more toward military forces. (S) Secretary Brown responded by saying that the study does not say that. It proposes to improve our capabilities to target military forces, and that such improvements would be an additional deterrent to the Soviets. (TS) Dr. Brzezinski then rescued the discussion by asking Harold to return to his summary of the study. (U) Secretary Brown continued by saying that the study does not suggest that we abandon economic or city targeting. He noted that the ultimate deterrent will continue to be the comprehensive targeting of the urban industrial base. Finally, he argued that the main point is that the study is not urging a big change in targeting policy. (S) Secretary Brown then began to summarize some of the additional follow-­on efforts being made within DOD. He cited a list of studies on criteria for targeting various categories of targets such as nuclear threat targets, other military targets, C3I, Soviet leadership, etc. He mentioned work underway to improve the flexibility of the SIOP by structuring building block options that could be combined to suit evolving circumstances in a nuclear war. He mentioned several efforts
