Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 2. Government Intervention —The United States managed to get only a weak agreement with respect to incentives and disincentives for investment in the OECD. However, a binding agreement might conceivably be negotiated in this area that was similar to the GATT arrangements with respect to trade. —GATT-type remedies might also be appropriately applied to performance requirements placed on foreign investors by governments. —In the tax area we might negotiate a multilateral tax treaty or agreements to extend the range of issues addressed in bilateral treaties. —The United States might have to respond to demands by other countries that we refrain from imposing requirements on the foreign affiliates of U.S. corporations to further our political goals. 3. Regulation of MNE Activities —The developing countries are particularly anxious to require subsidiaries to act independently of parental direction on such questions as pricing, market sharing, and sourcing of inputs. The United States and other developed countries have argued that restrictive business practice limitations should not be extended to intracompany affairs. —Tax avoidance problems have been met by the extensive international network of bilateral treaties. A GATT for Investment could be useful to national governments in providing a centralized pool of information for national tax authorities. —Increased disclosure of information by MNEs concerning their activities would be a basic objective of host governments in negotiation of any new agreements. —In the event that the U.N. negotiations on an anti-bribery agreement are unsuccessful, we could tackle the issue again in the new forum. Forum of Negotiations The five basic questions we should have to address in making the complex decision as to which forum or forums we should use to pursue our investment objectives are as follows: 1. Should we rely on a single forum or pursue our objectives in a coordinated fashion in several forums at one time? A single new or existing forum would focus public attention on the negotiating process and facilitate bargaining across issues; multiple forums would result in less politicized negotiations. 2. Should we propose establishment of a new organization for the purpose of negotiating and eventually administering the proposed agreement or rely on existing institution or institutions? Creation of a large new organization would give investment issues a greater prominence in international economic affairs approaching that of the mone-
