500.A12/41: Telegram
[Document 12]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 21, 1925—2 p.m.
19. Reference your telegrams February 20. Day before yesterday the Japanese Chargé
d’Affaires remarked that there had been a good deal appearing in the press in regard to
the calling of another arms conference, and that naturally his Government was much
interested in these reports.
I said that I was glad the opportunity had arisen to tell him just what had taken place, as
the situation has been considerably magnified in the newspaper reports. A few days ago
Mr. Austen Chamberlain, in the course of a conversation with Ambassador Kellogg,
had mentioned the possibility of another arms conference and had indicated the
willingness of the British Government to take part; that was all there was to it. It was
recognized that a conference would probably have to be confined to proceeding with
limitation of naval craft in view of the unlikelihood of doing anything in regard to land
armament. Mr. Chamberlain suggested further that an invitation extended by the
President would be received favorably by the other powers. The conversation between
Mr. Chamberlain and the Ambassador was most informal. Mr. Kellogg telegraphed me
the substance of it, and I then instructed him to inquire if Mr. Chamberlain had a
definite basis for belief that invitation would be welcomed by the naval powers, and
particularly whether any different attitude could now be expected on question of
auxiliary craft which had arisen between France and Great Britain. From the
conversation that followed it appeared that Mr. Chamberlain’s suggestion had been
general and that there was nothing very definite to go upon. A question on this matter
had been asked in the House of Commons, to which Mr. Chamberlain had replied that
there had simply been conversations.
I told the Chargé that the attitude of this Government remains unchanged, that it had
always wished to go forward when an opportune time should have arisen with the
proposals it had made at the Washington Conference in 1922, but that it had feared that
difficulty which had then prevented an agreement in regard to auxiliary craft still
remained. I said that I understood that the viewpoint of the Japanese Government is
very much the same as our own and that it is ready to proceed in event that there is any
appearance of reasonable expectation of an agreement. I added that I regretted only that
these reports had made it appear that some special negotiation was going on with Great
