478
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
182.
Intelligence Cable Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, February 13, 1980, 2326Z
COUNTRY
Iran/Iraq
SUBJECT
Reported plans by former Iranian Prime Minister Bakhtiar to attempt the
overthrow of the Iranian Revolutionary Government [less than 1 line not
declassified]
SOURCE
[3 lines not declassified]
1. [1½ lines not declassified] former Iranian Prime Minister Bakhtiar,
the latter plans to launch an attempt, approximately in mid-March
1980,
to
overthrow
the
Iranian
Revolutionary
Government.
Bakhtiar travelled to Baghdad from his exile residence in Paris to
consult secretly with Iraqi President Saddam Husayn on Iraqi support
for Bakhtiar’s planned return to power. Bakhtiar voiced his confidence
in his ability to return to power in Tehran with the support of loyal
elements of the armed forces. The resistance leader said that Bakhtiar
expects major political and military support from the Iraqi Government
for his movement.
2. The leader said that he, along with representatives of three other
Kurdish organizations, will meet in Baghdad, or a location nearby, on
20 February to coordinate military operations amongst themselves and
the Iraqi Government in support of the planned coup by Bakhtiar. He
identified the other expected representatives as Salah Mohtadi from
Komola (Zaaman-e Zahmat-e Keshan-e Kurdistan—Revolutionary
Organization of the Workers of Kurdistan), an unidentified brother of
Sheikh Osman Naqshahandi, and Sheikh Eziddin Hoseini. The Kurdish
leader indicated that he receives approximately 100,000 Iraq pounds
(USD 300,000) monthly from Bakhtiar for support of 2,500 armed men
in his organization. He said that he coordinates all matters related to
this support and their military movements into Kurdistan from Iraq
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 32, Subject File, Iran [Retained] 2/80. Secret. Sent to the National Security Agency;
Departments of State, the Treasury, and Justice; Defense Intelligence Agency; Secret
Service; Federal Bureau of Investigation; National Security Council Staff, and White
House.
