Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1085
17. Changing the subject, President Carter stated that he had en-
joyed his press conference earlier that morning.3 Questions arose on
both nuclear matters and human rights. These were answered truth-
fully and honestly with an acknowledgement that there were certain
difficulties in these areas and that they had been discussed with the
Brazilian government. He pointed out to the press that we are inter-
ested in discussing these matters with the Brazilian government,
adding that the differences are minor in comparison with areas of bilat-
eral agreement.
18. President Geisel said that these two subjects could not have
been avoided. Had he been a journalist, they would have figured in his
line of attack as well. Obviously President Carter has an obligation to
reply truthfully with an explanation of his views. It would be absurd
were he to feel embarrassed in responding. Our differences are natural
and are not as great as is often stated.
19. President Carter said he had two questions to raise concerning
the nuclear question. Brazil, he said, has signed and ratified the Treaty
of Tlatelolco but will not recognize its applicability until all nations sign
the Treaty. This would include nations which will never sign, like
France and the Soviet Union, perhaps also Cuba (under Soviet pres-
sure). Giscard D’Estaing has said he has no particular objections to Tla-
telolco, but he has doubts as to the desirability of France taking part
in these Western Hemisphere arrangements. President Carter aked
whether, if Argentina signs and the list of Central and South American
signatories is thereby completed, Brazil would agree to implement the
accord?
20. President Geisel replied that this question would require fur-
ther study. Argentina does not cause major concern for Brazil, he said.
However, Brazil feels that countries like France and the USSR, which
have nuclear weapons, should make a commitment pertaining to the
non-use of these weapons in the Western Hemisphere. They should un-
dertake to fight their wars elsewhere, not in South America, and to re-
frain from stockpiling their nuclear weapons here. Brazil wishes that
the Russians, French and Chinese would also sign Tlatelolco. President
Geisel said that the Ambassador of the Soviet Union, a country with
which Brazil has fair relations, especially in the trade sphere, came to
him with a note critical of Brazil’s accord with the Federal Republic of
Germany. President Geisel said that he had to be a bit rude in his reply.
He told the Soviet Ambassador that he had no right to bring this matter
up in his dealings with Brazil, in the absence of Soviet acceptance of
Tlatelolco obligations.
3 The text of Carter’s March 30 press conference is printed in Public Papers: Carter,
1978, pp. 627–634.
