International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1011
interest. It should be clear that this would not be a permanent new
structure, but a short term mechanism to insure the momentum of a
new initiative establishing overall policy and priorities. I believe in this
way we can duplicate the highly successful coordination we have
achieved in the drug area, a similarly fragmented field.
(b)
Substantive
Program
Planning—Establishing
a
committee
chaired by DHEW that would be responsible for further developing a
government-wide substantive program in International Health. This
would involve identifying those disease entities amenable to major as-
sault, geographic regions or countries where U.S. resources could have
a major impact, and special generic areas such as vector control, global
epidemic surveillance and clean water supplies that might be appro-
priate to emphasize. In coordination with other agencies they would
determine how the available resources could be mobilized and coordi-
nated to deal with the priority areas they had identified. This com-
mittee would also establish sub-committees to address the setting of re-
search, manpower development and training priorities.
(c) Coordination with Foreign Policy—Establishing a committee
chaired by the Department of State that would review region by region,
and country by country, our goals and priorities in the International
Health area. The U.S. Government resources going into each country
would be carefully inventoried, a determination made of whether cur-
rent expenditures are adequately coordinated, and aimed at achieving
agreed health goals for that country. We anticipate A.I.D. would play
the major role in the review of the countries where they are involved.
We are prepared to ask the State Department to begin immediately
such a review of Africa, and to provide them the appropriate back-
ground material which my office has prepared. This committee would
also address the issue of how International Health activities could be
most effectively coordinated within our missions overseas, and how
host countries could best be made aware of the range of resources, such
as appropriate training opportunities, now available in the United
States. This committee would also address the issue of how Interna-
tional Health could be better incorporated into our overall conduct of
foreign policy.
(d) Upgrading the Emphasis on International Health—Understanding
that in order to realize fully the U.S. Government’s potential in the In-
ternational Health field certain internal changes need to be made
within the departments. In response to the high priority you have at-
tached to this area some of these changes already have been instituted.
DHEW is completing an extensive internal review of its International
Health functions, upgrading its emphasis, centralizing coordination
and considering the creation of a position of Deputy Assistant Secre-
tary for International Health. The role of C.D.C., which has already es-
