558  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
95.	
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 4, 1990, 4–7:30 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of European Affairs, Lot 99D344, Office of 
Russian Affairs, Russia Desk Files, Baker-Shevardnadze Washington 4/4–6/90. Secret. 
The meeting took place in the Secretary’s office. The complete memorandum of conver-
sation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, 
Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts.
Secretary Baker
Dennis B. Ross, Notetaker
Interpreter
USSR
Eduard Shevardnadze
Sergey Tarasenko, Notetaker
Interpreter
Baker: I want to start by welcoming you and since you are the guest 
I think you should go ahead and feel free to kick off the discussions.
Shevardnadze: Thanks for the welcome. I believe this meeting is of 
great importance because we have little time before the Summit and 
we have a lot of work to do. I might begin by discussing the date of the 
Summit. Taking into account your previous proposals, we propose that 
we go ahead and have the Summit between May 30th and June 3rd. My 
impression is that this should be suitable to you. If it is acceptable we 
could make the announcement during my visit.
Baker: When the Ambassador gave me the dates he said that it 
was important that there be no leaks. I have discussed this only with 
the President and so far there have been no leaks. As I understand 
it, the dates and the scenario, as I have described them in Namibia, 
would be okay with you. That is to say we would have meetings here 
and then we would go to Maine and we might come back here.
Shevardnadze: I discussed this with Gorbachev before leaving and 
he believes that the main task right now is to set the dates. All that you 
propose in terms of scenario is basically acceptable, but he does prefer 
to reserve on certain possible proposals that he might want to suggest 
about the program. In any case, I will communicate our suggestions on 
the program after I get back to Moscow.
Baker: Good. You have no objection to the concept of spending time 
at the President’s residence in Maine?
Shevardnadze: No, that is fine with us.
Baker: Well, let me just say that the dates are acceptable to us. They 
really do suit our needs as well. We might decide how best to announce 
this. My sense would be that we should announce this simultaneously 
from both capitals while you are here.
