National Security Policy 839 readiness planning for limited war because different weapons, combi­ nations of forces, etc., will be involved. The new policy states the purpose of civilian readiness to be to sup­ port the essential military and civilian requirements in an emergency. Subparagraph b. (3) is of particular importance to the Department. It is intended to point up the relationship between U.S. trade and eco­ nomic policies and the civilian readiness base, and to emphasize that such matters as the strength of our alliances and the wartime readiness of our allies’ industries, as well as our own, are affected by U.S. tariff policies, import quotes, etc. The difference of view on page 4 concerns the degree to which planning should include measures essential to recovery of the nation after general war, in addition to measures essential for survival. Budget and Treasury believe the explicit mention of recovery will result in greater expenditures (e.g. for stockpiling of industrial and other items) then would be the case under a policy such as the existing one where only survival is named as an objective. OCDM, supported by State and Commerce, considers it appropriate to include recovery because that objective is part of OCDM’s responsibility, and because recovery must be an integral part of the U.S. objective of survival in general war. The proposed change in paragraph 64 f is to be consistent with new paragraph 59. Conclusion: While the Department has no direct responsibility for mobiliza­ tion planning, the degree of U.S. military and civilian readiness for an international emergency possibly leading to hostilities would exercise considerable influence upon foreign policy alternatives which might be available to the U.S. The new concept appears to be more realistic and workable than the old and should result in more effective measures to improve the readiness posture of the U.S. It also takes account of the importance of planning for a limited war readiness and capability. Recommendation: That you concur in the revised paragraph, supporting OCDM in its split with Budget-­Treasury. Concurrence: E—Mr. Fuqua (in draft)
