North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
941
—Isolates the U.S., thereby exposing the U.S. to greater pressure.
—Risks bringing the dialogue on debt to a halt and reducing
chances for compromise on other North/South issues.
B. THE US/EEC PROPOSAL, BUT NO OTHER INITIATIVES
The value of tabling the US/EEC proposal at the meeting is essen-
tially tactical. Tabling the US/EEC proposal is probably the only course of ac-
tion that would keep Group B together and allow the developed countries
to say they are being responsive to LDC concerns.
The other members of Group B could be persuaded that the US/
EEC proposal should be “activated” without any substantive changes,
and not for negotiations. Having rejected it once, it is unlikely that the
G–77 would accept this proposal at the UNCTAD Ministerial. The G–77
might decide to break off the dialogue on debt in the expectation that
the developed countries would sooner or later feel enough pressure to
move further toward meeting LDC demands (perhaps at UNCTAD V).
However, it seems most likely that the G–77 will insist on continuing discus-
sions on debt proposals.
There is one significant drawback for the U.S. in tabling the US/
EEC proposal: we would have difficulty implementing the proposal if it were
accepted by the G–77. The section of the proposal addressed to countries
having debt problems of a longer-term structural nature outlines a new
international procedure for dealing with these situations. The U.S. and
other donor countries would be committed to “enhance” their assist-
ance to a country that opted to take advantage of the new procedure.
(See Annex C, page 4, subpara. (v).) This would be done by increasing
the quantity and improving the quality of their aid by various meas-
ures with special emphasis on program aid and other flexible forms of
fast disbursing aid, as well as debt reorganization. Thus the US/EEC
proposal clearly implies a U.S. commitment to extend assistance to
LDCs experiencing structural balance of payments problems that im-
pinge unduly on their development.
The U.S. has no aid instruments which lend themselves readily to
this purpose. Bilateral Development Assistance, P.L. 480 and Security
Supporting Assistance (SSA) are all subject to varying policy and legis-
lative constraints. Moreover, Congressional concerns expressed during
the recent Witteveen Facility hearings about the use of official financing
for balance-of-payments support suggest that the Executive Branch
might face considerable criticism if it attempted to implement the US/
EEC proposal.
It is difficult at this late stage to change the language of the US/
EEC proposal to eliminate our problem with implementation. The
changes we would want to make are unacceptable to the EEC, and
might open up the proposal to changes that the U.S. could not accept.
