946  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Panamanian employees, even though ultimately the funds for both of 
these items would be provided by the company. The Secretary said that 
Panama obviously would have to cooperate in providing land for the 
housing and that some kind of negotiation would have to be carried out.
Secretary Herter said that, while the Department was not aware 
of the detailed terms of the company proposal, it sounded satisfactory. 
He said that the Department had made a careful long-­range analysis 
of the problems attendant to U.S.-Panama relations and that, after con-
sultation with Mr. Brucker, he would like to come back to the President 
with recommendations. He believed that the long range U.S. picture 
regarding the Canal hinged considerably on whether a sea level Canal 
is to be built and, if so, where it is built.
Secretary Brucker referred to a proposal made to the President to 
train annually 1000 Latin American doctors, nurses and medical tech-
nicians at Gorgas Hospital in Panama. The total cost was estimated 
at $600,000 per year but since the governments of the trainees would 
probably be willing to pay their travel costs, roughly half of the total, 
the balance of the $300,000 annual cost might be divided 50-50 between 
the United States and the recipient countries.
Secretary Herter expressed awareness of the proposal and said that 
the Department was studying it. He said that it was an appealing plan.5
The President opined that the gesture of the crossed flags on March 
1 had worked out well. Why hadn’t we done this five years earlier? As 
though to answer the question himself, he recalled a telegram of com-
plaint received from one of his brothers urging that the United States 
make no conciliatory gesture on the flag. Secretary Brucker stressed that 
the main point is that we are now prepared to do something regard-
ing this problem. He said we should certainly not allow any important 
anniversary dates in Panama to go by without taking similar steps.
Secretary Herter said that the Department would include rec-
ommendations regarding the flag issue in its next meeting with the 
President on Panama.
The President said that the measures included in the company pro-
posal seemed to him to be satisfactory and that the company should 
move ahead with them.
5 In a memorandum dated April 15, Under Secretary of State Dillon informed the 
President that the State Department had completed its feasibility study of the hospital 
and medical training program at Gorgas Hospital and had concluded that the program 
was feasible; that Gov. Potter had agreed to its implementation; that the International 
Cooperation Administration was prepared to proceed; and that Ambassador Harrington 
would bring the matter before the Foreign Ministry of Panama in order to obtain Panama’s 
cooperation. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman Files, Dulles-Herter Series)
