864 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI At the Washington summit, the U.S. pressed unsuccessfully for a limit of 7 flight tests over a three-­year period. Since then the Soviets have taken the position that the heavy ICBM issue is resolved for START and that there is nothing left to discuss. In the recent Moscow meetings, the Soviets did not reiterate their position that the issue is closed, nor object to the U.S. presentation on heavy ICBMs which reiterated the proposal for a limit of seven flight tests every three years, although they also did not respond to it nor to an invitation to present their ideas for additional limits. Options 1. Settle for the already agreed constraints on heavy ICBMs. 2. Accept the already agreed constraints on heavy ICBMs in return for constraints which would permit little, if any, additional modernization of SS–18s. 3. Offer a package that would resolve both heavy ICBMs and non-­circumvention: We accept the already agreed limitations on heavy ICBMs in return for Soviet acceptance of the U.S. position on non-­circumvention. 4. Accept the already agreed constraints on heavy ICBMs in return for a Soviet commitment to a deMIRVing commitment in START II that goes beyond the summit statement. (The summit statement commits the two sides to “seek measures that reduce the concentration of warheads on strategic delivery vehicles as a whole, including measures related to the question of heavy missiles and MIRVed ICBMs.) 5. Continue to press for a flight-­test limit on heavy ICBMs. Attachment Paper Prepared in the National Security Council8 Washington, September 17, 1990 Ballistic Missile Throw-­weight After years of resisting the U.S. proposal for throw-­weight limits, the Soviets appear ready to accept the U.S. concept. The primary outstanding issue is whether to accept a Soviet-­proposed 45 percent reduction in Soviet throw-­weight, or insist on a 50 percent reduction that the U.S. has sought. Throw-­weight has been one of the most politically visible concepts in strategic arms control. SALT II’s failure to address the 3:1 advantage in Soviet throw-­weight was one of the principal objections to that treaty. As a consequence, the U.S. proposed in START to reduce Soviet 8 Secret.
