Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 • Establishment of a U.S.-Japan Trade Facilitation Committee to expand U.S. exports to Japan by resolving market access problems encountered by U.S. firms. In addition, Japan has decided to stimulate its domestic demand to absorb production and reduce pressure to export. We are continuing regular discussions with Japan in support of these steps. The Japanese current account surpluses and our bilateral deficits with Japan continue to be large, but we believe that the trend will move in the right direction if both nations remain firmly committed to the goals we have set for ourselves in remedying this serious problem. The Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN) are equally important but less visible. Minister Ushiba and Ambassador Strauss agreed to get down to serious business on the MTN. They are now moving at top speed along with the European Community, Australia, and others to meet their mid-July deadline for agreement on the main elements. Relations With the P.R.C. The third element in our Asian and Pacific strategy is our commitment to normalizing relations with China. While we do not have a firm timetable, one of President Carter’s first actions as President was to reaffirm the Shanghai communique of 1972.5 He has expressed his determination to complete the process of building a new relationship with Peking. In structuring our relationship with the Chinese, we will not enter into any agreements with others that are directed against the People’s Republic of China. We recognize and respect China’s strong commitments to independence, unity, and self-reliance. Dr. Brzezinski’s trip to China was the most recent affirmation of the importance to both countries of the Washington-Peking relationship. As Dr. Brzezinski said in Peking, a strong and secure China is in America’s interest. I accompanied him on his visit and can attest to the fact that it enhanced U.S.-Chinese relations from a long-range strategic point of view.6 Nevertheless, there is an incompleteness in the relationship which, over time, could render it vulnerable to extraneous factors, raising once again the prospects of needless confrontation or misunderstanding between two major powers. This would deprive us of the opportunity to achieve greater cooperation with China on global and regional issues.
