Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
423
• Establishment of a U.S.-Japan Trade Facilitation Committee to
expand U.S. exports to Japan by resolving market access problems en-
countered by U.S. firms.
In addition, Japan has decided to stimulate its domestic demand to
absorb production and reduce pressure to export.
We are continuing regular discussions with Japan in support of
these steps. The Japanese current account surpluses and our bilateral
deficits with Japan continue to be large, but we believe that the trend
will move in the right direction if both nations remain firmly com-
mitted to the goals we have set for ourselves in remedying this serious
problem. The Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN) are equally im-
portant but less visible. Minister Ushiba and Ambassador Strauss
agreed to get down to serious business on the MTN. They are now
moving at top speed along with the European Community, Australia,
and others to meet their mid-July deadline for agreement on the main
elements.
Relations With the P.R.C.
The third element in our Asian and Pacific strategy is our commit-
ment to normalizing relations with China. While we do not have a firm
timetable, one of President Carter’s first actions as President was to
reaffirm the Shanghai communique of 1972.5 He has expressed his de-
termination to complete the process of building a new relationship
with Peking.
In structuring our relationship with the Chinese, we will not enter
into any agreements with others that are directed against the People’s
Republic of China. We recognize and respect China’s strong commit-
ments to independence, unity, and self-reliance.
Dr. Brzezinski’s trip to China was the most recent affirmation of
the importance to both countries of the Washington-Peking relation-
ship. As Dr. Brzezinski said in Peking, a strong and secure China is in
America’s interest. I accompanied him on his visit and can attest to the
fact that it enhanced U.S.-Chinese relations from a long-range strategic
point of view.6
Nevertheless, there is an incompleteness in the relationship which,
over time, could render it vulnerable to extraneous factors, raising once
again the prospects of needless confrontation or misunderstanding be-
tween two major powers. This would deprive us of the opportunity to
achieve greater cooperation with China on global and regional issues.
5 See footnote 6, Document 29.
6 See footnote 21, Document 62. Brzezinski made the statement in a toast at a ban-
quet the evening of May 20. (Power and Principle, p. 217)
