176
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
staff further, even at the cost of handicapping our ability to serve as
a listening post.4
Amstutz
4 The United States Mission in Afghanistan had already been reduced the previous
month. See footnote 3, Document 55.
61.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, September 8, 1979
SUBJECT
The establishment of an Afghan Liberation Front
The more over-extended the Soviets feel, the better off we will be
and the less likely that they will undertake reckless future action.
Afghanistan has all the earmarks of a situation in which the Soviets
could become embroiled endlessly. The only thing that is missing is a
sense of unity on the part of the opposition.
I therefore believe that we would derive great benefits if the various
Afghan exiles, together with representatives of the tribal groups doing
the actual fighting, could get together and proclaim an Afghan Libera-
tion Front (ALF) analogous to the NLF, which was such an effective
device for the Vietnamese. Like the NLF, the Front could be across a
wide spectrum that would include women’s groups, Royalists—even
avowed Communists. The stated aim of the ALF would be to rally
world opinion behind the Afghan freedom fighters’ heroic struggle
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–047, Afghanistan: 11 Sep 1979–22 Jul 1980. Top Secret; Sensitive; Outside the System.
Sent for action. Attached but not printed is a September 11 covering note from Brement
to Henze and Gregg asking “to get together with you on this ASAP.” Below Brement’s
request, Gregg wrote a note to Henze reporting he had met with two CIA officials,
September 12, who told him that a liberation front existed outside Afghanistan but was
fragmented and not in contact with rebels in Afghanistan.
