724 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 134. Memorandum From Arnold Kanter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft)1 Washington, May 23, 1990 SUBJECT Status of START Issues This memorandum reports on the status of the major START issues following the recent Moscow Ministerial, and describes the game plan for how we plan to proceed with the Soviets between now and the Summit. Soviet Arms Control Team One of the key unknowns concerns the team of Soviet arms control experts which is due in town later this week. This team (which is now scheduled to arrive on Saturday instead of today as previously planned) will be headed by Viktor Karpov. It evidently will not include General Omelichev or other senior level General Staff representation. The first meeting is now scheduled for Saturday afternoon, with plans to meet through the Memorial Day weekend. We have told the Soviets that we envisage these meetings to be a continuation of the Bartholomew-Karpov arms control working group that met in Moscow. As such, we expect this group to continue to work the unresolved START issues (as well as try to make progress on CFE and Open Skies). We also expect it to work on two joint statements that might be issued at the Summit, one that records substantive agreement on the major START issues and one that describes the objectives of follow-­on negotiations. The Soviets have told us that they agree with this approach. Their late arrival date and lack of General Staff representation, however, leave unclear whether they will be in a position to implement it unless the extra time in Moscow has been used to get them the guidance and authority necessary to close deals. At a minimum, we will want to use the presence of the Soviet team to come as close to agreement as possible on the two joint statements. Resolved Issues The ALCM and SLCM issues were settled in Moscow. Geneva is now working on final versions of the SLCM declaration and the ALCM “agreed 1 Source: Bush Library, George H.W. Bush Presidential Records, National Security Council, Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01657–027, Moscow—Follow-­up—May 1990. Secret.
