Various suggestions were made to conciliate this question but it was found impossible to arrive at a satisfactory solution. The Japanese insisted upon the date of landing, whereas Colonel Peel and others insisted upon the date of shipment. A considerable number of amendments designed to simplify administrative features of the paragraph were offered and practically all of them were rejected. Several of the Delegates thought it advisable to adhere to the usual practice in China of giving at least sixty days’ notice. Colonel Peel announced that he would not, under any circumstances, accept less notice than sixty days. Mr. Strawn announced that he would not be disposed to change the practice with reference to notice so as to accelerate the effective date and thereby preclude his nationals from completing contracts which they might have with the Chinese for the delivery of goods. He anticipated that if such a change were made there would be protests and in any event he did not consider that the American Delegation had authority to give their assent to a change of this character. He emphasized the point that he wished to move along the line of least resistance otherwise it might delay the effectuating of the Washington Treaty. Mr. Hioki continued vigorously to oppose the adoption of the date of shipment, but notwithstanding the efforts of Mr. Oudendijk to reconcile the differences, the question remained unsettled. Mr. Strawn emphasized the need of avoiding controversial subjects by pursuing the methods that hitherto obtained in China, so that nothing would arise to prevent the new tariff duties from becoming effective at the earliest possible moment. The paragraph relating to the impounding of the increased Customs revenues, free from all encumbrances, by the Chinese Customs Administration was then read for discussion and the chairman explained that the Chinese Delegation had practically embodied the ideas of the other Delegations in this paragraph. He explained further that in order to avoid any prejudicial or controversial questions, the Chinese Delegation had used the exact wording of the Washington Treaty as concerns purposes and conditions. The last part of the Chinese Delegation’s original resolution had therefore been changed to read “as for such purposes and subject to such conditions as the Special Conference may determine”. Various amendments were offered to this paragraph, the most important one being that of Mr.
