486 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 First, he said that Mr. S. will see and use this meeting as a “psychological victory” with the Imam. He says that he will go to the Imam and say, “I met one of Carter’s top men. I convinced them of the evils of their past policies and taught them about our revolution. You have humbled the Americans.” According to my friend, this will score points for Mr. S. with the Imam and also help soften his attitude. Secondly, by having established a “secret” relationship with an American official, his desire to end the crisis and his large ego will be reinforced. Also, he is a “rug merchant” who loves to bargain and trade. He says if he wants to do something for you, he will describe in great detail how difficult it will be to accomplish, then go off and do it quicker or better than you had anticipated. I hope this is true as relates to the release of the hostages, because he told me in great detail all of the problems, but also saying that “only I can solve this.” We’ll see. The final thing he told me was this: “Please tell President Carter that I appreciate his sending you to meet with me. I will report to the Imam your attitude of friendship and your desire to build a new relationship. Also tell President Carter that I hope he understands that the things I have said personally about him were said either in frustration with the U.S. or for domestic political purposes. I hope he understands. Tell him that the strength and success of the Revolution will be a better ally against Soviet aggression than the Shah ever was. And, finally, tell him that I will return to Tehran and redouble my efforts to obtain a quick release of the hostages.” Conclusion At best, Mr. S. is a deeply committed revolutionary, dedicated to the survival of that revolution and to the integrity and independence of Iran. His ego is enormous, but his devotion to the Imam is genuine. His commitment to the revolution makes the Soviet threat the dominant political concern in his life. At worst, Mr. S. is a devious person whose only source of power is the Imam. Now that the Imam’s health is in question, he is engaged in a number of activities (hostage negotiation, anti-Soviet rhetoric, etc.) that he perceives as being in his own self-interest. The truth about Mr. S. is probably somewhere in between, but either way, we should use his present attitudes to our own benefit. Report on Scenario/Implementation After four hours sleep, I awoke to what was supposed to be a brief review session with our French friends on the scenario.
