324
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
ciently painful for them, they may think again before undertaking
another such adventure.2 (S)
NSC Activity
Follow-up on the NSC Meeting3
State has transmitted messages on your behalf to the Heads of
Government of Muslim countries, key non-aligned countries, key Afri-
can countries and the Chinese as agreed at the NSC meeting.4 (C)
The messages to Muslim countries stress the threat to Islam from
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. (C)
The messages to the non-aligned countries urge that they must
stand up for one of their own in the face of a Soviet takeover. (C)
The messages to the African countries emphasize that Afghani-
stan’s peace and friendship treaty is being used as justification for
Soviet intervention and notes that several African countries also have
such treaties. (C)
The message to Hua concludes by noting that we have parallel
interests in the security of Pakistan and calls for close consultation on
our policies, stating that Harold Brown will be prepared to discuss this
issue during his visit.5 (C)
In all of these messages we urge the leaders to speak out and take
appropriate action individually or with like-minded countries with
which they are associated. (C)
2 Brzezinski is apparently summarizing telegram 28119 from Moscow, December
28. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number]; printed in
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 247) In telegram 28126
from Moscow, December 29, Watson argued that the United States’s “principal objectives
should be to (a) undo the Soviet action to the extent it can be done, which would mean
the withdrawal of Soviet troops—probably not immediately attainable—and (b) exacting
a political price for the Soviet action sufficient to dissuade the Soviets from undertaking
other such adventures in the future.” He also outlined a number of possible steps
including: unilateral actions such as increasing U.S. military alert status, launching a
major propaganda program, bolstering the U.S. military presence in the Persian Gulf
and Indian Ocean; multilateral actions such as consultations with friends and allies,
“demonstrative consultations with the Chinese,” action in the Security Council, strength-
ening security ties with key countries in Southwest Asia such as Turkey and Pakistan,
working “with the Pakistanis and Chinese to support the insurgency in Afghanistan,”
leading a global effort to boycott the Olympics; and bilateral actions with the Soviet Union
including withdrawal of the SALT treaty from the Senate, “limitation or cancellation of
grain sales to the Soviet Union,” tightening export controls, reviewing extant trade deals,
and cancelling “visits and exchanges” between the United States and USSR. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR and East/West, Brement,
Subject File, Box 61, Afghanistan: 11/79–1/80)
3 See Document 107.
4 See footnote 4, Document 107.
5 The message to Hua was not found.
