644 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement sea to US. Suppose Chinese had military strength to occupy San ­Francisco and then clamored about self-­defense. Could US consent to this? 47. I asked whether I could understand that they had no objection to principle but felt its mention in this context prejudiced their position in dispute between us in Taiwan area. 48. Wang said it was not thus. Chinese agree that every country has this right of self defense, but question is not that this prejudices their position but that US has no right to claim self-­defense in Taiwan area. And in exactly same manner China has no right to set foot on San Francisco and claim self-­defense. 49. I said that I did not believe he had gotten point of my question. Question of validity of our defense arrangements in Taiwan area was matter of dispute between us. Chinese Govt had one view, my govern­ ment had another. I did not propose to discuss or try to resolve this problem with him. That was element in differences of views we had respecting Taiwan area. As I had told him, I had no intention demand­ ing any statement from them that would prejudice their view in that regard. What I was saying was it was desirable we both make it clear we weren’t thereby renouncing our respective rights of self-­defense. I had tried to accomplish both purposes in this draft. If Chinese have suggestions as to another method of reaching this, I was willing listen. 50. Wang said in whatever way I might put this matter, present US occupation Taiwan was flagrant violation of international law. No mat­ ter how US was trying to defend itself, history would pass final judge­ ment. US had asked whether Chinese side had any other views on draft announcement. He said his side had made its greatest effort and could not go further. As Wang had said, if US would accept their proposal to remove individual and collective self-­defense from text, then Chinese would give consideration to draft. Otherwise, they could only consider that US was deliberately obstructing issuance of such announcement. 51. I said how he could call inclusion of statement of what I thought was universally recognized principle of individual and collective self defense obstruction, I could not understand. I had thought they would have considered it of equal importance. As I had made clear, I would be glad to consider any other formula they would like to propose. I wanted to be clear: was it that under no circumstances whatever and under no conditions that they would consider inclusion of any such phrases in any statement we might make? 52. Wang said that dispute between us in Taiwan area was what was under discussion and in this respect they could not acknowledge US right to individual and collective self-­deefense. It was matter of principle. This was not acceptable. Question was not that there should be any further suggestions from Chinese side but from the US side. And new suggestions should come from US side.
