1977  11
process as two contending forces. You all work out a time for a lengthy 
session. Do it quickly. Harold (Brown), do you want to outline what 
you are doing?
Dr. Brzezinski: How much time do you have this morning?
President Carter: About 15–20 minutes. In a way we are really wast-
ing this meeting, but I wanted to let you know how I viewed this.
Secretary Brown: I can summarize the proposed changes quickly. 
I have placed greater emphasis on combat readiness while continu-
ing essential modernization. I have slowed down some things that I 
thought were going too fast.
In strategic forces, on the B–1, I have reduced the rate of produc-
tion and have deferred the decision as to whether to continue the pro-
gram until FY 1979. On the M–X, I have slowed major development to 
its original (1977 budget) pace, but have left the final question open. 
Developments in SALT might preclude further development of the 
M–X. I have left cruise missiles at their present level, but have reorga-
nized what gets done under the program. The cruise missiles are not so 
far along as the B–1, but are farther than the M–X. We can’t really tam-
per with these until we know where we are going. I’m not foreclosing 
any options, and we will want an in-­depth review in the spring.
President Carter: We need to know how far along we are in each 
instance, and what would be the consequences of slowing down and 
trimming the programs.
Secretary Brown: On land and tactical air and mobility forces, I 
am changing the mix of F–15s and F–16s. We will reduce the number 
of high-­performance aircraft and keep five wings. I would terminate 
A–7E production. This program is largely political. They have knocked 
it out every year and Congress, under pressure from the aircraft indus-
try, puts it back.
On land forces, I am substituting two Reserve Component bri-
gades for two late-­deploying active Army brigades. I recognize there 
are foreign policy issues here. Also, I have stopped the non-­nuclear 
Lance procurement. I don’t think it’s efficient. The Army disagrees. I 
suspect they may have sold its value to other countries.
On NATO and mobility forces, I have added shelters for additional 
aircraft and additional storage capacity and have increased the heavy-­
lift capacity by modifying aircraft in the civilian fleet. Congress keeps 
turning this program down. Naturally, the aircraft industry wants us to 
buy new planes rather than modify old ones.
On ship construction, we had six programs last year—I think four 
came from the Pentagon and two from the Hill. Except for the nuclear 
powered strike cruiser, which will cost over a billion dollars, the ship-
yards are so jammed that adding additional money doesn’t get us any
