Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 9. (A) Rabbi Rosen would make a public statement in Romania similar to that which he made in synagogues in 1975 to the effect that those persons who wish to apply for permission to emigrate from Romania may do so. Statement would indicate where persons should go to initiate the process, how it works, etc. (Rohr said implicit in this was that application forms would have to be available to those desiring to fill them out.) 10. (B) GOR would agree that while applicants’ requests for permission to emigrate were being processed by GOR authorities, applicants were free to contact Israeli Embassy to begin visa application procedure. (Moses told Nimetz following meeting with Romanians today that this step was designed to provide permanent monitoring mechanism of number of pending cases. The GOI would maintain a list, which it would share with either the USG or directly with American Jewish groups. Moses said he already had discussed this aspect of the proposal with GOI Embassy in Washington.) 11. (C) Concurrent with its acceptance of steps (A) and (B), GOR would provide American Jewish organizations with numerical accounting of how many Jews it expected would be departing for Israel in the next few weeks and months. 12. Bogdan, who Rohr said did all the talking for GOR side, responded by saying he would have to transmit the Jewish organizations’ proposal directly to President Ceausescu. Bogdan said he was all too aware of the time pressures, and hoped to have a response for Moses in the nearest future. At one point in the discussion, Rohr said, Bogdan indicated it might be possible for the GOR to revert back to the procedures in effect in 1975 with regard to application for emigration (which presumably would mean dropping pre-screening). 13. Rohr said that Moses and Talisman were pleased by Bogdan’s reaction to their concerns and their proposal. They had indicated to Rohr after the meeting that they had dropped the notion of having the Joint Distribution Committee serve as a “good offices” intermediary because of the negative signals they had received in the past few days. He also said that Moses had promised the Romanians that if an understanding were reached as they had proposed, the Jewish groups would not publicize it here, which they recognized might embarrass the GOR in some fashion. Rohr said that at no time during the meeting did the subject arise of Jewish emigration to the United States per se. 14. At end of day Bogdan came by alone to brief Nimetz on developments. He confirmed essence of proposal reported by Rohr in paras. 8–11 above. While cautious, he said he would be reporting them favorably to Bucharest. Christopher
