500
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
have pushed the technology too hard and created problems for our-
selves in the current context.
Harold Agnew said that people could say that we haven’t been
testing stockpiled weapons for reliability for years, why now? He said
that they didn’t realize the benefits to stockpile maintenance that are
achieved from testing new weapons and continuing to produce nuclear
weapon materials and components. He observed that many devices
which are being tested in new warhead development programs use the
same primaries which are in the old stockpiled weapons.
The President asked whether the Soviets had more reliable war-
heads than the US. Harold Brown answered that in general their war-
heads were believed to be heavier, somewhat more roughly con-
structed and less sensitive to deterioration. Roger Batzel agreed and
pointed out that they had not had the same constraints on weight and
size, and appeared to have developed less sensitive warheads.
The President asked how long we have had small primaries. Roger
Batzel responded nearly 20 years and after thinking about Polaris and
Poseidon, said it was really about 10 years. Harold Agnew pointed out
that development of smaller primaries had really been a result of the
pressure of MIRVing of ICBMs and SLBMs.
The President asked what had been our experience with regard to
correcting problems in inventory. Roger Batzel replied that in the early
1960s a vulnerability test of one of our ICBM RVs had been carried out.
The President asked if this was for fratricide purposes. Batzel said yes
but added that it was primarily to check for vulnerability to Soviet
ABMs. [3 lines not declassified] Harold Brown pointed out that [2 lines not
declassified]
Harold Agnew stated that another example was with our B–25 air-
to-air warhead which consisted of [less than 1 line not declassified] The
plutonium at that time was manufactured in Hanford and Rocky
Flats—one making [less than 1 line not declassified]. After the weapons
were stockpiled, people began to notice [less than 1 line not declassified]
After disassembling them it was discovered [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] This was due to very slight differences in the manufacturing pro-
cesses at Hanford and Rocky Flats so that the plutonium [less than 1 line
not declassified] might shrink slightly while that [less than 1 line not de-
classified] expanded.
Agnew said that another example where the warhead did not per-
form as expected was the Talos/Terrier as mentioned earlier, [less than
1 line not declassified] As a result of these problems he felt that we
wouldn’t be able to certify warheads if the materials were changed in
any way without testing.
Frank Press commented out that he had brought a panel of experts
together to look into this issue. His panel had included the current labo-
