3. Inspector Everson being a subordinate official could not do otherwise than carry out the orders given him, the more so as he was necessarily apprehensive of the sacking of the Louza police station. He can at most be criticised for a certain lack of judgment in having refused reenforcements owing to his belief that the demonstration would not assume a dangerous character. 4. The diplomatic representatives concerned, being of the opinion that the police regulations are defective especially those dealing with disturbances and riots and that they constitute one of the causes of the incidents, consider that they must be modified and made public. It is indispensable in such circumstances that any recourse to arms by the police should be preceded by a warning (such as the sounding of a bugle) comprehensible to all and capable of being heard at a distance. In acquainting the Municipal Council with the arrangements described above, the diplomatic representatives concerned, desirous of settling the incident in a spirit of justice and equity, recommend to it the immediate adoption of the measures mentioned under numbers 2 and 4 which will, they consider, do much to allay public opinion and bring back a normal state of affairs. Having thus given proof of their sincere desire as far as practicable they are concerned to ascertain and fix the responsibility in the matter. The diplomatic representatives concerned feel bound to declare that they are satisfied that arrangements for the demonstrations were made on Chinese territory. The Chinese Government must, therefore, on their part, take energetic measures to fix responsibility where it belongs and inflict penalties upon the officials responsible. Moreover, in order to prevent the recurrence of similar incidents, it is indispensable that in the future the authorities of the Chinese city and those of the Concession shall maintain a close contact with the object of assuring an effective collaboration for the maintenance of order.” MAYER
