Preface  IX
November 4, 1980, his administration developed an updated national 
security strategy document. On January 15, 1981, Carter approved 
PD–62, “Modifications in U.S. National Strategy.” Extensive documen-
tation on the evolution of all three PDs is included in this volume.
The central figure in the development of U.S. national security 
policy during the Carter administration was the President himself. As 
the directives, memoranda, meeting minutes, and marginalia in this 
volume attest, Carter took a particularly keen interest in the details of 
nuclear matters and national security policy more broadly. Other key 
figures in this volume include Brzezinski, Harold Brown, and Odom, 
as well as members of the National Security Council Staff such as Fritz 
Ermarth, Roger Molander, Victor Utgoff, and Jasper Welch. Principals 
and deputies expressed themselves forcefully in meetings of the Pol-
icy Review Committee and Special Coordination Committee (recorded 
here in minutes and summaries of conclusion) and in internal memo-
randa and interagency correspondence that constitute the backbone of 
this volume. While Secretary of State Cyrus Vance played a lead role 
in the negotiation of SALT II, he was much less involved in the for-
mulation of overall national security policy. The same can be said of 
Edmund Muskie, who, having succeeded Vance in May 1980 following 
the failed Iran hostage rescue attempt, learned of PD–59 by reading 
newspaper coverage of it. As a result of Vance and Muskie’s relative 
lack of influence on matters of national security, this volume contains 
fewer Department of State documents—­such as memoranda, position 
papers, and telegrams to and from posts—­than other volumes in the 
Carter administration subseries.
Acknowledgements
The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the 
Jimmy Carter Library, especially Ceri McCarron, Brittany Parris, and 
James Yancey. Thanks are also due to Nancy Smith, who served as the 
Director of the Presidential Materials Staff at the National Archives 
and Records Administration during the research of this volume, Sandy 
Meagher, who provided access to Department of Defense materials, 
and to the Central Intelligence Agency for arranging access to the Car-
ter Library materials scanned for the Remote Archive Capture project. 
The Historical Staff of the Central Intelligence Agency were helpful in 
arranging full access to the files of the Central Intelligence Agency. The 
editor would like to thank Jeffery Flannery and Ernest Emrich of the 
Library of Congress for arranging access to the Harold Brown papers. 
The Office of the Historian wishes to thank the interagency declassi-
fication personnel who conducted the review of this volume, includ-
ing those at the Department of State, Office of Information Programs 
and Services, the FRUS Coordination Staff at the Central Intelligence 
Agency, the Department of Defense, Office of Prepublication and
