598 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX B. Loans to Romania from International Financial Institutions Recently, and in accordance with current legislative requirements, we have advised Romanian officials of our obligation to take human rights considerations into account in determining our position on loan applications to international financial institutions (IFIs) like the World Bank. However, we have not advised the Romanians that the U.S. is contemplating specific negative action against them in the IFIs. It is widely understood that Ceausescu maintains a tightly controlled internal political system. There is lack of consensus in the Department on the degree to which there is a pattern of violations of human rights in Romania serious enough to warrant such action. The U.S. encouraged Romania to join the World Bank and the IMF, in keeping with our interest in lessening Romania’s economic and political dependence on the USSR and Communist economic organizations. This stems from Administration policy (in accordance with PD– 21) to make legitimate efforts to accord Romania favored treatment in, among other things, economic matters. We are required by the Harkin Amendment (1977)4 and PD–305 to consider Romania’s human rights policies in the IFI context. OPTIONS 1. The President Raises Issue with Ceausescu This would signal the most serious intent to reflect upon the human rights situation in Romania and our need to consider this in decisions for positive votes, abstaining or voting against Romanian loan applications in the IFIs. The President could raise this issue in a calm fashion without suggesting that the United States is on the verge of abstaining or of a negative vote in the IFI and could make clear he has an open rather than closed mind on the subject. (HA supports.) 2. Secretary Raises Issue with the Foreign Minister This could be taken up as one of the “delicate problems” mentioned by the President (see above). The Secretary could explain the requirements of U.S. law and stress our wish to continue supporting Romanian IFI loan applications. (S/P supports, as does HA if the President does not raise it.) 4 The Harkin Amendment to the Fair Trade Act prohibited the United States from offering economic assistance to countries that grossly violated human rights. 5 PD–30, signed by Carter on February 17, 1978, established that promoting the observance of human rights would be a major objective of U.S. foreign policy.
