948 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 591. Telegram 1943 to Geneva1 Washington, May 2, 1956, 12:27 p.m. 1943. For Johnson. Guidance for May 5 meeting. 1. We concur in view expressed your 1825 that, in absence new move on part Chinese Communists, you should confine your remarks on renunciation force to attack on their position and reiteration ours. Heart of your presentation should be repetition theme which you expressed last meeting: that if Communists genuinely willing renounce force ­Taiwan area they cannot validly object to our April 21 draft. If their intention is to reserve to themselves option of resorting force there, then any form of words that they accepted purporting to bind them to renounce force in Taiwan area would be fraud on world. 2. Wang appears interpret phrase “without prejudice to pursuit by each side of policies by peaceful means” as meaning acquiescence by Communists in policies pursued by US. (Paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 your 1823.) Point out to him that our draft does not require Chinese ­Communists acquiesce in US policies. Neither does it require US acquiesce in or agree to Communist policies. Purpose of phrase is simply to make clear that neither side is renouncing anything except prosecution its policies by armed force. This is action which has been taken by all members UN, including US, as well as other countries. There is no sound reason why Chinese Communists should not take similar action. 3. Inform Wang that eighteen more Chinese from US crossed bor­ der into Communist China April 30, making total of at least 148 since August 1, 1955. FYI This figure includes only those proceeding US to Hong Kong by ship in direct transit to Communist China. END FYI This uninterrupted flow Chinese from US to mainland China contrasts sharply with complete cessation in release Americans since December last year, despite September 10 pledge that latter would be allowed expeditiously return. Ask Wang how Chinese Communists expect world believe they are carrying out Agreed Announcement when facts so clearly speak otherwise? US intends faithfully continue carrying out its September 10 pledge, but expects Chinese Communists to do like­ wise. Their failure to do so makes impossible improved atmosphere they profess to be seeking in these talks. Hoover 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/5–256. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Clough; cleared by McConaughy and in draft by Phleger.
