Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I • In India, the U.N. Children’s Fund is working to restore and improve potable water resources in the areas hardest hit by the November 1977 cyclone and tidal wave. • In Central America, experts from the U.N. Development Program are working in four countries to develop energy from underground volcanic steam. I could go on and on, citing projects in various countries aimed at specific problems and particular groups. The point is that when we are discussing aid levels, we must remember we are not talking about abstract statistics: we are talking about whether or not we can fund practical projects that make a difference to people in need. There is another important aspect of our foreign aid program which I would like to mention very briefly—our security assistance programs. These programs have three important objectives. First, they are designed to assist our friends and allies to provide for their legitimate defense needs. Second, these programs support our strategic and political objectives of reducing tensions and promoting stability in areas of potential confrontation and conflict. Third, they provide economic assistance to countries which are experiencing political and economic stresses and where U.S. security interests are involved. The vast majority of our security assistance aid goes to support our peace efforts in the Middle East and in southern Africa. In providing assistance to such nations, we help them meet the economic strains imposed by tensions in their regions. Does Foreign Aid Work? Do all these programs work? There is a popular myth that foreign assistance often does not produce results. The record shows otherwise. It is impossible to separate foreign assistance from other factors that produce development. But foreign assistance has been central in some measure to the following achievements. • Between 1950 and 1975 the developing countries grew more rapidly than either they or the developed countries had grown in any time period in the past. • Substantial increases in life expectancy are taking place in many developing countries. • The number of children in primary schools in the developing world has trebled since 1950, and the number of secondary students has increased sixfold during the same period. • The battle against communicable disease has produced significant results. Smallpox is now confined to a small area of Africa, and the
