380
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
• In India, the U.N. Children’s Fund is working to restore and im-
prove potable water resources in the areas hardest hit by the November
1977 cyclone and tidal wave.
• In Central America, experts from the U.N. Development Pro-
gram are working in four countries to develop energy from under-
ground volcanic steam.
I could go on and on, citing projects in various countries aimed at
specific problems and particular groups. The point is that when we are
discussing aid levels, we must remember we are not talking about ab-
stract statistics: we are talking about whether or not we can fund prac-
tical projects that make a difference to people in need.
There is another important aspect of our foreign aid program
which I would like to mention very briefly—our security assistance
programs.
These programs have three important objectives. First, they are de-
signed to assist our friends and allies to provide for their legitimate de-
fense needs. Second, these programs support our strategic and political
objectives of reducing tensions and promoting stability in areas of po-
tential confrontation and conflict. Third, they provide economic assist-
ance to countries which are experiencing political and economic
stresses and where U.S. security interests are involved. The vast ma-
jority of our security assistance aid goes to support our peace efforts in
the Middle East and in southern Africa. In providing assistance to such
nations, we help them meet the economic strains imposed by tensions
in their regions.
Does Foreign Aid Work?
Do all these programs work?
There is a popular myth that foreign assistance often does not pro-
duce results. The record shows otherwise.
It is impossible to separate foreign assistance from other factors
that produce development. But foreign assistance has been central in
some measure to the following achievements.
• Between 1950 and 1975 the developing countries grew more rap-
idly than either they or the developed countries had grown in any time
period in the past.
• Substantial increases in life expectancy are taking place in many
developing countries.
• The number of children in primary schools in the developing
world has trebled since 1950, and the number of secondary students
has increased sixfold during the same period.
• The battle against communicable disease has produced signifi-
cant results. Smallpox is now confined to a small area of Africa, and the
