3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1979
677
hostile campaign which is developing in the United States against the
Soviet Union, for which the United States has absolutely no actual pre-
tense and no legal basis. It occurs to us that the single result of the exag-
geration of this artificially created campaign could turn out to cause ap-
preciable damage to the relations between our countries and the cause
of strengthening peace, the importance of which we talked about in
Vienna. We regret that you still support the contrived version about the
Soviet combat unit which is allegedly located in Cuba.
We advise you: give up this version. We have a military training
center in Cuba, which has been there more than 17 years. It is fulfilling
its training functions by an agreement with the Cuban government. It is
doing that and can do nothing more. You can be completely assured in
this matter.
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance in a conversation with A.A. Gro-
myko,3 himself declared that the Soviet Union did nothing contradic-
tory to the 1962 agreement, and that the Soviet military personnel lo-
cated in Cuba do not present any threat to the United States.
I repeat, there is a military training center in Cuba. It will exist. We
do not intend to change its status as such a center, now or in the future.
We are informing you about it in order to show good will, since this
whole question is entirely a matter between two sovereign states—the
Soviet Union and Cuba.
But if that which is occuring in the United States now concerning
this question is an endeavor which is dictated by some other under-
standings, we can only express our regrets regarding this matter.
It seems to us that any other understandings should retreat before
the importance of Soviet-American relations in which the Strategic
Arms Limitations Treaty (SALT–II)4 now holds a significant place.
Let us, Mr. President, proceed from the results of the exchange
of opinions, which we had in Vienna and which I greatly value, on
fundamental questions of Soviet-American relations and of peaceful
policies.5
3 Ibid.
4 See footnote 4, Document 200.
5 On October 1, Carter addressed the nation on the topics of the Soviet Brigade in
Cuba and SALT. For the text of his speech, see Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp.
1802–1806.
