723.2515/1817: Telegram [Document 142] The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State [Paraphrase—Extract] ARICA, January 8, 1926—6 p.m. [Received January 9—9:30 p.m.75 ] From Pershing: On January 6 the Peruvians began to repatriate voters who had been expelled from Tacna, and some thirty were sent up in the morning train from Arica. Several of my staff were eyewitnesses of events attending arrival of Peruvians at Tacna; following is summary of their account: Peruvians arrived 10:25 a.m., and crowd estimated at about two hundred fifty had gathered about platform and station, rough elements predominating. Crowd greeted arrival of train with threatening outcries, such as: “Kill them.” When train had stopped the Peruvians began to descend, carrying hand baggage. Despite no provocative action on their part toward Chileans, the crowd immediately assaulted them. Twelve policemen who at outset made some effort to restrain mob became ineffective almost immediately; thereafter, their action appeared half-hearted. Peruvians, assailants, and police surged through the station and out into the street where the mob increased to four or five hundred and the police to about twenty-five, but no real attempt was made to check mob. As crowd moved up street Peruvians were brutally attacked for a distance of about four blocks, being knocked down, stoned, kicked, and beaten with clubs and fists. The principal attackers seemed to be organized into some half dozen groups consisting of 6 to 10 men each. Several soldiers and two men wearing uniforms of commissioned officers in the Chilean Army were observed among the onlookers, the spectacle affording them an occasion for much laughter. No arrests were made during the attacks, nor were efforts to make arrests apparent in cases which flagrantly demanded such action. The exact number of Peruvians injured and extent of injuries has not yet been reported. Actions of Peruvians at the railway station and in the street were confined to instinctive and ineffectual efforts at defense. The majority of the
