International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
505
special drawing rights (SDR). We have indicated our agreement in
principle to a quota increase and have taken a sympathetic view
toward a modest SDR allocation, but have refrained from indicating
figures we could accept, largely out of concern that a premature agree-
ment on these questions might jeopardize Congressional action on the
Witteveen Facility.2
Apart from the U.S., the Fund membership is now ready to settle
these issues during the upcoming meetings.3 There is a need to reach
agreement and assure that the IMF will be capable of playing its central
role in managing the international monetary system. We are under con-
siderable international pressure to conclude the agreement—and I
think it would be highly desirable, and important for the dollar, for us
to take a positive, constructive attitude. On the basis of intensive con-
sultations with the Congress, I am persuaded that there is broad under-
standing and support for U.S. agreement to go ahead, and that an an-
nouncement of an agreement at the meetings will not cause serious
problems for the Witteveen Facility.
In the absence of strong advice to the contrary from key Con-
gressmen that remain to be contacted in the next couple of days, I in-
tend to announce our agreement (probably on Sunday4 in the Interim
Committee meeting where this is being negotiated) to an increase in
quotas and an SDR allocation.
The quota increase will be in the range of 40–50 percent, with
agreement most likely on 50 percent, implying an increase in the U.S.
quota of about $5 billion. The authorization would probably be sub-
mitted to Congress sometime next year. However, assuming appropri-
ations will be required as a result of the compromises we have had to
accept on the Witteveen Facility, an appropriation would not be
needed until FY 1981. The SDR allocation will probably total SDR 3–4
billion per year for a three-year period.5 No Congressional action on the
SDR allocation is required.
thal’s recommendations; both Carter and Brzezinski initialed Owen’s memorandum.
(Ibid.)
2 Schultze argued strongly in favor of supporting IMF quota increases and new
SDR allocations in a September 14 memorandum to Blumenthal. (Carter Library, Staff Of-
fice Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 20, De-
partment of Treasury: Blumenthal)
3 Blumenthal is referring to the joint IMF–World Bank meeting held in Washington
September 25–28.
4 September 24.
5 In his September 22 cover memorandum (see footnote 1 above), Owen suggested
that the new 3-year annual SDR allocation would be “most likely 4 billion.”
