58  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
that ECM cannot beat.5 At the least, we should test the B–1’s ECM 
systems (which will be available in the fall of 1979) against our own 
AWAC’s and look-­down/shoot-­down fighters, as well as against our 
best low altitude SAM systems.
—We can also get a better idea of how well our current cruise mis-
siles might stand up against future Soviet air defense by testing them 
against our best air defense systems.
—Finally, we will know whether or not a promising new Air Force 
concept for building essentially invisible aircraft or cruise missiles will 
work.6 If it does, the arguments in favor of penetrating bombers may 
also disappear.
SALT
Another issue bearing on this decision is how it interacts with 
SALT, and clearly we have recognized an interaction in our efforts to 
preserve the option for a 2500 km ALCM. If you decide to deploy this 
system, we should make every effort to avoid having to count heavy 
bombers with long range ALCM’s as MIRV’s. Further, if we want to 
be able to eventually build a new long range cruise missile carrier, we 
must make certain that we have the right to define the new aircraft as 
a heavy bomber.
The announcement of your decision could conceivably impact on 
the ongoing SALT negotiations. However, the Soviets seem to have 
accommodated their thinking to the deployment of a long range ALCM 
or the B–1. Thus, unless your decision is accompanied by a claim that 
its purpose is to allow us to significantly raise our overall strategic 
capability, it probably won’t have much impact on SALT.
A third conceivable interaction involves the Senate. Specifically a 
delay in B–1 production could raise further problems for ratification of 
a new SALT treaty. On the other hand, Senator Jackson recognizes that 
Boeing has a very good chance of winning a contract to produce cruise 
missiles and/or the replacement for the B–1. (He came close to oppos-
ing the B–1 during the campaign.)
One final point concerns costs. In particular, will delay of the B–1 
program significantly increase its costs if we do end up building it? 
Harold’s study suggests otherwise by showing that it is cheaper to 
delay production a year and then catch up by building four aircraft 
per month, than it is to start now and build at a rate of two aircraft per 
5 See Tab A. [Footnote is in the original. Tab A, an undated one-­page evaluation of 
Soviet air defense capabilities against the B–1’s electronic counter measures, is attached 
but not printed.]
6 See Tab B. [Footnote is in the original. Tab B, an undated one-­and-­one-­half page 
description of stealth cruise missiles along with an artist’s rendering and a graph, is 
attached but not printed.]
