International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 221 Quotas. Discussions are underway in the IMF on an increase in Fund quotas, as foreshadowed at the Summit; the present target is to reach agreement by the spring of 1978. Like the new IMF facility, the increased IMF quotas should both give countries in deficit access to money which will afford them time to adjust their policies at an appropriate pace and prevent further moves toward protectionism. III. Trade Protectionism. High unemployment in the industrialized countries has continued to generate protectionist pressures since the Summit. Nonetheless, there has not been widespread use of import restrictions. The commitments made at Downing Street and reaffirmed in renewing the OECD pledge have proved effective. Pressures for restrictive import measures are likely to continue, however; governments will need to exercise discipline to avoid measures that would transfer the burden of unemployment to their trading partners; they should continue to seek multilateral solutions, in appropriate forums, to pressing trade problems. The best way to reduce pressures for import restrictions is to accelerate overall growth and employment, to reduce substantial imbalances of international payments positions, and to achieve rapid and substantial progress in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations. MTN. In the Tokyo Round of multilateral trade negotiations, agreement has been reached on a timetable for achieving substantive progress by the end of the year, as pledged at the Summit. As a first step toward meeting the timetable, a working hypothesis for tariff reductions, which will guide tariff negotiations, is being developed. The agreed approach should ensure that the Summit goals of substantial reduction, harmonization, and elimination of tariffs in certain cases will be achieved. Progress has already been made in preparations for tabling requests in the sectors of agriculture and non-tariff barriers, and work has been set in hand on customs valuation, subsidies and countervailing duties, standards, government procurement, and safeguard mechanisms. Only if this momentum is maintained can the aims of Downing Street Summit be met within the time scale we envisage. The objective established for the MTN—a comprehensive set of agreements to the maximum benefit of all—will require a major effort on the part of all participants. The timetable for progress which has been agreed is ambitious; the temptation to delay and settle for limited results should be resisted; wider trade will help to stimulate growth and limit inflation.11 11 Carter wrote “We’ll give our effort” at the end of this paragraph.
