358 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 5. F–108 and GAP–9 What effectiveness will this interception system add to air defense of the home base? Is this development the best means to get this added effectiveness? An interceptor system which does not depend too heavily on the ground environment is desirable during the ICBM era. But is the F–108 system too complex and the vehicle too small fully to exploit the concept? Can an effective radar for this plane be developed without degrading the performance of the plane? 6. ASW Expenditure Is the large fraction of the Nary budget expended on ASW in need of redirection? Should there be more emphasis on development of bet­ ter methods, including sea surveillance, as distinguished from marginal improvement and test of existing methods? Is the Navy recommending funds large enough to deal adequately with the solution of this com­ plex problem? 7. ASW Seaplane Development The prospect of success should be critically examined here on tech­ nical grounds. The use of the open ocean as a landing platform poses an extremely difficult problem under most conditions. Can this be con­ sidered a high-­priority item if the questions in “6” above are answered affirmatively? C. Passive Defense 1. SAC Alert Is the planned SAC alert adequate to meet the enemy missile threat? Has there been a realistic forecast of the operating costs entailed by the continuous alert over the next several years? How would these costs, as well as the operating capability of SAC, be affected by hardening a portion of each base? 2. Hardening In addition to earlier questions which have related hardening of SAC bases to other defensive alternatives, the following questions appear: To what level of pressure should bases be hardened? How is this level related to the number of aircraft to be protected by hardening? What levels of hardening are best for missile bases, and how many bases should be protected at this level? In all cases, the protection obtained by greatly hardening a few bases needs to be compared in its cost with more widespread harden­ ing to a lower pressure level.
