1052 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 252. Special National Intelligence Estimate1 SNIE 11–6–60 Washington, May 3, 1960 STRENGTH OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE USSR THE PROBLEM To estimate the strength of the armed forces of the USSR as of 1 January 1960. THE ESTIMATE 1. On 14 January 1960, Khrushchev declared that the person­ nel strength of the Soviet armed forces was 3,623,000. We have thor­ oughly reviewed the evidence available to us, and we conclude that Khrushchev’s statement was substantially correct. 2. In a number of instances it is impossible to be confident as to the subordination of elements of the Soviet armed forces. Accordingly, we have presented the estimates in categories corresponding generally to the primary missions or functions which the various elements per­ form. In this connection, it ought to be noted that the part played by civilians in the Soviet military organization is considerable, especially in research and development, in construction, and in various other sup­ port functions. 3. The following paragraphs give estimated strength figures, with explanatory comments. They are followed by a table which presents the same figures in summary form. The evidence is, however, insufficient to establish the precise accuracy of any of these figures. I. MINISTRY OF DEFENSE 70,000 4. Headquarters. The Ministry of Defense—including the General Staff and the Main Staffs of the Ground Forces, Air Forces, Air Defense Forces, and Navy, other staffs and directorates, and military missions abroad—probably comprises about 25,000 military personnel on active duty, as well as an undetermined number of civilians. 5. Research and Development. Military scientific research and devel­ opment in the USSR is conducted largely by civilians. In addition, we estimate that there are about 35,000 active duty military personnel in research and development, primarily subordinate to the Ministry of Defense. These include principally the personnel at missile test ranges, and in electronics, nuclear development, and aviation technology. These are not the only military men in R&D and allied functions, such 1 Source: “Strength of the Armed Forces of the USSR.” Secret. 7 pp. DOS, INR–NIE Files.
