3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 July–December 1978 449 3. Electron beam welding has military significance when computer controlled: It is easily diverted It is not foreign-sourced; the numerical control technology is licensed from U.S. 4. Tungsten carbide has military significance: It is easily diverted It is not foreign-sourced, at this scale of manufacture. With regard to substance, I am quite impressed by these three paragraphs from the letter of transmittal by J. Fred Bucy (president of Texas Instruments and a member of the DSB): “My conclusions are that this technology is very significant to national security in the broadest terms. It is critical to significant development of major energy resources throughout the world in the 1980’s. “There must be a few times within a decade that a subtle decision can change the course of history. My sincere belief is that a decision regarding the export of a turnkey factory for the manufacturing of drill bits for the exploration of oil is one of those. “This transfer of technology emphasizes that the whole is greater than the sum of the parts: that each individual piece may be all right, but when put together, the whole equals something that is very significant.” To ignore the DSB assessment and proceed as if nothing has happened would be to play into Senator Jackson’s hands,6 in addition to perhaps generally hurting our national security. However, to revoke the licenses would be preemptory and would now send an excessively negative signal to the Soviet Union. Therefore, on balance I recommend a suspension on both national security and foreign policy grounds. Some might say that this is another zigzag; but the DSB report represents a new factor and a review will preempt pressure for revocation on national security grounds. Moreover, there are also broader foreign policy considerations involved in the transfer of oil technology to the Soviet Union. In essence, as the DSB assessment suggests, “it would allow the Soviets to enter the natural oil and gas fields throughout the world with advanced drilling technical competence, presenting increased opportunities for them to exert their policy influence.” I attach a decision memorandum, in which the positions of the different agencies are stated in their own words. 6 Jackson wanted to prevent the deal by launching an investigation into the military and political ramifications of providing the Soviet Union with the technology. See Rowland Evans and Robert Novak, “Confusing Signals on Trade with Russia,” The Washington Post, August 16, 1978, p. A15.
