3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
July–December 1978
449
3. Electron beam welding has military significance when computer
controlled:
It is easily diverted
It is not foreign-sourced; the numerical control technology is li-
censed from U.S.
4. Tungsten carbide has military significance:
It is easily diverted
It is not foreign-sourced, at this scale of manufacture.
With regard to substance, I am quite impressed by these three
paragraphs from the letter of transmittal by J. Fred Bucy (president of
Texas Instruments and a member of the DSB):
“My conclusions are that this technology is very significant to na-
tional security in the broadest terms. It is critical to significant develop-
ment of major energy resources throughout the world in the 1980’s.
“There must be a few times within a decade that a subtle decision
can change the course of history. My sincere belief is that a decision re-
garding the export of a turnkey factory for the manufacturing of drill
bits for the exploration of oil is one of those.
“This transfer of technology emphasizes that the whole is greater
than the sum of the parts: that each individual piece may be all right,
but when put together, the whole equals something that is very
significant.”
To ignore the DSB assessment and proceed as if nothing has hap-
pened would be to play into Senator Jackson’s hands,6 in addition to
perhaps generally hurting our national security.
However, to revoke the licenses would be preemptory and would
now send an excessively negative signal to the Soviet Union. Therefore,
on balance I recommend a suspension on both national security and
foreign policy grounds. Some might say that this is another zigzag; but
the DSB report represents a new factor and a review will preempt pres-
sure for revocation on national security grounds.
Moreover, there are also broader foreign policy considerations in-
volved in the transfer of oil technology to the Soviet Union. In essence,
as the DSB assessment suggests, “it would allow the Soviets to enter the
natural oil and gas fields throughout the world with advanced drilling
technical competence, presenting increased opportunities for them to
exert their policy influence.”
I attach a decision memorandum, in which the positions of the dif-
ferent agencies are stated in their own words.
6 Jackson wanted to prevent the deal by launching an investigation into the military
and political ramifications of providing the Soviet Union with the technology. See Row-
land Evans and Robert Novak, “Confusing Signals on Trade with Russia,” The Wash-
ington Post, August 16, 1978, p. A15.
