3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
582
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
tion of Nuclear War.2 It had also become possible to cooperate on a
number of international problems. On that basis a whole network of bi-
lateral agreements had been established which made up the living
tissue of the ties and contacts between our two states. Of course, a
steady development of relations between states becomes possible only
if each partner observes continuity in pursuing his policy. Without that,
agreements between states would not be worth very much.
Brezhnev noted that at this meeting President Carter and he would
be discussing a number of serious issues and adopt important decisions
with regard to these issues. What would happen, however, if subse-
quently one of the sides, for reasons of its own, were to start revising
those decisions or begin acting as if they did not exist at all? Would the
time and effort expended on these negotiations have been worthwhile?
The answer, of course, was—hardly. As far as the Soviet Union was
concerned, it pursued a consistent policy. The Soviet state and party
leadership, and the entire Soviet people believed that Soviet-American
relations should be peaceful and should provide for broad cooperation
over the long term. Brezhnev said that on more than one occasion he
had said just that, and he was prepared to reiterate this now: the Soviet
Union did not have any hostile intentions with respect to the United
States. It did not seek any advantages or benefits at the expense of the
United States anywhere in the world. He referred to the so-called “So-
viet threat” that was so frequently cited. Any attempt to ascribe any
bellicose intentions or designs to the Soviet Union were based on sheer
fabrications and could only play into the hands of those who wanted to
sow enmity between the Soviet Union and the United States and even
set the two powers against each other. Of course, the Soviet Union, like
the United States, is a state with broad global interests and has certain
principles on which its policy was based, principles it could not give
up. The Soviet Union has allies and friends, it has treaties providing for
certain obligations with respect to these allies and friends, with whom
it has interests in common that would be safeguarded against any en-
croachment. The Soviet Union had declared its solidarity with people
who were struggling for independence and social progress, because it
believed this to be just. It was by no means by Soviet efforts that a
number of rotting regimes had collapsed and that a number of coun-
tries had asserted their independence. That process was governed by
its own inexorable laws. Revolutionary changes occur as a result of
conditions within a national territory, and it would only be self-
deception to ascribe such changes to “Moscow intrigues”. The Soviet
Union was opposed in principle to the export of revolution, just as it
2 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XV, Soviet Union, June 1972–August 1974,
Documents 122 and 129.
