3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
754
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
national Olympic Committees. The Africans, by contrast, can order
their committees not to participate. Some nations would probably at-
tend alternative games even if they decide to participate in Moscow.
The key nations which will have to be persuaded are France, West Ger-
many, the UK, Kenya, China, Mexico, Japan and Italy. These are the
most influential nations in terms of sports competition and participa-
tion in the Olympic movement. The West Europeans are the key. We
must attempt to persuade them to commit to support alternative
games, even if they will not make a firm commitment to stay away
from Moscow. That would permit us to proceed with planning for the
games. A major factor will be persuading the international sports feder-
ations to support these games since their approval is necessary to in-
sure that participating athletes will not be disqualified. (U)
At the present time, we have no offer of any site but Los Angeles,
and everyone agrees that we should not make this a solely U.S. alterna-
tive. We need 3–4 sites, perhaps including Los Angeles, which could be
linked by television worldwide. The LAOOC representatives felt that
such an approach was feasible and could be marketed worldwide.
Japan, for example, could be the site for volleyball and judo, the UK for
equestrian events, etc. It may be necessary for the governments to put
in some money to handle the initial costs of organizing the games, al-
though the LAOOC representatives believed strongly that the games
would be self-supporting once they had overcome the initial lag and
were widely accepted. Once a decision is made, it will be extremely im-
portant for the U.S. to convince the networks that this is a major
event—perhaps by insuring Presidential attendance at the opening,
etc. (U)
The best prospective time for the games to be held was for nine
days, spanning two weekends, in the second half of August. That was
desirable in terms of maintaining peak training by the athletes, to avoid
the national conventions, and to stay ahead of the regular TV season
programming. All agreed that was a reasonable planning date. (U)
All agreed that our next step should be to approach the various
key governments involved to get them to make a firm commitment that
they would send a team to the alternative games, regardless of what de-
cision they may make on attendance at Moscow. This will have to be
carefully handled to avoid giving the waverers an excuse to avoid a de-
cision on boycotting Moscow, but we cannot wait for a decision past
the end of March if planning for the alternative games is to be a success.
The games should be open to all nations, including the Soviets, just as
Lake Placid was. (U)
The LAOOC representatives noted the need to establish a private
international coordinating committee as well as an advisory committee
composed of leading sports and business figures. The LAOOC had
