Comprehensive Test Ban 605 B. Discussion Although we are insisting on the use of US equipment at NSS in the USSR, we do not yet know whether the Soviets will ask that their equipment be used at sites in the US and UK. Thus, to relieve the UK of the financial burden of acquiring equipment for three additional NSS sites, a US funding offer must apply regardless of whether the UK ultimately uses US or Soviet equipment. The cost of US equipment and related assistance to the UK for three NSS is estimated at $6–8 million; there is no reason why the cost should be higher for Soviet equipment. What would be involved at present is a commitment in principle to seek this funding at an appropriate time in the future; no specific budgetary actions need be undertaken at present. Following are factors bearing on this issue: —US offer to fund equipment for three additional UK NSS could lead to UK to shift to four-site NSS position. —UK will be concerned that any movement beyond one station could result in pressures in the future for them accept a number larger than four. —We should assure the UK that if they shift to four stations we will stand firmly with them in trying to resolve the UK NSS issue on this basis. —Nevertheless, the UK probably will seek assurances that our offer to fund equipment would apply for additional NSS if they eventually moved beyond four stations. —We would make clear to the UK that the Executive Branch can only make a commitment to request funds for UK NSS from the Congress at an appropriate time. The UK would have to take into account the possibility that the Congress might not approve these funds. —There are differing views regarding the relationship of US assistance to the UK and overall US–USSR funding arrangements: —Some are concerned that an offer of US funding of equipment for UK stations would complicate working out funding arrangements with the USSR in the future, and they argue that the basic ground rules for financing NSS in all three countries should be negotiated before the US makes any commitments to the UK. —Others feel that these overall arrangements cannot be negotiated until the Soviets agree to use US equipment, and that we will never reach that stage of the negotiating process until the impasse over UK NSS is broken. —Contribution of three additional UK NSS to monitoring UK compliance with CTBT would be marginal. —Three additional UK NSS in Southern Hemisphere could make some limited contribution to NPT monitoring (as discussed in attached CIA paper):13 —These NSS probably would not improve detection capabilities, due to high noise environment of island locations. 13 Not attached.
