Comprehensive Test Ban
605
B. Discussion
Although we are insisting on the use of US equipment at NSS in
the USSR, we do not yet know whether the Soviets will ask that their
equipment be used at sites in the US and UK. Thus, to relieve the UK of
the financial burden of acquiring equipment for three additional NSS
sites, a US funding offer must apply regardless of whether the UK ulti-
mately uses US or Soviet equipment. The cost of US equipment and re-
lated assistance to the UK for three NSS is estimated at $6–8 million;
there is no reason why the cost should be higher for Soviet equipment.
What would be involved at present is a commitment in principle to
seek this funding at an appropriate time in the future; no specific bud-
getary actions need be undertaken at present.
Following are factors bearing on this issue:
—US offer to fund equipment for three additional UK NSS could
lead to UK to shift to four-site NSS position.
—UK will be concerned that any movement beyond one station
could result in pressures in the future for them accept a number larger
than four.
—We should assure the UK that if they shift to four stations we
will stand firmly with them in trying to resolve the UK NSS issue on
this basis.
—Nevertheless, the UK probably will seek assurances that our
offer to fund equipment would apply for additional NSS if they eventu-
ally moved beyond four stations.
—We would make clear to the UK that the Executive Branch can
only make a commitment to request funds for UK NSS from the
Congress at an appropriate time. The UK would have to take into ac-
count the possibility that the Congress might not approve these funds.
—There are differing views regarding the relationship of US assist-
ance to the UK and overall US–USSR funding arrangements:
—Some are concerned that an offer of US funding of equip-
ment for UK stations would complicate working out funding ar-
rangements with the USSR in the future, and they argue that the
basic ground rules for financing NSS in all three countries should
be negotiated before the US makes any commitments to the UK.
—Others feel that these overall arrangements cannot be nego-
tiated until the Soviets agree to use US equipment, and that we will
never reach that stage of the negotiating process until the impasse
over UK NSS is broken.
—Contribution of three additional UK NSS to monitoring UK
compliance with CTBT would be marginal.
—Three additional UK NSS in Southern Hemisphere could make
some limited contribution to NPT monitoring (as discussed in attached
CIA paper):13
—These NSS probably would not improve detection capabil-
ities, due to high noise environment of island locations.
13 Not attached.
