296  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
—[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]
III. Terrorism.
General: Things are in overall good shape. That is, we have a struc-
ture in place. The way it works is not always satisfactory. The following 
list identifies some of the problems:
—We have a new Executive Committee Chairman, Tony Quainton, 
at State. This is a promising change.
—DOD now has a rather impressive military capability but how 
it will be tied to the other elements in an incident is not all that well 
worked out. McGiffert and others in DOD, including the General Meyer, 
cry out for national level exercises, CPXs. I have been less enthusiastic 
for this before DOD decides its own internal questions. For example, 
does the Secretary of the Army have the executive agent responsibility 
as he does for “domestic order”? Or is the link to Harold Brown and the 
JCS? Justice has procedures for working with the Army but not with 
JCS. I will be pressing on this front.
—Responding to foreign requests for counter-­terror training. This 
one may get sticky. CIA already has its own rather broad program 
which is not understood by State. Quainton, following Isham’s lead, 
wants State to “coordinate” our counter-­terrorism foreign training pol-
icy. Quainton has asked for all agencies to report what programs they 
have abroad. This is leading to a possible clash between State and CIA. 
I am in touch with Henze to try to prevent it.
—Intelligence for terrorism. The Executive Committee is believed 
by many to handle counter-­terrorism intelligence. I set it up so that an 
informal sub-­group of the committee can do so. The only problem is 
that when something like the question of aid for Italy comes up, I am 
not kept abreast of what you and Hunter are doing. Thus, things were 
not always under control, and the agencies gradually learned that we 
were not tied together properly at the NSC. The impression of discon-
nection got as far as some of the Senate Intelligence Committee staff 
apparently. I would like to pull intelligence for terrorism together. I 
have pushed the CIA to stop taking a purely passive attitude to intelli-
gence on terrorism and to look for positive ways to use what we know 
more effectively. Their reaction is favorable, but they hesitate about 
how to respond. After a day with the DDO, the IAD chief, and the head 
of terrorism group, I came away with a better, but not encouraging, 
sense of the realities out there. I greatly need your support and backing 
in this area, and I would like to push it.
—A related item, not terrorism but intelligence, is the beginning of 
a coordinated CI effort on our embassy construction in Moscow. Sam
