March 27–December 31, 1979
985
this. This approach would probably fail, but it is our only chance.
Maybe David Aaron is right, we should just let it bubble along.
Secretary Vance said we couldn’t let it bubble along.
David Aaron and Ambassador Strauss said we should do something.
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether Ambassador Strauss should go to Is-
rael now.
Secretary Vance said that to go would be good.
Ambassador Strauss said that is why he thought of London.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if we can wait that long.
Secretary Vance said the situation will break before that.
Ambassador Habib said the visit should be before then. There will be
an Arab foreign ministers meeting and a summit, with Lebanon as the
number-one item on the agenda. The summit is set for November 17.
Dr. Brzezinski asked how we should proceed.
Secretary Vance said that Boutros Ghali said we should play it softly
until Egypt gets its land back, and then work Israel over (Note: side
comment on the autonomy talks).
Dr. Brzezinski asked how we should proceed.
Secretary Vance said first, is this worth pursuing further. He be-
lieves we can’t drop it. The situation will blow up, and we will be
blamed. Yet it will not do for us to be visibly in front. Therefore how
should we structure how Ambassador Strauss will approach Begin?
Second, what little piece is there—e.g., Tyre or Beirut—to keep the mo-
mentum going, to give a better chance that it will not fall apart in a) a
Syrian-Israeli air battle; or b) some terrorist action in Israel mounted
from the West Bank (since it is doubtful that the PLO would launch one
from Lebanon).
Ambassador Strauss said that any PLO fool could commit a terrorist
act.
Secretary Vance said that, to be specific, would Saunders, Strauss,
and Hunter join forces on a couple of issues. How should we structure
this, and what can we get out of it if Ambassador Strauss is to go soon?
Ambassador Strauss said going soon is possible, not good, but he
will try to improve it. Tentatively, he is to meet Khalil and Burg in
London soon.
Dr. Brzezinski asked about talking with Dayan.
Ambassador Habib said that Dayan would not want to get into this.
Secretary Vance agreed. It has to be Begin.
Ambassador Strauss asked, if there were a bust in the ceasefire,
would that be a better or worse time to move?
Ambassador Habib said it would be worse. The Arabs would sit still
for an initiative now. Lebanon embarrasses them.
