838
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
(4) The mutually supporting relationship between a US human
rights strategy and US efforts to place basic human needs at the center
of our development policies.
II. The principal conclusions were:
(1) An interagency group chaired by the State Department and re-
porting to the PRC, would become the central bureaucratic mechanism
for the elaboration of the ideas contained in PRM 8 and for the develop-
ment of specific policy options in the field of North-South relations.
(2) The fulfillment of basic human needs should be considered as
an integral element of the fulfillment of human rights. The two closely
related concepts can and should form a central core of US foreign
policy.
(3) While the fulfillment of basic human needs is but one of several
elements of the North-South strategy outlined in PRM 8, it should be a
primary focus of the overall strategy and a central component of the re-
source transfer aspect of US North-South policies.
(4) The core elements of a basic human needs program should be the
provision of minimum levels of food/nutrition, health services and
basic education.
(5) US relations with the “middle” and “upper-tier” developing
countries require an emphasis on a broad range of policy tools which
need further investigation. A basic human needs strategy will be far
less central to their needs, and its role in these countries needs further
study.
III. The following actions are to be taken:
(1) The new North-South Working Group will immediately under-
take the analysis and development of policy options considered neces-
sary for the President’s September address to the United Nations.2
Drawing on the work done in preparing PRM 8 and being done in the
present DCC study of foreign aid3 where appropriate, the Group will
present specific options to the PRC during the first week in September.
(2) Beyond this initial assignment, the Group will flesh out in detail
the four-part strategy for North-South relations outlined and proposed
in PRM 8. It will attempt further refinement by disaggregating
North-South problems into (a) issues; (b) countries; (c) venues; and
(d) policy instruments.
2 Carter addressed the UN General Assembly on October 4; for the text of his ad-
dress, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book II,
pp. 1715–1723.
3 See Document 268.
