resolutions contained in this report presumably represent the leadership of
American business in China. They are doubtless well informed with respect
to conditions in that country. Although they may not have in general as full
a knowledge of the political conditions, of which they complain, as
diplomatic and consular officials have, they nevertheless come in even
closer contact, in some respects, with the resulting practical conditions, than
do government officials. They have a first-hand access to many sources of
information which the Government’s representatives lack; and the
information obtained by Government officials comes in large part from the
business firms represented by these Chambers of Commerce.
It may furthermore be remarked that the problems to be solved in
connection with the maintenance of our treaty rights in the protection of
persons and property are not, in general, of a technical character. The
problems, and the practical remedies to be applied, if such may be found,
are such as may appropriately be made the subject of discussion and
recommendation by any group of intelligent persons having an accurate
knowledge of the existing conditions. The question of the adequate
protection of American interests in China is one in which these business
men may be presumed to have a vital interest; for the failure to receive an
adequate degree of protection means the serious impairment, if not the
ultimate destruction, of the business interests which they have built up. The
Department, accordingly, notes with surprise that (with such few exceptions
as will be noted later) these resolutions are phrased in the most general
language and contain almost nothing which is of assistance to the
Department either by way of concrete proposals or by way of suggestions
from which it might be possible to evolve some practical method of dealing
with the situation.
By way of example, your attention is invited to the recommendation with
respect to illegal taxation (page 529 ) that
“… the American Delegation to the Special Conference … give
serious consideration to this matter of illegal taxation before
agreeing to China’s request for further increases in the Customs
tariff.”
