1088 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI (If he asks what the quota would be:) We can accept a quota of 8 per year per facility. That is the quota for opening canisters at Votkinsk under the INF treaty. We should adopt the same number in START. Stage dimensions If we are to use length to distinguish new types of missiles from existing types, we need to make sure that differences in length reflect real differences in capability. Mr. Hadley and Mr. Katayev had good discussions of this last week in Geneva, but did not reach agreement. We should get them back together. This is a big issue that needs to be resolved if we are to close on the new types definition. Throw weight values Mr. MacEachin and Col. Koltunov made real progress on our problems with some of the values your side has declared for the throw weights of Soviet missiles. But they did not finish the job. I hope Col. Koltunov has brought what we need to wrap this up. If we are to use throw weight as a new types criterion, we need to know that problems like this can be worked and resolved. Use of ICBMs and SLBMs for space launch from airplanes As you know, we have real doubts about this concept. It raises a number of problems—for the START ban on air-to-surface ballistic missiles (which is something you wanted in the treaty), for verification, and for our mutual efforts to prevent proliferation of missile technology. There do not appear to us to be any practical benefits for offset these problems. Nevertheless, Mr. Hadley and Mr. Katayev had useful discussions of the Soviet proposal. Mr. Katayev provided us a paper outlining his ideas, and we have responded with a paper of our own outlining the conditions we would need if something like this is to go forward. The best solution would be simply to drop this. If in the future you should decide to pursue it, you could raise it in the JCIC. (If he needs to proceed with this concept rather than drop it:) Our paper sets forth the conditions we would need. Are you saying that you accept these conditions? Mr. Katayev and Mr. Hadley should take this up. Submarine tunnels We came close to resolving this at the Bartholomew/Obukhov talks last week.
