March 27–December 31, 1979
851
can do something about in our further meetings with the Soviets. We
spent some time discussing the political situation in the Arab world. I
then went into depth on the need to freeze settlements stressing the re-
lationship of settlements to maintenance of momentum in the peace
process as well as to help prevent further isolation of Sadat. Begin did
not react strongly as usual. He said he recognizes the importance of this
issue but we had also to take into account his political problems. He
then told me at length about the ugly incident in the settlement near El
Arish which was underway. In short, this time I got an evasive rather
than a negative response on what he will do about the settlements. I did
not have enough time to pin him down but I believe that he is thinking
seriously about this problem, I have told Sadat about this and have
asked him to raise the issue at El Arish on Sunday.
11. I also expressed in strongest terms the need for Israel to get
some kind of control over Major Haddad in southern Lebanon. He said
he recognized the need, again described Israel’s difficulties in curbing
Haddad, but said he would speak to Weizman immediately. I plan to
discuss Lebanon further at El Arish.9
12. We had a long private dinner and evening with Dayan and Sam
and our wives. It was an extremely interesting discussion. Sam and I
also met with Shimon Peres for about an hour. Again that conversation
was useful.10
13. I return now to Egypt where I will see Khalil Saturday after-
noon before going with him to dinner with Vice President Mubarak.
My main focus in this meeting will be to try to set the stage for a private
meeting between him and Burg and him and Dayan to try to get the
working sessions of the negotiations off to a reasonable start.
14. Jim Leonard will stay behind in Israel and Egypt and will begin
working quietly with the two sides and will then attend the session on
June 6–7. Depending on when the following meeting is scheduled, he
might return to Washington in mid-June to brief Bob Strauss for his
first trip out here at the beginning of July.
15. In short, although we have had our flap over Khalil’s attend-
ance and the preparations for serious negotiations are only now begin-
ning to crystallize, it also was important that we be fully represented at
this opening session. I believe our involvement and the statement
which we made will help to persuade the Arab world and Israel that we
are serious in our continued commitment to these negotiations. Both
sides have told me that they wish to avoid if possible getting into a
head-to-head confrontation at the outset and will seek to work quietly
9 See Document 257.
10 No memorandum of conversation from either discussion has been found.
