Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 641 3. What measures of a limited military nature (if any) should we take in conjunction with the announcement, and what preparations should we take now for more stringent military activities which may become necessary later? (S) Proceed Now With Sanctions Barring some last-minute change in Tehran, it now appears that Bani-Sadr and his associates have been unable to achieve the kind of support within the Revolutionary Council and with Khomeini which would permit a prompt transfer of the hostages from the custody of the militants. We have postponed imposition of sanctions for a full week to give them an opportunity to make the necessary decision. All of your advisors are agreed that we have delayed as long as we reasonably can and that we must proceed with sanctions in order to sustain our credibility and in order to convince Tehran that their inability to act is costly. This view is shared by Bruce Laingen and by the French lawyers as well. (S) The package of sanctions is ready to be announced. The timing of an announcement should take into account the need for the Department of State to notify the Iranian Embassy of the expulsion of their diplomats and for the Department of Justice to have its personnel in place to implement the order. You will wish to ask Cy and Ben Civiletti for their comments on timing. (S) Texts of Communications The following texts are attached and will be distributed to the participants at the NSC meeting: Tab A—The draft text of the formal announcement which you will make. (U) Tab B—The draft text of a message to the allies, in the form of an Aide Mémoire. (U) Tab C—The text of an Executive Order directing revalidation of all outstanding Iranian visas. There is no difference of views on this issue, and it need not be raised at the meeting. The Executive Order amends the Order which you signed on November 26, 1979, (but which was never implemented) extending its scope to include all categories of visas.2 (S) A. Draft Announcement.3 There are three points of controversy in the text: 2 A copy of Executive Order 12206, April 7 (see Document 246) and a signed copy of Executive Order 12172, November 26, 1979, are attached at Tab C. 3 For the official announcement, see Document 246. For the full text, see Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 611–612.
