320  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
245.	 Telegram 790 from Geneva1
Geneva, September 28, 1955, 4 p.m.
790. From Johnson.
1. Wang opened this morning’s meeting with long prepared state­
ment to effect agreed announcement completed agenda item one, we 
were entangling agenda items one and two, if our intent was delay dis­
cussion agenda item two until all remaining Americans released “this 
sure to fail”, will not submit to threats, etc., etc., suggested if we had 
any “specific opinion” on implementation announcement PRC willing 
give consideration and that discussion thereof be referred to assistants. 
Will inform UK results of reviews as completed. Criticism US imple­
mentation, 76 who applied for departure whose names we previously 
gave him 42 not yet returned, none has returned who left since begin­
ning of talks, knows of no one who has left US to return to China except 
Tsien, students fearful to apply for departure, etc. Our attitude will 
“impair the improvement of Sino-American relations and is bound to 
have a bad effect on our lenient way of solving the problem remaining 
Americans”.
2. I replied with long statement stating no need spend much time 
on these subjects if he would give me straightforward answers to my 
straightforward and simple questions on implementation, unless were 
willing to keep each other fully informed on implementation will be 
difficult to make progress discussion other matters, implementation too 
important to leave to assistants, then refuted his statements on Chinese 
students in US, welcomed statement they willing give consideration 
suggestions on implementation, pointed out my repeated questions 
this regard, repeated them and also reframed as suggestions asking 
for specific replies, in referring statement on threats said I could not 
understand how my questions on implementation could be interpreted 
as threats, he could be certain we would not respond to threats, PRC 
should be absolutely clear we not willing trade fate remaining persons 
for political concessions. Three weeks since agreed announcement and 
not one of 19 yet released, our concern increases with passage of time 
no information on this vital point, only prompt full and faithful imple­
mentation announcement can dispose agenda item one, only imple­
mentation words of announcement can dispose of problem return of 
Americans, until this accomplished first item of agenda remains first 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2855. Confidential; Niact; 
Limited Distribution.
