Arms Control and Disarmament 1275 Table IV Seismic Detection* Capability for Low Yield Subsurface Nuclear Tests Detection Coefficient YIELD (KT) Summer Winter Excellent 90–100% 4 8 Good 60–90% 3 6 Fair 30–60% 2 4 Poor 0–30% 1 2 * Detection but not identification as nuclear in nature. [Footnote is in the ­original.] c. High Altitude Tests. The Long Range Detection System has no evidence to date that the Soviets have tested a nuclear weapon at extremely high altitudes. U.S. tests conducted so far have been limited to altitudes below 50,000 feet (HA, 37,000 ft). Theoretical investigations of the effects of very high altitude tests (100,000 to 250,000 ft) have been made by Professor Hans A. Bethe and others in recent months. These studies indicate many very interesting and unusual phenomena which will be discussed in detail by Professor Bethe in another paper. Of the four existing detection techniques, only the acoustic and elec­ tromagnetic techniques appear to offer promise for the detection of very high altitude tests and these are debatable in the light of present knowl­ edge. It is believed that adequate detection of high altitude tests will involve development of new or improved detection techniques follow­ ing experimental high altitude tests at HARDTACK involving new influ­ ence fields, i.e., optical, magnetic, etc., as well as possible modification of existing acoustic, seismic and electromagnetic surveillance methods. d. Nuclear Tests Conducted in Remote Geographical Locations. The AFOAT–1 Long Range Detection System is deployed around the USSR as the primary target. It therefore has very great limitations for shot points in such remote geographical locations as the Antarctic, South Pacific and Indian Ocean areas. It is believed possible that shots of several hundred kilotons and possibly even a megaton could be detonated in these areas far from the present acoustic stations without fear of detection by acous­ tic means. British tests in Australia at points only 20°–30° S produced no nuclear, no seismic, no electromagnetic and, in six shots out of twelve tests, no acoustic data although advance notification of time and place of the test was provided by the U.K. Six tests did excite one and in two cases two acoustic stations but detection even in these cases was cer­ tainly greatly assisted by advance knowledge of U.K. intentions. The seismic capability suffers very seriously from core shadow for shots detonated in these remote areas. Over 60% of the Southern
