554 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Ms. Derian responded by characterizing her meetings in Singapore and the Philippines.3 The President reflected Senator Inouye’s concern that our more confrontational approach in the Philippines had set the U.S. back there. Secretary Vance said that he would follow that point up with Senator Inouye and attempt to allay his concern. The President reiterated his view of the value of quiet diplomacy citing our recent experience with Libya. He offered support for Ms. Derian’s efforts and encouraged her for the future. Secretary Vance emphasized the President’s observation, noting that where we could talk to people there was a chance to influence their behavior. He felt that was an argument for universal diplomatic recognition. The President asked Ms. Derian to prepare a brief report outlining recommendations for possible changes in our human rights approach to those countries where she thought it might be improved. 3 Derian met with officials in the Philippines, Singapore, Indonesia, and Thailand in January 1978. See Henry Kamm, “Asians Explain Restrictions on Freedom to U.S. Aide,” The New York Times, January 18, 1978, p. A–3. 176. Editorial Note Following their December 6, 1978, meeting on human rights (see Document 175), President Jimmy Carter, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbignew Brzezinski, and Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Patricia Derian participated in a White House East Room ceremony commemorating the 30th anniversary of the adoption of the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Approximately 250 representatives from domestic and international human rights organizations attended the ceremony, which took place from 11:58 a.m. to 12:22 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) After a short statement by Vance, Brzezinski indicated that he would devote his remarks to the introduction and development of three basic propositions regarding human rights. Brzezinski’s first two propositions focused upon the historical inevitability of human rights and the centrality of human rights in America’s relevance in a “changing world.” In describing the third—the indication of progress in the enhancement of human rights—Brzezinski asserted:
