364  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Key Points Made at NORAD
1. The DSP system has blindspots at times and barely covers the 
threat areas. SSBNs could easily shoot through it undetected until the 
new PAVE PAWS coastal radar is active (1979 on the West Coast, but 
held up by an environmental impact court proceeding on the East 
Coast).
2. DSP ground stations are few and vulnerable.
3. Ground and satellite communications with the BMEWS system 
is degrading due to budgetary decisions to give up costly landlines.
4. There is virtually no BMEWS or other capability for characteriz-
ing a Soviet IRBM attack on Western Europe.
5. Monitoring ASAT activities and other space activities exceeds 
NORAD’s capability, and the forecast is for the gap to grow in the 
future. Do the Europeans know this?
Follow-­up Actions
This is a tentative list of things to do and approaches to take. The 
possibilities, of course, are rather staggering because you opened more 
issues than Defense could possibly resolve in a decade.
1. How to deal with the rigidity in our SIOP and the lax of flexibility.
This is the issue of most direct concern and responsibility for you as 
chairman of the Special Coordinating Committee (Crisis Management). 
You have already mentioned the very schemes I would recommend.
First, you mentioned to General Jones some IVORY ITEM exercises 
to explore scenarios other than the SIOP. Four or five limited nuclear 
conflict scenarios, particularly scenarios taken from Soviet exercises, 
can teach the President, you, Brown, and the Joint Chiefs a great deal 
about our present predicament. Creating that awareness is the first and 
most important step now.
Second, you could establish an SCC for LNOs, one to be an NSC 
when you can get the President involved. Once that process is started, 
you will generate the kinds of guidance needed for more flexibility in 
LNO planning. You are also going to uncover the lack of integration of 
LNOs with Army and Navy commands and plans, particularly in the 
theaters of Europe and Northeast Asia.
This SCC for LNOs could in fact grow into what has been sought 
by many people for several years. NSDM–242 called for some small 
political-­military war staff for the President;2 it never took hold because 
2 NSDM 242 is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXV, National Security 
Policy, 1973–1976, Document 31.
