112  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Cooperation Administration; the Special Assistants to the President 
for Information Projects, for National Security Affairs, and for Science 
and Technology; the White House Staff Secretary; Mr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., 
Department of Defense; Assistant Secretary of State Gerard C. Smith; 
Paul McGrath, Charles Shafer, and Robert Stokley, Federal Civil Defense 
Administration (for Item 1); Dr. Gordon Dunning, Atomic Energy 
Commission (for Item 1); the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the Deputy 
Executive Secretary, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
1. MEASURES TO CARRY OUT THE CONCEPT OF SHELTER
(NSC Action No. 1814; NSC 5724; NSC 5724/1; NSC Actions 
Nos. 1841 and 1842; Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, subject: 
“Report to the President by the Security Resources Panel of the ODM 
Science Advisory Committee”, dated January 22, 1958; NSC 5807)
In briefing the Council, General Cutler indicated that the prob­
lem of providing shelter for the population against radioactive fallout 
would be considered at two successive meetings of the Council. At the 
first one, today, the Council would hear a factual presentation by the 
Federal Civil Defense Administration on radioactive fallout and on 
the types of protective measures against it. (A copy of General Cutler’s 
briefing note is filed in the minutes of the meeting, and another is 
attached to this memorandum.) Upon the conclusion of his briefing, 
General Cutler called on Governor Hoegh, the Federal Civil Defense 
Administrator, who in turn indicated that the presentation would be 
given by Dr. Paul McGrath of FCDA.
Upon the conclusion of Dr. McGrath’s presentation, General Cutler 
complimented him on the high quality of his report, and advised 
the Council that the purpose in hearing this factual presentation 
was to remind members of the Council of the basic facts relating to 
shelter prior to Council consideration next week of the report of the 
Interdepartmental Committee entitled “Measures to Carry Out the 
Concept of Shelter” (NSC 5807).
The Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization inquired of 
Dr. McGrath the number of casualties estimated in Dr. McGrath’s dis­
cussion of Operation Sentinel. Dr. McGrath replied that the casualties 
were estimated at about 82 million.
Mr. Stans, the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, pointing out 
the arbitrary level of tolerance of radiation which Dr. McGrath had set 
at 75 Roentgens, inquired what was the general range of tolerance in 
human beings. Dr. McGrath explained that the figure of 75 Roentgens 
had been selected because this intake of radiation would not make many
