1326  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
in military applications of nuclear weapons. The military application 
mostly contemplated is the use of a clean weapon in a ground burst 
against a hard enemy target. In such an application, the neutrons com­
ing from the weapon will create radioactivity in the soil next to the 
weapon. This radioactivity will be carried up with the debris of the 
weapon itself and will cause fallout in the neighborhood.
It has been estimated that the radioactivity in the ground is at least 
1% of the radioactivity which would be produced in a pure fission 
weapon of the same yield. Since the radioactive materials formed in 
the ground are different from fission products, the radioactivity will 
change with time in a different way from that of fission products. How­
ever, calculations at Los Alamos indicate that this difference is not very 
great, and that at any time the radioactivity created in the soil will be of 
the order of 1% or more of the corresponding fission activity
[text not declassified] for sometime to come. It is conceivable that 
further technical progress and testing may make it possible to return to 
lead even for the smaller weapons, but this seems quite difficult, quite 
far in the future, and would undoubtedly be connected with a further 
loss in yield for a given weight.
For these reasons, and particularly because of the radioactivity nec­
essarily produced in the ground, it does not seem of practical interest 
to develop clean weapons of a cleanliness of better than 1%. Whether 
such a development is technically feasible is not known at this time. 
[text not declassified]
According to Dr. Teller, Dr. Brown of the Livermore Laboratory, 
head of its Theoretical Division, is the person most competent on the 
development of clean weapons. In a recent conversation with him he 
was very skeptical whether a completely clean nuclear weapon could 
be developed.
The only circumstance in which a completely clean thermonuclear 
device might be of interest would be for peaceful applications. I do not 
know of any such applications at present. In the case of a deep, under­
ground explosion for peaceful purposes, I believe that there would be 
other means of protection from the radioactivity than complete clean­
liness. Besides, I do not think that the uncertain possibility of some 
peaceful applications would be a sufficient reason to continue nuclear 
testing merely for the purpose of developing a completely clean nuclear 
weapon.
Hans A. Bethe
