1394 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement resolved first. This confirms indications we have received from other sources that the Chinese Communists do not expect any early prog­ ress in the direction of formal relations with the United States and are willing to bide their time. A correspondent telephoned Mrs. Fecteau to tell her that the press was about to be permitted to send representatives to Communist China. Her immediate and spontaneous response, which was picked up by the wire services, was that if they went she wanted to go too and see her son. She has not yet made any request of the Department, but certainly if correspondents go we can expect immediate pressure from relatives of the prisoners to be allowed to do so. I have sent you a copy of the memorandum of conversation with Mr. Dalal from the Indian Embassy concerning the impounding by Treasury of a sum of money from another departing Chinese, Hsiao Chi-­mei. We have since furnished Mr. Dalal at his request copies of pertinent extracts from the Foreign Assets Control Regulations and the trade control regulations of the Department of Commerce. I have explained to him that these regulations apply to everyone alike and that there is nothing in the Agreed Announcement which requires us to discriminate in favor of returning Chinese with respect to export of goods or money to Communist China. Defense is instructing Panmunjom to make a statement in the MAC on the missing 450. The text of the statement is the one you approved while in Washington of which I am enclosing a copy. We do not know yet when the UNC will make the statement, but we hope it will be before your September meeting. At the request of Fathers McCarthy and Houle, the American Red Cross sent a telegraphic plea to the Chinese Red Cross in Peiping for the release of Father Wagner on humanitarian grounds. A curt message just received by the American Red Cross reads “Authorities contacted not consider release J.P. Wagner.” We have been in correspondence with John Dexter, who is being trained in Taiwan to replace Bob Ekvall as interpreter next January. Present plans are for him to leave Taiwan September 18th and receive an additional month’s training in the Department’s Language Services Division following his leave and before going to Geneva. We are negoti­ ating with EUR in the hope that we can have him put on the EUR payroll as a regular member of the Consulate General staff, but with the under­ standing that he would be available to you as desired and that he would receive further language training at the Ecole des Interpretes between meetings and in addition to his regular duties. He is one of our most talented young Chinese language officers and has been working hard in preparation for this assignment. I am confident you will find him satis­ factory, although I realize it will be quite a jolt to part with Bob, who has
