Chapter 6, June–December 1990 881 4. ALCMs41 US position: No limits on conventional ALCMs including conventional MIRVed ALCMs. Sov position: Ban conventional MIRVed ALCMs. Bottom line: No give on conventional ALCMs.42 Talking points: We have come a very long way on ALCMs. Both sides have contributed to this. Still vestiges in the Soviet position of the old approach of limiting the entire inventory of ALCMs. Trying to clean this up in Geneva.43 Biggest remaining problem is Soviet proposal to ban conventional ALCMs with multiple warheads. We have agreed to ban ALCMs with multiple nuclear44 warheads. Such weapons are germane to our negotiations. But conventional ALCMs are not.45 All of the constraints the US has agreed to on long-­range nuclear ALCMs, and in particular our agreement to the 600 km range threshold, were accepted by the US on the understanding that non-­nuclear ALCMs would not be constrained. That was our explicit understanding. Conventional forces are not what START is about. The Gulf situation today is just one illustration of how important conventional forces are to us. We cannot limit conventional ALCMs. We have studied the concerns that Amb Nazarkin has expressed, and we have drafted a letter46 that meets those concerns. (Give him draft at Tab 4.)47 — We will not produce, test, or deploy long-­range nuclear ALCMs with multiple weapons. — We will not produce, test, or deploy long-­range non-­nuclear ALCMs with multiple weapons for the purpose of acquiring the capability to deploy long-­range nuclear ALCMs with multiple weapons. — Any long-­range non-­nuclear ALCMs with multiple weapons would be distinguishable from long-­range nuclear ALCMs, and would be subject to the appropriate procedures for exhibitions and inspections which apply to non-­nuclear ALCMs now being worked out in Geneva. — Any ambiguities would be addressed in the Joint Commission. As you see, we have gone a long way to address the concerns your negotiators have expressed. Let us resolve the conventional ALCM issue on this basis. 41 Baker circled the number 4. 42 Baker underlined “No give on conventional ALCMs.” 43 Baker placed a checkmark in the left-­hand margin beside this point. 44 Baker underlined “nuclear.” 45 Baker underlined “conventional ALCMs are not.” 46 Baker underlined “a letter.” 47 Printed as Document 162.
