690 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement over the possibility that once this exercise is conducted, it will establish a requirement for its continuance; and the implication will be that at the end of the test we will no longer be alert. The President pointed out his mentioning in press conference that a continuous airborne alert may become essential during certain phases of the missile age, but it is not essential now. He therefore desires that a training name be placed on this exercise, in order to alleviate the effect of possible leaks. A training name would emphasize that we are only preparing to do what we need to do in the future. Mr. McElroy pointed out that this will go under the code name of Headstart II; but this did not satisfy the President in itself. He desired that we have a name in case we are asked for a description of this exercise. Mr. McElroy voiced his agreement that there is no cur­ rent military need for an airborne alert. (The President then digressed for a moment to tell of an episode reported by Macmillan on his recent trip to Moscow. Khrushchev had apparently dropped the thought that the Soviets have no interest in small bombs. Further, their large bombs have now been developed sat­ isfactorily and they have adequate weapons in the megaton class in their stockpiles. Consequently, the Soviets claim they have little interest in conducting tests and are actually shutting down some nuclear reac­ tors. Mr. Quarles stated that recent Soviet tests have verified that their main interest lies in large bombs.) In conclusion, the President approved the conducting of exercise Headstart II. In describing this operation, he directed that it be called “advance training” rather than an “airborne alert exercise.” Further, he understood that the route of the 92nd Bomb Wing from Fairchild to the Aleutians would be modified so as to avoid frightening the Soviets in the event they picked it up. * * * * The President then questioned Secretary Murphy about political aspects of this exercise with the Canadians. Mr. Murphy pointed out that although the Canadians had granted permission for overflights, they had done so in a somewhat negative fashion. They had denied having a right to withdraw their approval for such an exercise if it involved the effi­ ciency of SAC. However, they had expressed some fears and had desired no publicity and no tie-­in to Berlin. They also expressed the view that in the light of their cooperation in military matters, the United States should see fit to improve its cooperation with them on the matter of oil quotas. According to Mr. McElroy, the military side of the Canadian Government seems easier about this exercise than the civilian side. (General LeMay here indicated that the Canadian Government has been briefed on this exercise.) In connection with the oil quotas, however, the Canadians are, at the appropriate time, going to “explode.”
