1977 53 peacekeeping activities and potential local wars (TAB D), but also as a backdrop to diplomacy in Europe (TAB A) and in East Asia (TAB C). Forces for Asia: Military forces in Asia are addressed in the context of maintaining a balance of power in East Asia (TAB C), of providing a capability to counter the Soviets in a worldwide war (TAB B), and of providing for peacekeeping activities or intervention in potential local wars (TAB D). If the US pursues a strategy in East Asia requiring a major military presence, the US would then have the ability to intervene in most potential conflicts, including conflict with the Soviets in Asia during a war in Europe. Conversely, if a strategy involving reduced peacetime presence in Asia were to be chosen, the US might still want to acquire deployable military forces for intervention in potential conflicts, including those in Asia. (U) Included in the descriptions of the substrategies for each analytical area is a brief discussion of the likely political and military force implications. Unless explicitly indicated otherwise, it has been assumed that the military objectives and programs of both hostile and friendly nations will remain as described in existing intelligence projections. Thus, allied contributions and enemy threats have been taken as constant, across the spectrum of US strategy alternatives. This is an approximation that needs to be refined in subsequent study. (U) The final chapter (TAB F)3 describes current US military strategies (or postures) and capabilities; the latter does not always correspond to the former. The next steps in the PRM–10 study will be: —To integrate the substrategies into a representative set of alternative worldwide military strategies (the AIMS). —To estimate a reasonable range of force postures, phased programs and funding, appropriate to each overall strategy. It should be recognized that the uncertainties or differences in judgment about what forces and programs are appropriate for which strategies are likely to be as great as the variations between adjacent strategies in the tabulation of alternative strategies. —To assess the adequacy of alternative strategies and forces in terms of the ability of each strategy to achieve objectives. In this regard, the non-­military components of national strategy (economic, diplomatic, etc.) are of major importance in determining such adequacy. —To describe the domestic, economic, foreign policy, and arms control implications for each alternative strategy, as well as likely allied, Soviet, and third country reactions. 3 Attached but not printed.
