800 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Organization and the Organization of American States. He had already made public statements to that effect in Honduras and was working to persuade the presidents of the other Central American countries within the ODECA framework to his point of view. If the five ODECA countries could reach a common position in favor of the proposal, they could bring their influence to bear with some effect upon the other Latin American countries in the Council of the OAS. The Secretary stated in reply that he had not contemplated any organic relationship between the regional organizations. He did believe it very desirable, however, to develop a means of informal contact so that they could exchange information and share experiences. The NATO countries were not always inclined to realize the significance of developments in the OAS area. It would be well for them to become more aware of the problems in Latin America and to learn to attach a greater degree of importance to them. He was especially desirous that the Western European countries should learn of the most encouraging progress made by the OAS itself in furthering the peaceful settlement of disputes, in promoting the acceptance of precepts of international law and in facing common problems in a frank and friendly atmosphere. While the OAS was not yet in a state of perfection, there being much ground still to cover, it was definitely an advanced organization, as he often took occasion to point out when addressing other regional groups such as NATO, SEATO, etc. The Foreign Minister indicated that President Villeda was in favor of having Secretary General Mora and Secretary General Spaak authorized to develop a procedural plan for the interchange of views. He then spoke of the perplexities facing the new regime in his country. Honduras had for many years been under a certain form of government which was not the most fortunate one for the country. Now President Villeda was seeking to establish a completely new administration with different (i.e. democratic) ideas and different personalities. Naturally, it was a slow process at first and fraught with difficulties. The most serious basic problems encountered were financial and economic in character, the first order of business being to balance the budget, which might require funds from abroad. Another great need was for a proper system of roads. The Ambassador-designate added that there was also a serious deficiency in education. The Secretary remarked that borrowing was not the soundest way of balancing a nation’s budget, as we ourselves had discovered. He also inquired whether the Pan American Highway would not be of substantial benefit to Honduras once it was completed. The Minister answered that the Inter-American Highway passed through only a small portion
