International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
157
companied by inflation and unemployment. Periodically, there are se-
rious balance of payments crises, particularly among the Mediterra-
nean states and some LDCs. The OPEC surplus will total some $45–50
billion this year, while Japan will run a $7 billion payments surplus and
the FRG a $2.5–3 billion surplus. The U.S., on the other hand, will have
a current account deficit of $12 billion and a trade deficit of $25 billion.
These deficits are unlikely to diminish for some time.
Secretary Blumenthal then suggested strategies with which we can
deal with these problems.
—Progress on energy is vital, but will take time and the economic
effects of the U.S. program will not be felt until 1980 or 1982.
—Non-OPEC countries in surplus or close to payments balance
can encourage imports from the deficit countries by meeting the
London growth targets. The U.S. will continue to emphasize exports.
Surplus countries should let their currencies appreciate. The Japanese
have not been completely cooperative on this issue, although there has
been improvement lately; they have considerable administrative con-
trol over the value of the yen. Our aim is the gradual reduction of the
U.S. deficit; that is important because the continued outflow of dollars
could be inflationary, although this is less of a problem if currencies are
floating, because exchange values accommodate.
—Secretary Blumenthal stressed cooperation to make available fi-
nancial reserves—through the Witteveen facility and increases in IMF
quotas—noting that such assistance can be very effective, as in the case
of Britain.
—Finally, Secretary Blumenthal urged that the Chancellor do
whatever possible to achieve German growth of at least 4.5%, indi-
cating that he and the Chancellor had discussed Germany’s problems
and possibilities.
The President said that the U.S. will not interfere with the goals
various nations set, or with changes that they deem necessary. If they
want to change their goals, fine. The Japanese will be close to meeting
their goal of 6.7% growth; the U.S. will be close to its 5.5% target, al-
though growth will drop off in the second half of this year. If the FRG
cannot attain its goal, the U.S. will understand. But there is an im-
pending problem for the U.S.: with 7% unemployment it is difficult to
explain a $25 billion trade deficit to Congress, especially while the
Germans have a $9–10 billion surplus. But the U.S. and the FRG will not
impose policies on each other.
The Chancellor commended Blumenthal’s summary, as fair and ac-
curate. He stressed the importance of regular, quiet meetings between
the Finance Ministers of the U.S., Britain, France and the FRG. The Japa-
nese should be included periodically. Meetings are easier without them
because they are not fluent in English or comfortable in such meetings,
