26 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 13. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 RPM–78–10208 Washington, May 5, 1978 SUBJECT The New Afghan Government’s Relations with the USSR Principal Judgments 1. The Soviets welcome a Communist dominated government in Afghanistan, but probably will be cautious in attempting to capitalize on the advent of the new regime because of its internal fragility and the delicate equilibrium of regional tensions in South Asia. 2. Moscow will work actively to keep the Communists in power in Kabul and to influence the new government’s decision-making process. The Soviets probably will offer increased economic and military assistance. 3. Because the new Afghan Government could face serious domestic threats in the near term, Moscow’s major immediate interest will be to help the regime consolidate its power. The Soviets in the near term probably will counsel restraint regarding any adventuristic policies at home and abroad. 4. Limited Iranian meddling in Afghanistan seems likely, given the Shah’s perception of a serious threat to Iran from the USSR via Afghanistan. Although Pakistan shares these worries, it is less likely to become involved unless the Afghan Government revives the Pushtunistan dispute over Pakistan’s western provinces. 5. The chances of a direct confrontation between the USSR and Afghanistan’s anti-Communist neighbors remain low, although they have increased slightly. Both Tehran and Islamabad will use the prospect of such a confrontation as an argument for increased US military and political support. Introduction On April 27, leftist military officers overthrew former President Daoud and installed a largely civilian government controlled by the leadership of the pro-Soviet Khalq Party (the Afghan Communist 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support Services, Job 80T00634A: Production Case Files (1978), Box 13, Folder 39: New Afghan Government’s Relations with USSR. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A typed note on the first page reads: “This memorandum was prepared by the CIA’s Office of Regional and Political Analysis in consultation with the Bureau of Intelligence and Research in the Department of State.”
