Panama 907 with the threat of an imminent attack as well as a final review of the plans for United States participation at the Moscow Fair.] Panama Canal2—Mr. Roderick first noted that since 1951 the Canal had been a self-­supporting operation and has made payments to the United States Treasury in recompense for past funding. Mr. Roderick outlined the anticipated great increase of traffic through the Canal and the ensuing requirements for modernization and expansion of facilities. He stated that this can be accomplished out of current earnings up until about 1975 but for the period beyond that consideration would need to be given to the possibility of constructing a third set of locks which would handle the largest existing ships, or the possibility of a sea level canal, at a cost of $700 million–$1 billion, and with the possibility of utilizing nuclear energy for cutting the canal. He noted that the Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee of the House has appointed a good study group headed by General Leslie Groves to go into this. Mr. McCone cautioned that the nuclear aspect would need much more study before it would be anything other than an academic question. Regarding the sea level canal concept, Mr. Gates pointed out that any canal would be vulnerable to attack with or without locks. Mr. Roderick said that he would want to rely on a military decision as to that question, but that a sea level canal could be reopened much faster than one where the locks had been destroyed. The President ascertained that the immediate question at issue was one of authorizing a $28 million modernization program and further planning towards the 1975 requirements. The President thought this much certainly to be in order. He believed also that eventually it would be necessary to dig a new canal because the trend is more and 2 In a memorandum dated May 21, the Secretary to the Cabinet, informed the President that the agenda for the Cabinet meeting of May 22 included a consideration of problems concerning the Panama Canal. According to Gray’s memorandum, “There will shortly be issued from the House Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee a report about the Panama Canal—­its traffic problems, the improvements which are being made there, and the desirability of a second canal which might be constructed, possibly with the aid of nuclear explosives.” “Chairman Roderick has asked to make a report so that these new ideas and developments will not catch the Administration unawares. Although the report will be highly informative, no specific recommendations for action will be presented.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Cabinet Series)
