Negotiating Channels 395 Shah’s ‘billions’”. He said that while no one has specially asked the Shah to invest in Panama, Gabriel Lewis has offered the Shah financial advice, and he suspects that the Panamanians will become more specific over time. 20. Lloyd said he would review the points that had been made with Hamilton Jordan.4 He reiterated that his instinct was that the Shah should raise the “local” problems with Torrijos and/or Royo, or even Lewis. 21. Jackson asked what the USG’s position is on the “Waldheim proposal” concerning a tribunal to hear charges against the Shah and the United States. Lloyd said we are prepared to go along with some such formula provided the hostages are released before any tribunal begins its proceedings. Jackson inquired as to the legal foundation for any such tribunal. Lloyd responded that the Secretary General has authority to appoint committees or commissions to look into various matters or interests, and that the only nation in a position to object to any inquiry into its internal affairs (Iran) was unlikely to do so. 22. Armao raised two housekeeping problems. He said the private security personnel protecting the Shah’s children in the U.S. need a special radio frequency. Lloyd asked that Armao put this request in a letter and said we would pass it along to Henry Geller at Commerce. Second, Armao asked for the status of the visa applications by family members or individuals in the Shah’s entourage. Jackson cut in to say that Rocky Suddarth on David Newsom’s staff and John Dean in Jackson’s office were handling these matters and that everything seemed to be in order. 23. Lloyd concluded by saying that we would stand by the commitments we had made in Texas5 and that Armao and Jackson should let us know what they would like us to do. Armao responded that the Shah does not want us to raise any of the foregoing problems with the Panamanians. Armao said he wanted to emphasize this point to us. Lloyd said we would not do so unless Armao requested it. Armao said that it might be helpful if Hamilton Jordan could ask General Torrijos on the phone “how things are going” with the Shah. Armao said there was nothing else that he or the Shah want us to do at this time. Jackson also said that “we” (i.e. the Shah’s representatives) are going to look quietly into alternative countries, but did not ask our help. 24. Armao and Jackson said they were very grateful for the opportunity to meet with us and would be back in touch as the situation develops. 4 See Document 144. 5 See Document 98.
