Chile 287 CH–31. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director of the Office of East Coast Affairs (Briggs)1  Santiago, March 1, 1960. US/MC/14 PARTICIPANTS 1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files, Lot 64 D 559, CF 1596. Confidential. Information on the source text indicates that this conversation took place between 3:00 and 5:30 p.m. at the Union Club, and that the memorandum was approved in the Office of the Secretary of State on March 8. United States The Secretary ARA - Mr. R. R. Rubottom Embassy, Santiago – Mr. Krieg ARA/EST – Mr. W. T. Briggs Chile Germán Vergara Donoso, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Carlos Vial Infante, Minister of Defense SUBJECT Chilean Need for Naval Vessels The Foreign Minister referred to his earlier comments on Peruvian military links with Argentina and the existence to some degree of a spirit of [illegible in the original] in Peru. He said that although he has confidence in the bona fides of President Frondisi of Argentina, the recent negotiations with the GOA on boundary matters have not been heartening and the possibility that former President Odria of Peru may again be a Presidential candidate with a good chance of election is a cause for concern. These factors are leading to some internal pressures in Chile, in the Congress and from the public as well as among the armed forces, for strengthening the Chilean military position. The Minister noted that the United States Congress has recently released the figures on U.S. military assistance to Latin America. These figures show, he continued, that during the last ten years Brazil received the greatest amount of U.S. military assistance, followed by Peru, with Chile a poor third. He said that President Alessandri had said yesterday to President Eisenhower that the minimum which Chile can ask is to reach an agreement with the U.S. Government which would result in Chile’s receiving the two destroyers and two submarines which she had expected to get under existing U.S. legislation. So far only one submarine has been authorized, he said, the availability of the other submarines and of the two destroyers depending on action by the United States Congress. He mentioned Chile’s long coastline, with innumerable channels and islands to patrol, and added that Chile has become inferior in naval strength to both Peru and Argentina and is
