78
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
32.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
[assessment number not declassified]
Washington, December 1978
[Omitted here are a title page, cover page, map, and list entitled
“The Afghan Cabinet Announced on 1 May 1978.”]
The Afghan Revolution After Six Months
([classification marking not declassified])
Key Judgments
President Taraki has consolidated his position in the People’s Dem-
ocratic Party of Afghanistan and in the government. Foreign Minister
Amin has emerged as the second most important person in the country.
Working through Amin, Taraki is attempting to control the military
through the small minority of completely loyal officers. They may be
in a position to keep him better informed than any of his predecessors
about coup plotting.
Control of the military remains the key to Taraki’s survival. His
government, like its predecessors, is weak, and his sudden overthrow
by a small group of military officers cannot be completely discounted.
There is nothing to indicate that distrust of his government on
religious grounds has abated. Tribal rebellions are spreading, and
should antigovernment activity increase significantly, the willingness
of the military to carry out the government’s orders could be seri-
ously affected.
In foreign policy and their public statements the Afghan leaders
have moved closer to the Moscow line. They have, however, done little
to implement domestic programs that could be labeled Communist,
presumably to avoid risking adverse popular reaction but also in part
because they lack the resources to do so.
The degree, if any, to which Taraki is independent of the USSR
has not so far been tested by significant differences between Moscow
and Kabul. Taraki may believe he needs Soviet backing to survive and
the Soviet role in Afghanistan continues to increase.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support
Services, Job 80T00634A: Production Case Files (1978), Box 11, The Afghan Revolution
After Six Months (An Intelligence Assessment). Top Secret; [codeword and handling restric-
tion not declassified]. According to a typed statement on the cover page, “the author of
this paper is [name not declassified] South Asia Division, Office of Regional and Politi-
cal Analysis.”
