International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 393 bility in exchange markets has been caused by the energy crisis, resulting in different rates of growth and rates of inflation, causing trade surplus in Japan, Germany, and Switzerland, and inflation in the United States. The long-term solution to inflation in the United States was outlined by the President in his April 11 speech.2 Our goal is a 4½ percent growth rate. We intend to reduce the rate of inflation, and we will soon secure final enactment of an Energy Bill. This, plus the success of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations and our determined resistance to protectionist sentiment will make a success of our efforts. Our monetary policy remains committed to following a flexible exchange rate. We will not peg the dollar to a particular level of value, or even to a zone or range of value. Here are our measures for correcting short-term disorder in exchange rates: —International Collaboration. The United States and Germany have developed and expanded a swap agreement which helps stabilize the dollar-yen relationship. —Our gold sales are intended to provide further stability. —Consultations with Japan. The Bank of New York and the Bank of Japan, as well as our Treasury and the Ministry of Finance, will exchange information daily to help deal with short-term problems. As to the long-term solution, Japan clearly has an important role to play. Reduction of Japan’s trade surplus is a key requirement. And key to this is for Japan to achieve a 7 percent growth rate. Co-financing of the World Bank with a Japanese contribution would also improve the stability of the dollar-yen exchange rate. A final element of our own policy is to work closely with you and to collaborate in the international organizations. We are engaged in efforts to secure maximum contributions to the World Bank and to such regional banks as the ADB, with aid on an untied basis. Collaboration in the International Monetary Fund is equally important. The Witteveen facility will contribute to this. We discussed the IMF surveillance mechanism in Mexico a few days ago and we should all collaborate closely on the results of that meeting.3 I am not going to comment on trade. Ambassador Strauss may want to do that. 2 Carter announced his anti-inflation policy on April 11; see footnote 14, Document 119. 3 The IMF Interim Committee met at the Ministerial level in Mexico City April 29–30.
