Nicaragua 869 accomplishment this aim. To cite only few examples for purposes illustration this conclusion borne out by following factors: (1) Administration of assistance as well as counsel and training accorded by MAAG and military missions to national guard consistently reflect institutional, representative, apolitical character of ideal military establishment thus contributing to fulfillment of essential role in achievement objective (A) in important military segment. This program of course primarily seeks objective (D) and modest FY 1961 plan estimated to provide adequately for fair gains in both principal and contributory roles. (2) Capital loans, present and in prospect for FY 1961 are deemed essential for accomplishment objectives (B) and (C) and important in pursuing objective (A). Export Import Bank and IBRD credits for agricultural diversification and hydroelectric projects for instance should assist towards both political and economic stabilization through development of new or improved sources production with consequent appreciation of U.S. interests in solution of country’s problems. In same connection technical cooperation programs in agriculture, transportation, health, education and housing are each in their respective fields cooperating toward achievement objective (A) (B) (C) and (E) with FY 1961 program seen as no exception. UN, UNICEF and MASB programs in equivalent projects are viewed as useful in light Nicaragua’s needs and as generally contributing to fulfillment final U.S. objectives through improvement social standards. (3) Information, cultural and educational exchange programs for FY 1961 regarded as logical continuation present efforts achieve ­objective (E) and greatly contributory to progress in attaining all other objectives. This especially exemplified by enthusiastic response to teacher and ­student grants, workshop projects and consistently pro-U.S. press. To date there has been no indication of ineffective coordination among MSP elements or between MSP and other programs and FY 1961 programs show no such conflicts. Whelan
