Afghanistan
805
do that would be to create a major incident inside Pakistan. Do we
think that Zia would be able to withstand such an incident? Pakistan
needs some firm signs of assurance from us as Hal Saunders suggests.
Jones: They will seek to intimidate Pakistan.
Newsom: One unknown is what the Pakistanis may think of all of
this. Perhaps we should raise this question with Agha Shahi when he
comes here and Hummel could speak directly to Zia. Pakistan may
prefer a non-military response in case of a Soviet threat—for instance
recourse to the UN or to the other Islamic countries.
Muskie: Is the requirement for us to give a signal to the Soviets?
What should we be considering in the way of a US response including
military supply? There are a number of aspects—the attitude of Con-
gress, the governing law, allies, our relations with the Soviets, etc.
Should we be considering specific steps now or should we wait until
we have had consultations with the Pakistanis?
Brzezinski: In addition to speculating on what the Soviets and Paki-
stanis might think we should ask what we want to do in order to
influence the Soviets and what we want the Pakistanis to do. I see two
things: First, we want to deter Soviet political intimidation of Pakistan.
Second, we want Pakistan to continue its role of maximum support to
the Afghan resistance. If this is correct then we should take actions
that first, send a message to the Soviets that would threaten escalation
should they put too much pressure on Pakistan (this might not necessar-
ily imply a military response), and second, give the Pakistanis a political
and psychological sense of assurance that we will respond if they turn
to us. This will fortify them. Both of these objectives can be served by
the same policy, specifically a greater predisposition to help on military
supply. I do not think there is any basis for approaching the Soviets
now with warnings about actions against Pakistan.
Muskie: I agree with that. But what are we prepared to do?
Brzezinski: The State Department paper (Tab B of the briefing pack-
age) outlines a number of steps to be taken in the military supply area.4
Erb: The Congressional attitude is also vital. How can we best
handle the Symington problem—the way David Aaron suggests?
Aaron: Pakistan may not want military assistance from us; IMET
may be the best path for both of us to take.
Brzezinski: Consultations with Congress would in themselves be a
desirable signal.
Owen: I agree that pursuing IMET is the best route.
4 The State Department paper was not found.
