March 1952–February 1953
307
109.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, July 31, 1952.
SUBJECT
State Guidance on Emergency Operations in Iran
1. Mr. Joyce called Messrs. [name not declassified] and [name not de-
classified] to his office this morning and subsequently took them to Mr.
Jernegan’s office, together with Mr. Krentz, to report on a high-level
meeting held last evening in the Department. This meeting was at-
tended by the Secretary of State, the Under Secretary, Messrs. Bohlen,
Byroade, Jernegan and Joyce. The meeting decided that:
a. It is the policy of the Department of State to maintain the present
government in Iran so long as this government has the authority to
govern, or until it appears certain that the government will be taken
over by the Communists.
b. CIA should stockpile arms and other mate´riel as near Iran as fea-
sible for possible use by friendly elements in the event of deterioration
or collapse of the non-Communist central government. CIA will report
to State the proposed site or sites for stockpiling and receive concur-
rence therein.
c. CIA should be authorized to plan [less than 1 line not declassified]
for unconventional activities in the event of the deterioration or col-
lapse of the non-Communist central government. The thought here was
to make plans and external preparations to work with and through the
principal tribes, notably the Qashquai and the Bakhtiari, and any other
friendly elements which might be available. In response to CIA’s in-
quiry, the [less than 1 line not declassified] planning should relate only to
the possible emergency and not to current unilateral Cold War opera-
tions. It is important to note that Mr. Jernegan made it clear that State is
not at this time authorizing the actual implementation of unconven-
tional operations but merely the planning and preparation therefor.
Such plans and preparation are for the present to be conducted exter-
nally and are not to include any formal participation by the tribes. Our
informal contacts with tribal elements will continue as in the past but
without increased emphasis at this time.
2. Mr. Joyce said that he would like us to assume the responsibility
for coordinating with the Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 79–01228A, Box 11, Folder 14,
Iran 1951–1953. Top Secret; Security Information.
