1216 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement quarter. The remaining popular support is divided among URD, the Communists, the relatively conservative Integratión Republicana, and six minute political groups, probably in that order, with URD far in the lead of the others. 21. Acción Democrática, headed by Rómulo Betancourt, is conceded to be the largest party in Venezuela and claims to be the majority party. It probably is the majority party in the chief urban centers, but not in the smaller towns and the countryside. It seeks membership at all levels of society, but relies on its strong labor support for the bulk of its votes. The party is roughly comparable to the social democratic parties of Western Europe. It advocates industrialization and agrarian reform, a broadening of the economic base to lessen the nation’s dependence on petroleum revenues, and a larger share for Venezuela in the profits of the petroleum industry. While recognizing the importance of foreign private capital in Venezuela’s economic development, it proposes to regulate such investment more closely in the national interest and favors gradual Venezuelan private or governmental acquisition of majority control or ownership of Venezuela’s natural resources and basic industries.6 In world affairs, Acción Democrática sides with the West as against the Soviet Bloc. At the same time, it bitterly resents the supposed role of the United States in support of the Pérez Jiménez dictatorship and other dictatorships in the area, is strongly anti-­imperialist in sentiment, and advocates greater Latin American unity in dealing with the United States. 22. There is in Acción Democrática a younger element impatient of the older (Betancourt) leadership and disposed to proceed more impetuously toward the realization of party objectives. The difference is one of tactics rather than of purpose. The younger element, conscious of the party’s popular strength, would forego efforts to reach agreement with other parties regarding a joint presidential candidate and would present a party candidate, at the risk of provoking a military coup. Indeed, they would welcome a showdown with the military rather than avoid it. Past experience has taught Betancourt and his generation greater discretion. At the recent party convention, the Betancourt group demonstrated its continued control of the party machinery. Therefore the party, as such, will probably continue to maneuver with circumspection. In frustration and impatience, the younger element may tend increasingly to take its lead from the more aggressive Communists. 23. Partido Social Cristiano Copei. COPEI, led by Rafael Caldera, resembles the Christian social democratic parties of Western Europe. It appeals to practicing Catholics in all walks of life. Originally the 6 U.S. private investment in Venezuela is estimated at more than three billion dollars, of which two-­thirds is in the petroleum industry. [Footnote is in the source text.]
