216 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 continue with our channels through the UN, the PLO and others to seek release of the hostages. A representative of the Secretary General should leave for Tehran tonight or tomorrow. Crown Prince Fahd has asked Arafat to go. We have been in touch with Arafat. We called him today from Beirut. Arafat is timid about taking any action until he has an assured result, but Fahd has said to push him on the plane if necessary. In addition, there are possible intermediary efforts by Assad of Syria and Demirel of Turkey. Nothing will be lost if they can be persuaded to go, although he was not too sanguine about their prospects. President Zia of Pakistan has asked to talk to our Ambassador about this. Should we agree? (The President said sure.) We are also working on the departure of the Shah. Chapter Seven sanctions are available as well. These are all steps we should pursue. The President asked for comments. The Vice President observed that with the religious holidays over and the vote on the constitution behind us,8 if there is going to be a change we should see it soon. Our time runs out fairly rapidly. We should find some way—through Arafat to Ghotbzadeh to Khomeini perhaps—to tell them this is it. We have kept our tempers for thirty days. We need to know if they are going to start to move. We need to know if it will be another six months. We now see ourselves in an entirely different interval than before. Mr. Jordan noted that the easiest course for the Iranians each morning was to say that they would wait till tomorrow. It is in their interest to prolong the situation. They keep world attention focused on their grievances and they are not paying a high price. Mr. Powell asked to raise a new point. If they are not suffering and simply maintain the status quo, should we start to ratchet up? Should we wait for a few days to see while we prepare to heat up the situation? What posture do we want to be in and how long are we willing to stay in this new period? There is some public expectation that the next few days may provide an opening. We have a few days to see if something develops. The President said that we cannot stand for the status quo to perpetuate itself. Thus far we have been balanced in our actions. We have lucked out in several instances by acting in the nick of time. We have to get our allies with us or tighten up ourselves. He sensed that in the past few days the support of our allies has been waning, and he feared that our adversaries would assess our weakness which would 8 The new constitution came into force on December 3 when the voting in the referendum concluded.
