Comprehensive Test Ban 341 mitting the introduction of new weapons for testing or the disclosure of design information. —Unforeseen circumstances may require new PNE explosive designs which could not be accommodated. —Some stockpile reliability testing could be accomplished by putting certain weapons in the PNE explosive stockpile. (3) Explosives Supplied by Observing Party This procedure would include a provision that the observing party would supply, maintain custody of, and detonate the explosive. The procedure would presumably have to include a veto right for the supplying State with respect to safety and treaty obligations. Advantages: —Makes explosive substitution very difficult for PNE projects in host country. —Because of possible large Soviet PNE program, US may supply many explosives helping to maintain US nuclear explosive design capability. —Similar to IAEA PNE supplier approach, making it more acceptable internationally. Disadvantages: —Probably not negotiable because of Soviet concern that military advantages accrue to US, and because of US veto power. —US may have problems of explosive supply, logistics and liability. —Melt material left in host country is revealing of explosive design. —Has US/USSR condominium aspects to other nations. —USSR may test new weapon designs by providing PNE services to friendly states. (4) US/USSR Cooperative PNE Program This last procedure is based on the establishment of a comprehensive and effective US/USSR PNE cooperative program that encompasses all aspects of PNE technology, including mutual disclosure or joint development of explosive designs. Such a cooperative program must include verification procedures that assure that the explosive used is of the same design as that disclosed or developed for the project. Both sides would share in the weapons-technology benefits of PNEs. This procedure could also include provisions to maximize nonnuclear assistance in the proposed projects in an attempt to reduce the numbers of nuclear explosives required. Advantages: —Allows US to obtain large amount of information concerning Soviet PNE program, and some insight into Soviet explosive design. —Cooperative aspects could enhance US/USSR relations (de´- tente), and might be negotiable for that reason.
