98  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
not be set up with a very large sum of money, such as [illegible in the 
original] million, earmarked for it.
It was [illegible in the original] from this conversation [illegible 
in the original] we should go ahead with our [illegible in the original] 
method of handling this matter, with a view to [illegible in the original] 
recommendations to the President.2
Christian A. Herter
2 A hand-­written note from Ramsey to Smith, dated July 21, attached to the source 
text reads as follows: “You will want to see this good news. I’ve sent copy to Achilles.”
ETA–40.	
Memorandum for the Record, by Henry C. Ramsey of the 
Policy Planning Staff1

Washington, July 25, 1960.
SUBJECT
New Latin American Aid Program: Meeting of July 24, 1960, at the Under Secretary’s 
Home2
I was called around 2 o’clock yesterday (Sunday) afternoon by 
Mr. Mann’s staff assistant (subsequently by Ted Eliot3) and invited to 
attend a 5 o’clock meeting at Mr. Dillon’s home. Ted had flown up to 
Newfoundland on Saturday with the product of the Mann task force,4 
in order that Mr. Dillon might study the plan en route Washington 
Sunday morning. Others attending were Mr. Achilles, Mr. Mann, 
1 Source: Department of State, PPS Files, Lot 67 D 548, “American Republics 1960–
1961.” Confidential; No Distribution Outside S/P.
2 On July 23, Assistant Secretary Mann’s task force completed preparation of the 
proposed new Latin American program, and an extensive briefing book for Under 
Secretary Dillon containing supporting papers. In the covering memorandum to Dillon, 
dated July 23, Mann stated in part the following: “The book represents our best efforts 
to reach interdepartmental agreement on the major issues regarding the proposed new 
Latin American Program. A lot of underbrush has been cleared away but there are 
major decisions regarding three or four issues that should be taken only after discus-
sion. A discussion of approximately two hours on Sunday [July 24] afternoon with as 
large or as small a group as you wish would, I think, be helpful. If not, I hope we can 
meet soon thereafter.” ARA Files, Lot 62 D 302, “Latin American Program” (Prior to 
Bogotá Conference).
3 Theodore L. Eliot, Jr., Special Assistant in the Office of the Under Secretary of State.
4 Reference to the briefing book and program proposal cited in footnote 1.
