International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 509 matically change the patterns of world trade they will help move in the right direction. I assure you we are going forward aggressively and will continue to press for the best result possible but you should be aware of the probable domestic political costs that Congressional consideration will entail. All of this, of course, must be evaluated by you in the broader context of Administration policy, and from a longer, historical perspective. In the coming weeks and months as we proceed we must evaluate, and re-evaluate, the results of the Tokyo Round and reach our decision as to how best to proceed. It was to alert you to the problems I foresee and to encourage such an evaluation by the appropriate advisors that I have written this memorandum. Accordingly, I am sharing copies of this memorandum with Blumenthal, Brzezinski, Owen, Cooper and Eizenstat. 164. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, September 27, 1978 MEMORANDUM FOR The Secretary of State The Secretary of the Treasury The Secretary of Defense The Attorney General The Secretary of Commerce The Secretary of Labor The Director, Office of Management and Budget Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers Special Representative for Trade Negotiations Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs and Policy SUBJECT Study on Export Disincentives 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 91, Export Controls: (National Export Policy): 8–12/78. Confidential. Sent to Brzezinski for his signature under cover of a September 18 memorandum from Owen, who noted that Schultze, Blumenthal, Solomon, Cooper, and Weil all supported studying U.S. export constraints. Owen also noted that Blumenthal, Solomon, and Cooper believed “that review of these constraints was probably the single most important action that could be taken to promote US exports.” (Ibid.)
