1955  545
use force to take Taiwan any time they wish. This Communist tactic 
appears designed to handcuff the United States by pious expressions 
of the renunciation of force to settle disputes while reserving to itself 
complete freedom to use force to take Taiwan whenever it wishes. This 
entirely defeats object of seeking declaration on renunciation of force 
in the Taiwan area which was designed not as a verbal exercise but to 
remove in fact threat of armed conflict there and thus permit progress 
in discussion on other practical issues.
Re your 1216, Department considering advisability introduction 
revised draft at later meeting if deemed essential to forestall break. In 
any event any changed formulation should not affect our basic position 
that both sides must renounce force in Taiwan area, and do this before 
there can be fruitful discussions other issues.
Dulles
389.	 Telegram 1330 to Geneva1
Washington, November 29, 1955, 7:34 p.m.
1330. For Johnson.
UNC called meeting of MAC November 26 at which US repre­
sentative referred to Wang statement Geneva that MAC was proper 
channel for accounting for missing US military personnel and said 
US concurred this view. He presented revised list 2720 UN personnel 
including 450 US servicemen and offered individual accounting for 
98,739 personnel of Communist side whenever Communists presented 
accounting for UN personnel. Communist side accepted lists but stated 
(1) individuals held outside Korea do not come under authority MAC 
and therefore irrelevant to discuss in MAC; (2) MAC has no connec­
tion with POW’s disposed of by PRC. Also noted UNC offer to account 
for Communist side personnel and stated it unnecessary comment on 
UNC list at this time.
In view above MAC action you need not raise this subject again 
with Wang until further instructed. However, Communist statements 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–2955. Confidential; Priority. 
Drafted by Clough; cleared in substance by Norred (NA) and by McConaughy.
