752  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Department (Mr. William A. Wieland) visited Haiti September 10 to 13 
to discuss this matter further with the President of Haiti and officials of 
his government.
Ambassador Drew participated in these discussions and on 
September 12 an understanding was initialed by him and the Haitian 
President on the following points: the Haitian Government will take 
measure to allay current political tension; the U.S. reserves the right 
to curtail the training mission’s activities or even withdrew it in case 
of a recurrence of internal violence of political origin; and the training 
mission will not become involved in training or advising the Haitian 
police. The Haitian Government also agreed to give adequate support 
to the training mission and to allow it sufficient scope to operate effec-
tively. A public statement was released in Haiti on the fact that discus-
sions were being held; the specific understanding reached has not, of 
course, been made public.3
I think it is of great importance to follow up these successful 
talks with the Haitian President by assigning a Marine Corps Training 
Mission to Haiti at the earliest possible time. Since negotiation of the 
necessary agreement and other preliminary steps may consume several 
months, I further recommend that a temporary military training unit 
(USMC personnel) be sent immediately to Haiti to begin the training 
desired by the Haitian Government.4 This would be of great value from 
the point of view of our basic relations with Haiti, as tangible evidence 
of our intention to work with Haiti in this field of vital importance to 
it. On July 28–29 of this year a revolutionary attempt was made against 
the elected Government of Haiti by a small force launched from U.S. 
soil, which included American citizens. This attempt was quickly 
crushed but there are many reports of further plotting in the United 
States and elsewhere against the Haiti an Government. To counteract 
the adverse impression created by the involvement of Americans in the 
July 28–29 attempt and the reports of further plotting on U.S. soil, I 
think it is of urgent importance for the U.S. to take all possible steps to 
forestall a possible repetition of that attempt. The speedy arrival of a 
military training unit (even though it might be a comparatively small 
unit assigned on a temporary basis) would be useful in accomplishing 
this political objective. Further, the Haitian request for this mission has 
made it possible for us to obtain important political commitments from 
3 The texts of the memorandum of understanding for negotiations of conditions 
under which the United States would provide Marine Corps Personnel to Haiti and of the 
joint communiqué issued to the press on September 12 were transmitted to the Department 
of State in despatch 133 from Port-au-Prince on September 12. (738.58/9–1258)
4 Snow had recommended this course of action in a memorandum to Murphy of 
September 22. (738.58/9–2258)
