March 1952–February 1953
239
hoped would soon end and Nasser stated that in his opinion it would
be a wise thing if America could make a loan to his country.
William C. Foster2
2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
75.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, May 24, 1952, noon.
4540. 1. Ala Min Court asked to see me yesterday afternoon. He
told me he wanted talk in utmost confidence re problem facing Shah.
Until several weeks ago Shah’s policy of not (rpt not) intervening in po-
litical situation seemed to have widespread support although certain
opposition circles were inclined be critical at his passivity. As situation
has continued decline increasing number Iranian polit leaders have
been insisting that Shah take some action to prevent complete ruin of
country. He was afraid that Shah’s policy of non-intervention was now
commencing seriously to affect his prestige. Country was looking to
Shah to take some kind of action. Question was what kind of action
shld he take and at what point.
Shld Shah take steps to effect removal Mosadeq before May 27 ten-
tative date departure for Hague?2 If he did and Internatl Court shld de-
cide against Iran Shah and new govt wld certainly be blamed. Shld
Shah try bring about fall of Mosadeq after latter had concluded his ar-
guments at Hague and before he had returned to Iran? Such course
might be construed as cowardly. It might be said Shah had not (rpt not)
dared remove Mosadeq while latter was on Iranian soil. Suppose Shah
shld decide await Mosadeq’s return before effecting his removal. Mo-
sadeq might dawdle on his way back. He might stop over in Switzer-
land or elsewhere in meantime financial situation of country might
have resulted in internal disorders. Furthermore if Shah shld bring
about removal Mosadeq now, in Hague, or after his return what cld his
successor do to relieve financial situation? If Bank Melli shld be unable
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.11/5–2452. Secret;
Security Information; Priority. Repeated to London. Received at 8:38 a.m.
2 See Document 76.
