793.00/121: Telegram
[Document 671]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 5, 1925—noon.
[Received August 5—9:25 a.m.]
311. Your telegram number 181, August 3, 5 p.m.
1. From a conversation which the British Chargé d’Affaires had with me yesterday in
pursuance of the instructions referred to in your telegram I infer that the British Foreign
Office is concerned less with the substance of our draft note than with the relative
emphasis placed in it upon our willingness to accede to Chinese wishes to the point of
subordinating the emphasis upon China’s responsibilities.
In order to meet what I understand to be the British views, I would suggest the
modifications below.
2. Latter part of fourth sentence, first paragraph, of draft might be made to read:
“The Government of the United States desires to impress upon the Chinese
Government the necessity of giving concrete evidence of its ability and
willingness to enforce respect for the safety of foreign lives and property and
to suppress disorders and antiforeign agitations which embitter feeling and
tend to create conditions unfavorable for the carrying on of negotiations in
regard to the desires which the Chinese Government has presented for the
consideration of the treaty powers.”
This language is in part suggested by that of your note of the 24th [23rd?] to the British
Embassy.
3. The last two sentences of draft note might be replaced by the following:
“My Government is now ready to appoint its commissioner to sit with the
commissioners of the other interested governments in accordance with that
resolution. It hopes that that commission may be able to begin at an early
date its investigation into the existing conditions of the administration of
justice in China, and to make a report which will serve as a basis for the
recommendations to be made, in pursuance of the resolution, for the purpose
of enabling the governments concerned to consider what, if any, steps may be
taken with a view to the relinquishment of extraterritorial rights.”
