432  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
such revolutionary movements. In Ambassador Willauer’s reply he 
states that President Echandi has done everything possible and can-
not do more without additional physical aid, which the Ambassador 
suggests the United States might provide. President Echandi wishes to 
purchase the jeeps on credit but wishes to have immediate delivery by 
air because of the very urgent need.
In my opinion we should give consideration to the possibility of providing 
these jeeps and radios on a grant aid basis, and I offer the following reasons as 
justification.
1. In the past six months the Costa Rican Guardia Civil has been 
engaged in intensive police actions, such as the Punta Llorona affair, 
the costs of which have far exceeded its appropriated funds, which are 
extremely limited even to cover normal operations.
2. The Figueres dominated majority opposition in the Legislative 
Assembly actively supports the Nicaraguan revolutionary movement 
and it would be expected to oppose the appropriation of additional 
funds to expend on controlling such revolutionary groups.
3. Echandi, in the face of widespread sympathy and of active sup-
port of such revolutionary activity, has acted resolutely and effectively 
to the limit of the capabilities available to him to control these revolu-
tionary groups.
4. By making such equipment available the United States will be 
giving effective aid in promoting peace in the Caribbean area, and spe-
cifically, the maintenance of peaceful relations between Costa Rica and 
Nicaragua.
It has been determined that funds sufficient to cover the cost of this 
equipment are available in ICA Special Assistance funds which could 
possibly be used for this purpose.
Recommendation:
That we immediately request ICA to provide the necessary 
funds for the purchase of 15 radio-­equipped jeeps to be furnished the 
Government of Costa Rica for the purpose of augmenting its capability 
of dealing with a situation within its own borders which threatens to 
disturb the peace of the area.3
Approved_________4
Disapproved_______
3 Fifteen radio-­equipped jeeps were given to the Government of Costa in December 
1959.
4 Recommendation is initialed as “Approved.”
