360
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
132.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Will the Soviets Succeed in Afghanistan? (U)
There is a lot of loose talk around the State Department and else-
where, reflected in the Oberdorfer piece this morning, suggesting that
Afghanistan is “the Soviet Vietnam.”2 This is whistling in the dark and
the motivation for at least some of this whistling is to provide a rationale
for tepid action by the US in response to the Soviet invasion. If the
Soviets are going to learn their lesson on the ground in Kabul—so goes
the logic of the argument—then there is no important reason for us to
pay too large a price in terms of overall US-Soviet relations to show
them that this was a wrong decision. (S)
However, unless General Pavlovski does not know his business
(and I strongly doubt this), the Soviets should have the Afghan situation
cleared up in a matter of months. This will require:
a. Control of Kabul and all major population centers;
b. Control of major roads;
c. Control of the major passes between Afghanistan and Paki-
stan; and
d. Effective restriction on the ability of the outside world to obtain
solid information on the insurgency (control of the press is vital). (S)
Given the above, it will be possible for the Babrak regime to declare
the end of the insurgency and to “prove” it by inviting selected outside
observers to see for themselves that the country is secure and that “the
people” support the government. This should be no trick at all for a
major army. It is generally forgotten that the US Army cleared out
South Vietnam. In 1971, for example, the entire country was “pacified,”
and it was possible to visit every one of the 44 provincial capitals—
day or night. If we had shown the ability or inclination to stay in
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1/1–8/80. Secret. Sent for information. Copies were sent to
Thornton, Sick, Odom, Albright, Schecter, Henze, Griffith, Larrabee, Ermarth, and
Hunter. Brzezinski wrote: “I agree” at the top right of the memorandum. An unknown
hand wrote: “1/3/80” beneath Brzezinski’s note.
2 See Don Oberdorfer, “The Making of a Soviet Coup,” Washington Post, January
2, 1980, p. A1.
