736
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
232.
Paper Prepared in the Bureau of European Affairs,
Department of State1
Washington, December 15, 1980
SUBJECT
Uncertainties in Romania
Over the past several weeks we have seen further indications of a
growing mood of uncertainty in Romania which reflects Ceausescu’s
difficulty in coping with the country’s increasingly difficult economic
and political problems and his concern that developments in Poland
might find an echo in Romania.
There are signs that President Ceausescu is having an increasingly
difficult time managing affairs in Romania. While he has demonstrated
considerable skill in maneuvering Romania through difficult periods
in the past, the current situation—domestic and international—presents
particular problems for him. There are also reports from intelligence
sources indicating that he may be suffering from slightly debilitating
medical problems and/or, increasingly, the meglomania which is an
outgrowth of his own cult of personality. In any event, it seems clear
that Ceausescu’s erratic involvement in mid and low level personnel
matters and economic planning decisions has become even more pro-
nounced. As Soviet political pressures build over Poland, Ceausescu
may also encounter difficulties in managing Romania’s foreign affairs.
Ceausescu’s reaction to the Polish crisis has been a mixture of
predictable toughness and unusual conciliatory gestures. Although
sharply critical of the Polish Party for not maintaining adequate control
over developments, Ceausescu has repeatedly stressed his opposition
to any outside intervention in Poland’s affairs. Addressing his domestic
audience, Ceausescu has stressed the need for Romania’s workers to
stay within the established party and trade union system when dealing
with problems and raising grievances. While exhorting the workers to
redouble their efforts to increase production and meet planned needs,
Ceausescu has made clear that open dissent will not be tolerated, and
worker slow-downs and stoppages since the beginning of the Polish
strikes have been dealt with quickly, though apparently not harshly.
In an unusual effort to suggest an atmosphere of responsiveness to the
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Counselor to the Department, Subject, Country
Files and 1980 Briefing Books, Box 3, Pol 2—Romania. Confidential. Drafted by Becker
and Bradtke, cleared by Bridges and Barry, approved by Holmes. The paper was prepared
as part of the briefing material for Ridgway’s December 16 meeting with Bogdan.
