1956 935 knowledge of the language, no matter how good, is not enough. I do not know what we would do if Ekvall were not available, and looking to the future we certainly cannot depend on his always being available. In any event, it is anomalous for us as the Department of State to have to depend on Defense in this regard. Good as he is with the language, I know that Stanley felt he would not be up to doing the type of interpreting required in these meetings. However, I should think that he or someone with com­ parable facility in the language could with intensive training become qualified in this field. Of course, it is not too attractive a field for an FSO but it seems to me that it is a problem that the ­Department will have to resolve. Incidentally, I noted in Prague just before I left that the Czech May Day slogans which have just come out, this year dropped any mention of support for Chinese Communist liberation of Formosa. I think that this would be particularly significant if the same pattern is followed elsewhere in the Soviet Bloc and suggest that it would be of interest to have DRF make a check into it. We have received Part II of the White Paper on prisoners, giving a summary of the experiences of individual Americans. Although my comments were not asked for I cannot refrain from saying that it by no means seems to me to be up to the standard of the White Paper itself. To me at least, it simply does not make as effective and convincing a case as the facts justify. My own feeling is that this appendix will be most effective on supporting the White Paper if it sticks to a plain, cold recital of facts avoiding color words and simply letting the facts speak for themselves. I also feel that there is simply too much carelessly and poorly written English in it to be issued as a public document by the Department. Just as a few examples of what I have in mind: the last paragraph on page 2 under Bersohn, the last sentence beginning at the bottom of the page seems to me to be open to misinterpretation by non-­Americans and simply not as effective as quoting some statement of Bersohn’s fol­ lowing his return. On page 7 under Buol, the statement is made that, “in August 1951 he was removed to a private home and placed in con­ finement alone with a Communist-­provided companion”. In the first place, as a matter of English, if he had a companion he was not alone. However, the use of the word “companion” in the sentence without any explanation does not, it seems to me, make any point. It is only when one gets to the end of the section that it is stated that his “com­ panion” was subjecting him to propaganda. On page 8 under Cline, the statement is made that “according to medical reports” he died from being denied needed medicine. The question immediately arises as to whose medical reports? If they are independent reports, we certainly should say so. On page 9 under Dillon, the statement is made “he kept
