394
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Prime Minister Fukuda: I thank Secretary Blumenthal for his re-
marks. I agree with his assessment. I basically agree with him as to how
we should proceed.
Last year at the London Summit, various countries set targets as to
the growth rate they intended to attain: West Germany pledged 4 per-
cent and reached 2.4 percent; the United States pledged 5.8 percent and
reached 4.9 percent; Japan pledged 6.7 percent and reached 5.3 percent.
All the other countries did not meet their targets of growth.
In current account balances, your country had a deficit of $10 bil-
lion while the Japanese surplus was $14 billion. The situation is even
more difficult this year.
The dollar is the key currency in the world. It is essential for the
dollar to be stable. Japan and West Germany are trying to rectify their
trade surplusses. These endeavors are not just to benefit the United
States but benefit the whole world economy. We recognize our respon-
sibility to rectify our trade surplus.
The depreciation of the dollar and the appreciation of the yen,
however, meant that we were unable to reach our growth rate target.
Had the dollar-yen exchange rate remained stable, we would have
reached our goal of 6.7 percent last year. But because prices in the
United States went up, the dollar value of our exports also went up. We
expect another large surplus this year.
This year our goal is a 7 percent growth rate and a reduction in the
surplus of our current accounts. Attainment of these goals is our re-
sponsibility to the world economy.
My major concern presently is how to cut the surplus. Let me give
you my analysis of this.
On the export side, the yen value appreciated 30 percent in the past
year, but this appreciation has not yet had its effect. Three exports ac-
count for 43 percent of the total value of Japanese exports to the United
States:
—Steel. Due to the trigger price mechanism, we anticipate that
steel exports to the United States will decrease 10 to 15 percent in
volume.
—Automobiles. Though there is a long list of orders for automo-
biles, our goal is to keep the volume of sales the same as last year or
less, if possible. We are pursuing administrative measures to this effect.
—Color TVs. We talked about this last year. We expect a 30 percent
decrease in exports below the level of 1976, the year during which sales
surged in the American market.
How these efforts to reduce exports in three key commodities will
affect the dollar value of our exports is uncertain. If inflation continues
in your country, then the value of these exports will still rise.
