14 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI tarily important Soviet space systems. Both NSDM 33315 and 34516 are currently in abeyance pending PRM–23 review. (TS) The U.S. has not yet made a decision on deploying an ASAT, and the pace of related R&D has not been accelerated. There is no deployment program to put a U.S. laser weapon into space. The U.S. has not begun approved implementation of the survivability measures recommended in response to NSDM 333. [11 lines not declassified] The competition could be self-limiting on the U.S. side because of fiscal constraints. However, an ASAT competition could lead to an expensive long-term series of action-reaction events in which each side would attempt to maintain the survivability of his own systems and to develop ASAT systems with better capabilities for attack against the adversary’s satellites. In addition to their value as ASAT systems, lasers in space could be provocative because of concerns that they were stepping stones to a space-based laser ABM system. There are major differences between systems for ASAT’s and those for ABM’s; nonetheless, the situation would be a source of concern. (S) Improvements and proliferation of ASAT’s could be disadvantageous to the U.S. military since we may remain more dependent on space than the Soviets, and we may be in a better position to exploit space because of our superior technological space capabilities. An active Soviet ASAT program could raise doubts about the survivability of proposed U.S. satellite systems, and prevent us from reaping the benefits of our technological advantages. B. Need for a U.S. ASAT (TS) There are important scenarios in which the absence of U.S. ASAT capabilities could leave the U.S. at a net disadvantage; for example, keeping the sea lanes of communication open during U.S./ Soviet conflicts. Further, the U.S. could probably build more effective ASAT’s and more survivable satellites than could the Soviets, which given the U.S. determination to do so, they could function to the disadvantage of the Soviets. (TS) [6½ lines not declassified] These satellites are uniquely valuable over the broad ocean areas where the Soviets’ terrestrial resources are limited or subject to attack. In addition, other Soviet space threats may affect U.S. force operations, e.g., Soviet photo reconnaissance of U.S. 15 The Ford Administration issued National Security Decision Memorandum 333, “Enhanced Survivability of Critical U.S. Military and Intelligence Space Systems,” on July 7, 1976. It is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXV, National Security Policy, 1973–1976, Document 91. 16 See footnote 2, Document 1.
