340
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the goals we set for ourselves during 1977. In important respects, our
choices in 1978 will shape the character of America’s role in world af-
fairs for years to come:
—We will persist in continuing long term efforts to promote
human rights, to check nuclear weapons proliferation and to restrain
the growth in conventional arms traffic.
—Ratification of the Panama Canal Treaties will secure our future
interests in the Canal and set the pattern for a healthy new relationship
between big powers and smaller countries, a relationship of clear mu-
tual benefit and respect.
—We will continue during the coming months to pursue a stra-
tegic arms limitation agreement with the Soviet Union that will
strengthen our security as well as that of our allies, and reduce the risks
and tensions that accompany an uncontrolled nuclear weapons race.
We will at the same time press for a comprehensive ban on nuclear
testing.
—Diplomacy for peace in the Middle East, southern Africa, and
the Horn of Africa will continue, in the hope that these particularly
dangerous regional disputes can be resolved.
—An effective American energy program must be enacted.
—We will pursue a more open trading system that serves the econ-
omies of all nations.
—Through a more effective foreign aid program, we will seek to
encourage the growth and well-being of developing societies. Their
economic progress will promote our own.
We have always responded well as a nation to immediate chal-
lenges. Today, more than ever, we face another critical test: whether we
can rally for the long haul, whether we can make the short-term sacri-
fices sometimes necessary to secure our future interests.
We have emerged from our national ordeal in Vietnam. In 1978, a
strong America has the opportunity to show that we have the confi-
dence to play a positive role of world leadership. This positive Amer-
ican role is essential if the world is to come to grips with the problems
that could otherwise engulf it.
The choices we face touch every American. While the immediate
interests of our citizens are diverse, over the longer run each of us
shares an interest in a foreign policy that serves three goals: to be true to
our values, to seek peace, and to enhance the well-being of our people
and the peoples of all nations. The body of this report addresses each of
these fundamental objectives.
II. VALUES
American values provide the base of our policy. Our concern for
the welfare of others coincides with our own national interest:
