Venezuela  1271
behind him. Ambassador Sparks agreed that our military mission peo-
ple should not engage in conversations of this kind and said that he 
would look into it.
The President, in speaking of his position with regard to the 
Communists and the Armed Forces, also said that reports concern-
ing division among the three major parties are very much exagger-
ated. He said that, as a matter of fact, he was having lunch that day 
with leaders of the three parties in order to discuss important current 
problems.
At the end of the conversation Ambassador Sparks asked President 
Betancourt if the matter of PAA jet landings at Palo Negro pending the 
completion of the Maiquetia airstrip is a closed issue. The President said 
that the one experimental landing presents no problem, but the Armed 
Forces are very much opposed to continuing landings on a commercial 
basis until the airstrip at Maiquetia is finished and the President did not 
see how he could properly override this objection. The President said 
that in any case the work on the Maiquetia airstrip will be completed 
in October.
VE–29.	
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the 
Embassy in Great Britain1
 
Washington, April 28, 1959—9:13 pm.
Prior to his departure for Arab Petroleum Conference Venezuelan 
Minister of Mines Pérez Alfonso was requested by Department to stop 
in Washington for consultation on proposed exemption from U.S. 
import restrictions of crude oil and derivative products transported 
into this country by pipeline. Latest information indicates he is return-
ing from conference via Athens, Belgrade, London and Washington, 
not arriving here until May 4. View his change of plans and imminence 
Canadian debate on national energy resources bill it not possible delay 
public announcement of exemption until Department has had opportu-
nity consult with him as originally planned.
Embassy is therefore requested contact Pérez Alfonso as soon as 
he arrives in London later this week to inform him before April 30 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.316/4–2859. Confidential. Drafted 
by Bartch and approved by Snow; repeated for information to the U.S. Embassies in 
Canada and Venezuela.
