1082  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
(a) Organize a Joint Strategic Target Planning staff consisting of 
personnel from the various services possessing the required skills to 
perform the targeting and planning functions.
(b) Develop and maintain the NSTL and the SIOP for attack of the 
targets on the NSTL.
(c) Submit the NSTL and the SIOP to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
for review and approval, highlighting points of difference which he 
resolved during the preparation of the NSTL and the SIOP.
(2) There shall be a Deputy Director of Strategic Target Planning of 
flag or general rank who shall be selected by the Director of Strategic 
Target Planning and who shall be of a different service than the Director.
5. Damage and Assurance Criteria. Plans and operations directed 
toward the attack of the NSTL will be based on the criteria set forth below:
a. Damage Criteria. In applying these damage criteria, account will 
be taken of cumulative damage effects from adjacent nuclear detona­
tions. It is recognized that variations from established probabilities will 
be desirable in order to adjust to variable target configurations, yields 
and CEP’s of available weapons, characteristics of delivery vehicles, 
and other operational factors.
(1) Ninety percent probability of severe damage to military targets 
directly related to atomic delivery capability.
(2) Ninety percent probability of severe damage to military and 
government controls of major importance.
(3) Ninety percent probability of severe damage to 50 percent of 
industrial floor space in major urban areas.
b. Assurance Criteria. Taking account of all pertinent operational 
factors, plans and operations will be based upon achieving a minimum 
of seventy-­five percent assurance of delivery at each bomb-­release line 
(BRL) of the necessary weapons to achieve the specified levels of dam­
age to targets on the NSTL.
Tab B
Memorandum for General Power, USAF
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Director of Strategic Target Planning
1. You are hereby designated Director of Strategic Target Planning 
for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
2. Your task, responsibility and authority are as contained in the 
National Strategic Targeting and Attack Policy dated ____________.
