266
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
122.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
Washington, April 26, 1980, 0444Z
109665. Subject: Consultations on Reported use of Chemical
Weapons (CW).
1. (Secret—Entire text)
2. Summary: We believe the reports of Chemical Weapons (CW)
use in Indochina and Afghanistan require greater international atten-
tion and that they should be investigated further by an impartial inter-
national team. We are planning to send out an interagency team to se-
lected capitals to discuss the issue further. This message instructs
action addressees to approach host governments to set up meetings for
the team with appropriate host government officials. The request for
administrative assistance in arranging the team’s trip will follow
Septel. End summary.
3. The USG continues to be deeply concerned over continuing re-
ports that Chemical Weapons (CW) are being used in Laos, Kampuchea
and Afghanistan. These reports are sufficiently credible to warrant
greater international attention to discourage such use and help ensure
that Chemical Weapons are not used in any conflict, current or future,
in any region of the world. We believe the most effective means of ob-
taining the necessary attention and action would be through an impar-
tial international investigation.
4. Reports of the use of Chemical Weapons are not and should not
be a matter of concern to the United States alone. To stress the seri-
ousness with which the USG views this issue, to stimulate support for
such an investigation, and to encourage other actions which could con-
tribute to the resolution of the problem, we plan to send out a special
interagency team of policy officials [less than 1 line not declassified] to se-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800206–0389. Se-
cret; Priority. Sent Priority to Paris, Bern, Bonn, Rome, Brussels, The Hague, USNATO,
Copenhagen, Stockholm. Sent for information Priority to the Mission in Geneva, USUN,
Islamabad, Vientiane, Moscow, Bangkok, Ottawa, Canberra, Tokyo, the U.S National
Military Representative to the Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Powers in Belgium,
and Wellington. Drafted by Murray and David Carlson (PM/CA); cleared by Oplinger
and Brement, Jack Smith and Manuel Sanches (JCS), Alan Overmeyer (T), Peter Wilson
(S/P), Robert Peck and Richard Norton (NEA/PAB), Avis Bohlen (EUR/RPM), Edgar
Beigel (EUR/WE), Charles Hoettle (EUR/CE), Cameron Sanders and William Menold
(IO), Mark Palmer (PM/DCA), [name not declassified] (CIA), George Gasberri (DIA), Merle
MacDonald (OSD), Robert Mikulak (ACDA/MA/AT), Richard Combs (S/MS), Edmund
McWilliams and Michael Gelner (EA/VLC), Martin Mclean (EUR/SOV), Neil Michaud,
Richard Thompson, and Dennis Goodman (EUR/NE), Michael Matheson (L/PM), and
Robert Martin and Gary Crocker (INR/PMA); and approved by Mark Palmer (PM).
