3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
311
suspending the deadline for closing the construction site. Shulman em-
phasized the serious housing problems faced by Embassy Moscow,
particularly after the fire last year.3 The Secretary pointed out that this
problem goes back to his trip to Moscow in March 1977 and urged that
the Soviets meet their obligations.
3 See footnote 6, Document 45.
96.
Letter From President Carter to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, April 14, 1978
Dear Cy:
Your visit to Moscow can be an important step towards our major
foreign policy objectives: a more peaceful world based on the reduction
and control of arms; a deeper understanding with the Soviet Union; a
resolution of regional conflicts and restraint on the part of the major
powers. For this reason your visit requires that we address the entire
scope of our relationship with the Soviet Union, including particularly
those issues which are the source of deep concern to me and to the
American public at large.
It is in the interest of both countries that SALT succeed. However, I
am concerned that Soviet strategy is to focus attention on SALT as
proof of progress in U.S.-Soviet relations while the Soviet Union
pursues its political objectives elsewhere by military means. Therefore,
you should begin the discussions with a broad review of U.S.-Soviet re-
lations, emphasizing that the U.S. seeks a detente that is increasingly
comprehensive and genuinely reciprocal. Unless this happens, some of
the central factors of our relationship, including SALT, will be ad-
versely affected by the consequent deterioration in the political envi-
ronment. It is for this reason that you should stress that detente cannot
be compartmentalized and that mutual restraint lies at the core of a de-
tente relationship.
You should make clear that we regard the U.S.-Soviet relationship
as central to world peace and global stability. This relationship must
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 50, Chron: 4/78. Top Secret. A draft copy of the letter is ibid. Vance
traveled to Moscow April 19–23.
