International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1017 307. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, January 25, 1978 SUBJECT Implications of Worldwide Population Growth for United States Security and Overseas Interests: Evaluation of Population Program Performance In response to your memorandum of May 17, 1977,2 and in furtherance of this Administration’s continuing efforts to improve the effectiveness of our foreign aid programs, the attached format evaluating the performance of population programs on a country-by-country basis has been developed by the Department of State, in consultation with the Agency for International Development and the Department of the Treasury, and approved by the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy. This effort attempts to assess the effectiveness of our population assistance activities in the context of the programs of recipient governments. It attempts to estimate the prevalence of contraceptive use as a measure of the effect of a country’s overall population program in reducing birth rates, and to estimate the dollar cost per contraceptive user as an indication of the cost-effectiveness of the program. As the attached discussion of the format emphasizes, however, any serious attempt to evaluate the effectiveness of population programs must take into account the influence of other socio-economic determinants of birth rates. For this reason, the performance evaluation format calls for data on a wide range of socio-economic variables potentially affecting fertility, and incorporates this data in the final section of the format in which the overall effectiveness of the program is analyzed. Additional work must be done to improve our understanding of the relative contributions of family planning services and these other determinants of fertility reduction; as this work progresses the evaluation format will be refined by the Ad Hoc Group to increase the usefulness of these criteria and to develop new and better measures of program effectiveness. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary—Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 8, Memos/Letters FM WC to Agencies. No classification marking. Christopher sent a copy to Gilligan under a January 31 covering memorandum, commenting that he hoped “that this effort proves helpful in making future planning and budgeting decisions about our foreign aid programs and that State and AID can continue to work together in monitoring and improving the effectiveness of our aid programs in population and in other areas.” (Ibid.) 2 See Document 282.
