International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1017
307.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 25, 1978
SUBJECT
Implications of Worldwide Population Growth for United States Security and
Overseas Interests: Evaluation of Population Program Performance
In response to your memorandum of May 17, 1977,2 and in further-
ance of this Administration’s continuing efforts to improve the effec-
tiveness of our foreign aid programs, the attached format evaluating
the performance of population programs on a country-by-country basis
has been developed by the Department of State, in consultation with
the Agency for International Development and the Department of the
Treasury, and approved by the NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population
Policy.
This effort attempts to assess the effectiveness of our population
assistance activities in the context of the programs of recipient gov-
ernments. It attempts to estimate the prevalence of contraceptive use as
a measure of the effect of a country’s overall population program in re-
ducing birth rates, and to estimate the dollar cost per contraceptive user
as an indication of the cost-effectiveness of the program. As the at-
tached discussion of the format emphasizes, however, any serious at-
tempt to evaluate the effectiveness of population programs must take
into account the influence of other socio-economic determinants of
birth rates. For this reason, the performance evaluation format calls for
data on a wide range of socio-economic variables potentially affecting
fertility, and incorporates this data in the final section of the format in
which the overall effectiveness of the program is analyzed. Additional
work must be done to improve our understanding of the relative con-
tributions of family planning services and these other determinants of
fertility reduction; as this work progresses the evaluation format will
be refined by the Ad Hoc Group to increase the usefulness of these cri-
teria and to develop new and better measures of program effectiveness.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary—Records of
Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 8, Memos/Letters FM WC to Agencies.
No classification marking. Christopher sent a copy to Gilligan under a January 31 cov-
ering memorandum, commenting that he hoped “that this effort proves helpful in
making future planning and budgeting decisions about our foreign aid programs and
that State and AID can continue to work together in monitoring and improving the effec-
tiveness of our aid programs in population and in other areas.” (Ibid.)
2 See Document 282.
