International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 695 sources (coal, nuclear power, synthetics) should be the main outcome of the Summit. All saw energy as being its main business. 3. North/South. All, except the British (who are cutting their foreign aid), agreed that more attention should be paid to North/South issues at this than at previous Summits. The German proposal to focus on helping LDCs produce energy found favor; so did the US suggestion that the World Bank be asked to examine means of increasing its activities in this field, including the possibility of creating a new IBRD affiliate for this purpose, in which OPEC could play a large financing role. It was agreed to convene a special Summit preparatory sub-group to examine the US proposal to give the war on hunger higher priority in the Summit countries’ aid programs—with particular emphasis on increased food production, improved food storage, and strengthened agricultural research. 4. Political. The French delegate objected to any Venice consideration of political issues (although this didn’t prevent him from agreeing that strong language about terrorism should be included in the communique). The British said that they had been told the French would eventually agree to Summit consideration of political issues, if this was done informally. The Italians may propose that a seven-nation group, which would be an extension of the present Summit Preparatory group, meet before the Summit to canvass political issues. Several delegates spoke of the need for some such means of involving Japan, the major EC countries, and the US on a regular basis in informal consideration of political issues [before?] they come to a head, quite aside from Summit preparations. 5. Scheduling. There will be an 8:30 breakfast on the first day for the heads of governments to figure how they wish to run the Summit. (This leaves you free to arrange a breakfast of the four on the second day, if you wish.) The general view was that it might be wise to start the first day with a brief discussion of economic issues, so that the economic types could then go off to revise the draft communique in light of this discussion, while heads of governments devoted most of the first day and their dinner to political issues. The second day would be devoted to economic issues. The press conference will be at 6:00 p.m. of the second day. 6. Comment. I agree with the French that a collective commitment to greatly increased production of alternative energy sources should be the Summit’s main outcome. It would help to elicit efforts from other Summit nations comparable to those the US now plans to undertake. At a dinner for OECD Secretary General Van Lennep last night, Congressman Wirth said that he thought such a commitment by the industrial nations would be welcomed by the American people as a sign that
