1956 771 in effect, demand that US say that if its forces are attacked they will not defend themselves. That of course is absurd on face of it. 53. I said I earnestly hoped that he could reconsider his position on this in light our discussions and my explanations this morning so that we could see whether it possible for us to reach agreement on this at our next meeting. I sincerely hoped we could do so. 54. Wang said they could not but want make clear their point view regarding issuance of agreement. They could not but explain their views regarding what they consider to be incorrect views concerning announcement. 55. Wang said they say US is occupying Chinese territory of ­Taiwan today. Only after American forces in Taiwan area—such as Seventh Fleet and so on—are withdrawn could I argue that US not occupying Taiwan. That would be matter which everybody would welcome and be glad see carried out. 56. Wang said I had talked much about alleged threats. As long as US forces not withdrawn from Taiwan area, American threat will always exist in that area. This not threat on part Chinese against US, but on contrary is US threat against China. This plain fact. 57. Wang said in spite all this their side still willing negotiate with US in peaceful manner in attempt arrive at solution this dispute. Is not this attitude Chinese side very conciliatory attitude? Certainly we are still in present stage of discussing issuance of agreed announcement. 58. Wang said I had stated that we should confine our discussion at present stage to issuance of the announcement. In course of discus­ sion we should continuously overcome obstacles in our way and keep advancing. If as I had said we should confine discussion strictly to question of announcement itself, was I willing accept their December 1 draft, which he considered very reasonable? His draft says that “PRC and USA are determined that they should settle disputes between their two countries through peaceful negotiations without resorting to threat or use of force.” This says both should use peaceful means, rather than means of war, to settle disputes between them. 59. Wang said certainly he would be prepared listen to any sugges­ tions or opinions I might have regard to this draft. 60. Wang said he had noted that when I read from my January 12 draft I had left out phrase regarding “without prejudice to inherent right of individual and collective self-­defense.” He wondered if I meant that I would omit this clause from draft announcement. He would appreciate it if I would clarify these two points he had just raised. 61. I said first I would not take our time to review my previous comments regarding his December 1 draft. I had previously set forth reasons I felt it was defective as meaningful declaration.
