International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 economy. Our ability to compete is unimpaired. Our foreign markets are simply growing slowly or not at all, while U.S. economic growth leads the industrial world. The dollar has depreciated considerably against slow-growing countries, many of which are now in surplus as a response to our deficit. The recent exchange rate adjustments will help to keep our deficit in line and reduce the surpluses elsewhere. The exchange rate changes also put pressure on the countries in surplus to take needed action to stimulate their economies. Although there may be alarmist press coverage, Vance and Schultze see little risk that exchange markets will get out of hand. In fact, this risk is likely to be increased rather than reduced by major policy reversals and high visibility statements that emphasize our alarm. Schultze and Vance recommend low key public education, pursuit of diplomatic efforts to stimulate adjustment by countries in surplus and quiet adoption of reasonable, low-cost measures. C. Schlesinger Comment We must recognize that while approximately half the deterioration in our balance of trade is attributable to increased oil imports, the other half is not. Over the past two years, there has been a significant deterioration in our trade balance in the industrial products sector, and some deterioration in the agricultural sector. Our biggest single problem— the $12 billion annual Japanese trade surplus—is largely unrelated to energy imports. It is interesting to note that, considering the relative sizes of GNPs, the Japanese import the equivalent of twice the amount of oil as does the United States and yet still manage to run an enormous balance of trade surplus. Thus, when considering the balance of payments problem, we must keep the non-energy component in mind and act accordingly. This should call into question any strategy which does not focus on a broad range of remedial actions.5 Those actions, however should be implemented gradually, and any energy-related actions should be implemented without an explicit linkage to the balance of payments problem. III. OPTIONS FOR DECISION The pros and cons of each of the options suggested by Secretary Blumenthal are outlined below. Some of the impacts of these options can be described as either positive or negative, depending on the basic approach to the problem which you feel is most appropriate. For example, a highly visible expression of concern about the strength of the dollar would be a plus under the Blumenthal approach, and a negative under the Schultze/Vance approach. 5 Carter underlined the phrase “broad range.”
