Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
715
There may be others who are missing from that group. We have aero
MEDEVAC airplanes . . . we had at Dhaharan one positioned for the
next day . . . and a C–9 special with whole blood coming out of Germany
to go into Wadi Kena to meet. We have report from [less than 1 line
not declassified] . . . we’re not sure . . . may be from the helicopter crew
that is missing, however their first report is that they cannot get a
location on it yet. So we’re working on an expedited basis on that [less
than 1 line not declassified] and the whole business of trying to rescue
that crew that’re down.
Carter: How would we go about that David?
Jones: Well, probably with that RH–53 we now have back and
refueled on the Nimitz. They also have other helicopters. That would
be the quickest thing. We are also . . . we had loaded aboard C–5 in
New Mexico . . . launching some special RH–53s that we did not launch
ahead of time because it would tip the hand of the whole operation.
But if it becomes very complex they are better. But it appears that the
Nimitz could pick up in the rescue . . . from the Nimitz . . . with its
helicopters if we could find out where the crew is located. So that’s
where . . . now it appears that everybody’s airborne out of Desert One
and getting close to the coast. We’re really concentrating on trying to
find that crew. And also be sure to get those 5 aircraft across the coast
without being intercepted.
Carter: Now David one thing we don’t want to do is compound
the problem by having a major pitched air battle over Iran.
Jones: Yes sir. I had told that to . . .
Carter: We need to think this through if we know where that crew
is on the ground, how to go about getting them out.
Jones: Yes sir. Well when we find it I’ll talk with you or with
Harold and we’ll make sure we’ve got a well organized plan to get in
and to get it out. I told Harold one thing we wanted to do the better
choice we have [1½ lines not declassified] to get this helicopter crew
picked up. We have no report [less than 1 line not declassified] any alerting
of anybody anyplace.
Carter: That’s unbelievable, isn’t it?
Jones: Yes sir.
Carter: Someone just walked through the office watching TV.
They’re apparently having massive riots on the street over there in
Tehran because of other altercations, and they said the streets in Tehran
looked almost like they did when the Shah fell.
Jones: I hadn’t heard that. I know there was a lot of fighting in
and around the Iraqi border, and many people killed over there that
we’d gotten earlier. Things have quieted down now as far as all of the
gendarmerie out in the country.
