International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 409 cient and progressive. Thus, our trade relationships with such countries as Brazil, Korea and others will take constant vigilance and a regular series of bilaterals to enforce adherence to reasonable rules of the game in fair trade. An aggressive policy with the advanced LDC’s may also permit us to segregate the LLDC’s for some special privileges which we want to confer for humanitarian reasons. This would cost us very little in trade problems. Of course, such a two-pronged effort would in itself reinforce the concept of graduation by making it a reality in U.S. practice. C. EC: With the largest trading entity we will also want to maintain essentially a continuing dialogue cum negotiation to make sure we are playing by the same rules. Then, together we must insist on the adherence of others who have access to our markets. Our long-term interests are converging and we collectively can provide enormous discipline for the system if the EC will join us in this effort. D. Multilateral Efforts: Here we must make the GATT work. We should do the following: —devote the time and effort needed to upgrade and reinforce its mechanisms and secretariat —get the codes off to a good start with constructive, positive precedents —provide mandatory referrals of legitimate complaints by U.S. industry to the GATT —maintain strong U.S. positions to provide a continuing role of leadership —keep a broad-based, commercially oriented discussion going to reduce political build-ups of pressure in the UN, UNCTAD and other political fora. 3. STR Responsibility for Building and Defending U.S. Export Interests As the President’s Special Trade Representative, the office of STR should be charged with the responsibility to build and defend U.S. export interests on a consistent and effective basis. These efforts, in cooperation with many of the executive department entities, should include: —initiate and provide leadership for key U.S. programs to expand exports and support the needs of exporters —audit across the board of U.S. programs to comment on their impact on our international competitive position —serve as a persistent, continuing watchdog over U.S. export results and trends and our balance of trade. 4. Active Management of the Trade Interface with Non-Market Economies We have no good solutions yet to our relationships between the Western economies and the Communist/Socialist countries whose markets are essentially closed to us. We must make sure that our market is not glutted by their merchandise when they have followed no
