Comprehensive Test Ban There should be no multilateral CTB consultations without the approval of the President. The Delegation should bear in mind that the President has decided to resume testing at the end of the agreement unless a vigorous safeguards program and studies indicate that this is not necessary. Zbigniew Brzezinski 220. Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Rogers) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, September 26, 1978 SUBJECT Nonproliferation Value of a Comprehensive Test 1. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have carefully studied your memorandum of 10 July 1978,2 subject as above. While they agree that proliferation of nuclear weapons is a serious national security issue, they remain unpersuaded by the evidence you have presented on the potential nonproliferation benefits of a Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) of the type currently under discussion. 2. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have been unable to establish to their satisfaction any causative relationship between a ban on nuclear testing and the cessation of the development of nuclear weapons by states without such weapon. They feel at this point that a nation’s decision to develop nuclear weapons is dependent upon perceptions of vital selfinterest, not upon the existence of a CTB. Further, they believe the benefits stated in your memorandum would be uncertain and debatable in the case of a CTB of unlimited duration, and that significant nonproliferation benefits would not be derived from the type of CTB now being considered by the United States—one of 3to 5-year duration with an announced option to resume testing. 3. (S) Clearly, there are divergent views concerning the nonproliferation benefits of a 3to 5-year CTB followed by resumption of testing. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that an interagency paper 1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82, Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty #2. Secret. Copies were sent to Brown, Schlesinger, Brzezinski, and Warnke. 2 See Document 211.
