Comprehensive Test Ban
543
There should be no multilateral CTB consultations without the ap-
proval of the President.
The Delegation should bear in mind that the President has decided
to resume testing at the end of the agreement unless a vigorous safe-
guards program and studies indicate that this is not necessary.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
220.
Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff (Rogers) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, September 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Nonproliferation Value of a Comprehensive Test
1. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have carefully studied your memo-
randum of 10 July 1978,2 subject as above. While they agree that prolif-
eration of nuclear weapons is a serious national security issue, they
remain unpersuaded by the evidence you have presented on the poten-
tial nonproliferation benefits of a Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) of the
type currently under discussion.
2. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have been unable to establish to their
satisfaction any causative relationship between a ban on nuclear testing
and the cessation of the development of nuclear weapons by states
without such weapon. They feel at this point that a nation’s decision to
develop nuclear weapons is dependent upon perceptions of vital self-
interest, not upon the existence of a CTB. Further, they believe the ben-
efits stated in your memorandum would be uncertain and debatable in
the case of a CTB of unlimited duration, and that significant nonproli-
feration benefits would not be derived from the type of CTB now being
considered by the United States—one of 3- to 5-year duration with an
announced option to resume testing.
3. (S) Clearly, there are divergent views concerning the nonpro-
liferation benefits of a 3- to 5-year CTB followed by resumption of
testing. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that an interagency paper
1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82,
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty #2. Secret. Copies were sent to Brown, Schlesinger, Brze-
zinski, and Warnke.
2 See Document 211.
