Yugoslavia
917
avoid. State feels that it should be low profile and perfunctory.5 This
is probably impossible. If the President goes, Marshall, Bob and I feel
that he should emphasize our concerns about Afghanistan and that he
should above all give the impression of firmness and determination.
(Alternatively, Vance could meet with Gromyko if the Vice President
heads the delegation.) If possible, bilaterals with the allies should pre-
cede any meeting with Brezhnev, but we should avoid a Quad type
meeting since this would offend the Yugoslavs. (C)
Coordination with the Allies: Over the next few days, the allies will
be looking to us for indications of what we plan to do and we need
to convey to them our views. If we do not, the allies may get out
in front—Giscard leading the pack—and attempt to act as mediators
between the US and the Soviets. The Soviets could try to play on this
lack of unity within the allies to further split the US from its allies.
The President needs to convey our thinking to the allies as soon as
possible. (C)
Military Supply Relationship: General Graves has been in Yugoslavia
where he has had talks with Ljubicic and other Yugoslav officials (Tab
A). The main problem in the military supply relationship remains the
high cost of US weapons and the inability of the Yugoslav’s to pay for
them. Ljubicic made several proposals on how we might overcome the
financial obstacles (military credits to Yugoslavia and they would then
use them to pay for US hardware, etc.)6 Ask Harold to explore the
feasibility of Ljubicic’s proposals and report back as to how we can
overcome the financial obstacles.7 (S)
5 Brzezinski underlined “low profile and perfunctory” and wrote an illegible com-
ment in the margin.
6 Ljubicic made two proposals: 1) That the U.S. help Yugoslavia obtain commercial
credits that could be used for the purposes of buying military hardware if FMS credits
remained a challenge. 2) That the U.S. consider selling Yugoslavia small quantities of
some of the up-to-date anti-tank and air-defense systems for training purposes. Ljubicic
told Graves: “Yugoslavia recognizes that in exceptional situations—‘and we both under-
stand what such situations might be’—Yugoslavia may be able to obtain from the United
States the up-to-date weapons systems it needs to defend itself.” These weapons—which
the Embassy identified as the Viper, Stinger, and Roland missile systems—would be
used for training purposes in preparation for larger scale acquisition in a time of crisis.
(Telegram 1089 from Belgrade, February 12; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D800075–0640)
7 Brzezinski highlighted this sentence and wrote “Very important” in the margin.
At the bottom of the page he wrote: “We should immediately call Armstrong, Von
Staden, Wahl[erhime] to see what their people plan to do, & to set up a system for
coordinating our statements and the line our leaders [wi]ll take in meeting the Soviets,
that should include: * restore Afghanistan as a buffer; * token Soviet withdrawals and
new plans; * Will guarantee neutrality of non-aligned Afghanistan ([illegible] pro Sunni,
Islamic (eg Iraq)).
