108 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II nated a significant number of borrowers who “consistently deprived their people of basic human rights.” This argument seemed to suggest that not only was the past practices of the banks inviolate, but also that the reduction of their budget was inconceivable. Summarizing, I again urge that these observations, along with those of Frank Moore, et al., be considered prior to your final decision. 37. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, April 19, 1977 SUBJECT Call to President Regarding Lipshutz Opposition to the IFI’s Bill Zbig’s office tells me that he spoke to the President this morning about Bob Lipshutz’s opposition to the Humphrey approach to the IFI’s bill. The President said he would re-read Lipshutz’s memo. Zbig suggests that it is important for you to “weigh-in” with the President today, if possible. Robert Lipshutz’s April 17 memorandum to the President (Tab 1)2 sets forth a number of arguments which appear to favor Administration support for the Harkin Amendment. Apart from the substance, the timing of Lipshutz involvement presents important procedural and credibility problems. He began asking questions after the President’s press conference remarks endorsing the Humphrey approach (Tab 2).3 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 7, Memoranda to the Secretary—1977. No classification marking. Christopher did not initial the memorandum. A stamped notation on the memorandum indicates that Vance saw it. 2 Attached; printed as Document 36. 3 Attached but not printed is an undated excerpt from the press conference, which took place on April 15. In response to a question regarding administration support for the Harkin amendment, the President asserted, “I think the Harkin amendment is a mistake. The Reuss amendment and the Senator Humphrey amendment, which are the same, provide me with an adequate authority to deal with the question of human rights as it relates to international and regional lending institutions. To have a frozen mandatory prohibition against our nation voting for any loan simply removes my ability to bargain with a foreign leader whom we think might be willing to ease off on the deprivation of human rights. But when the requirement is frozen into law, there is simply no reason for a foreign leader to try to comply. I think we need to have the flexibility that we proposed. My
