January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1265
strengthen those who oppose our course and will endanger our mutual
efforts to achieve comprehensive peace in the area.
I am also convinced that the only sound way of meeting your con-
cerns and achieving our mutual goals is to pursue the autonomy nego-
tiations as actively as possible so that we can make demonstrable
progress on the key issues critical to the autonomy concept.
I therefore urge, Mr. President, that you authorize us to tell the Is-
raelis that you are prepared to resume the negotiations as soon as pos-
sible. If you will do this, I believe the next step might be to arrange a
meeting among the delegation heads to draw up plans for the resump-
tion of negotiations on lines that will ensure they proceed as produc-
tively as possible.
With warm personal regards,
Jimmy Carter
End text.
Muskie
382.
Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple Posts1
Washington, June 7, 1980, 2219Z
150838. Subject: U.S. Position on European Middle East Initiative.
1. (C) Entire text.
2. As addressees know, Europeans are concerned about Middle
East peace process and have conferred among themselves about an ini-
tiative they might take. There is much divided counsel, however, about
what specific form an initiative should take, with some preferring the
idea of a Security Council resolution while others believe this would be
a mistake and that instead the Europeans should confine themselves to
an EC statement. The Egyptians are apparently now weighing in with
the Europeans against a Security Council resolution at this time: Vice
President Mubarak reportedly took this line in his recent visits to
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800279–1230.
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent Immediate to Luxembourg, London, Paris, Bonn,
Copenhagen, Brussels, and Dublin. Sent for information Immediate to all Near Eastern
and South Asian posts and Khartoum. The telegram was repeated Immediate to Rome
and The Hague and repeated for information Immediate to Brussels (for USEEC),
USNATO, and Berlin on June 9.
