960
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
financial problems. Loncar said that Miller had expressed gratification
with Yugoslavia’s stabilization program.
5. The Vice President pointed out that he had brought Secretary
Miller along on his delegation to the funeral because of our desire to
be helpful.
6. Loncar continued that through its efforts to help Yugoslavia over
this financial problem the US had an opportunity to broaden ties with
Yugoslavia in all fields—military, economic and political. On the terror-
ism issue he said that the most important fact was that progress was
being made. He had told Attorney General Civiletti what he thought
was good and what needed improvement in US efforts to control
terrorism and he did not want to go over the same ground again but
that the arrest of only a few more terrorists would do much to control
the problem.
7. Turning to the President’s visit, Loncar referred to the pioneering
role which the Vice President had had in his 1977 visit to Yugoslavia
which came after four bad years in US-Yugoslav relations. This is the
perfect time for President Carter to come, capping the remarkable
progress made in the last three years. Loncar referred to the great
popularity which President Carter enjoys in Yugoslavia particularly
after the statements he made concerning US policy toward Yugoslavia
in February of this year and at the time of Tito’s death. Loncar said
that the visit was taking place at a time of tension in international
affairs and that the Yugoslav leadership would be ready to discuss
these problems forthrightly. The very solid US-Yugoslav relationship
is one which has a wider impact which Yugoslavia can use. However,
Loncar cautioned that it would be important not to sound confronta-
tional notes about US-Soviet relations during the President’s visit since
this would create problems for Yugoslavia and diminish the importance
of the visit. The Vice President assured Loncar of the President’s under-
standing on this point.
8. Loncar continued with the description of the dynamics of the
nonaligned movement leading up to the Havana Summit and beyond.
Discussing Yugoslav and Cuban proposals for a NAM Ministerial,
Loncar said there were two issues. One issue was the location of the
conference and here Yugoslavia and others had been insisting that the
conference must be in Sri Lanka, Tanzania or Indonesia or there would
be no conference. More important than the form was the substance
and here Yugoslavia was very active to insure the proper focus. The
Vice President assured Loncar of our appreciation of the constructive
role which Yugoslavia played in the nonaligned movement.
9. In closing the Vice President told Loncar he would welcome the
opportunity to continue this kind of exchange in the future.
Muskie
