1980 785 Soviet programs are to strengthen the USSR’s deterrent, to support its foreign policy, and to foster strategic stability through Soviet advantage. In these efforts, however, the Soviets would face less favorable strategic trends over the longer term if additional and more formidable weapons now in prospect are deployed by the United States and NATO in the middle and late 1980s. 2. Throughout the 1980s, with or without SALT limitations, the retaliatory capabilities of US and Soviet forces surviving even a surprise attack would be very large. In the early 1980s, when Soviet forces would have greater capabilities than today to reduce US surviving weapons in a surprise attack, the Soviets would still have to expect the United States to retain the potential to destroy a large percentage of the USSR’s economic and military assets. Similarly, despite the improvements planned for US forces in the late 1980s, the Soviets could expect to retain the potential for massive retaliation against US economic and military facilities, even under circumstances of a US surprise attack. This Soviet potential, however, would be less than in the early and middle 1980s, and such a prospective decline is cause for Soviet concern. 3. In seeking to meet the challenges posed by prospective US and NATO force improvements, we believe that the Soviets would hope to avoid substantial further increases in the costs of their strategic programs. We believe that principal Soviet aims will be to slow or halt the Western programs through a combination of threats, inducements, and arms negotiations and, at the same time, to continue to develop force deployment options that could counter these programs. The Soviets would have more latitude to develop and deploy such counters if they were not bound by the limits of SALT II or if those limits were to lapse in 1985. If Western strategic programs proceed as planned and SALT II limits are not changed, the Soviets could find it increasingly difficult to reconcile their strategic force objectives with their desire to continue the SALT process. 4. We do not expect immediate, irreversible responses by the USSR to US deferral of the SALT Treaty. We believe the Soviets will wish, at least initially, to avoid visible changes in strategic programs that could seriously jeopardize the chances of eventual US ratification. They could, however, take measures designed to pressure the United States, with the idea of reversing them later if the Treaty were eventually ratified. A US rejection of the Treaty, particularly in light of prospective US and NATO force improvements, would probably result in a combination of actions by the Soviets that would increase their forces and capabilities beyond those they could have under the SALT II agreement.
