152
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
But there are enormous problems in the short-run. Without a sub-
stantial transitional period, the three economies will be unable to com-
pete in most manufactured goods with the present EC members. In the
agricultural area, however, they will be extremely competitive and thus
pose a threat to the agricultural interests in Southern France and Italy.
Schmidt is also understood to have expressed concern at the London
meeting of the EC Heads of State that admission of these three coun-
tries would pose special difficulties for the EC’s policy of free move-
ment of labor—i.e. he does not want these countries to send their la-
borers to Germany and undercut the jobs of more highly-paid German
workers.
Because this issue will become increasingly important in the
months ahead, both to the EC and to the three applicant nations who
regard admission as the European seal of approval of their democratic
directions, we have an interest in doing what we can to avoid a break-
down in negotiations between them and Europe and smoothing their
way into Europe. We should probe with Schmidt whether there is any-
thing we can do to help these countries assume the responsibilities of
Community membership.
North-South
Continued momentum on North-South issues is important in its
own right and because close coordination among industrialized coun-
tries, and a cooperative framework with OPEC and other LDCs, can
help to reduce tensions in the event of Arab pressures, or threats, re-
garding the Middle East.
The CIEC Ministerial Meeting, fell short of the expectations of both
developed and developing nations, but it did provide the developing
countries with a better understanding of the points of view of the de-
veloped nations and of the reasons why we cannot do certain things the
developing countries want.8
The thrust of US policy is to be forthcoming toward the developing
countries through measures which we believe to be economically
workable. We want to continue a dialogue that concentrates on specific
issues in forums most conducive to substantive progress—e.g. World
Bank, GATT, UNCTAD commodity groups. We also want to make the
UN General Assembly’s overview role more productive, perhaps
through a new economic committee. We want to build on the improved
industrial country coordination and solidarity which worked well in
CIEC; based on this we should attempt to develop a constructive
counter-proposal to the UNCTAD Common Fund. The idea of a contin-
uing energy dialogue should be reexamined and played low key. We
8 See footnote 6, Document 27.
