584
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
to emigrate by Hungary which would have great difficulties absorbing
them, wish to retain the manifestations of their ethnic origins in their
everyday life while also enjoying equal opportunities. They strongly
believe that not only are their human rights being denied but that it
is Romanian policy to eradicate them as a distinct group. Although
many Magyars were purged from government positions during late
Party leader Gheorghiu-Dej’s strict nationalities policy in the 1950s,
Ceausescu is being more cautious. The objective, creating a unified
state in which national differences are either forgotten or at least mini-
mized in favor of unswerving allegiance to Romania, remains the same.
But there are still several Hungarian-language newspapers and periodi-
cals, a large number of locally published books, and state-subsidized
theaters, radio and television programs. In Transylvania there are Hun-
garian-language primary and secondary schools, and some university
courses are taught in Hungarian. Nevertheless, the trend is toward
integration of Magyar with Romanian institutions, dispersal of Magyars
to non-Magyar areas, and importation of ethnic Romanian workers for
new industries being opened in Transylvania.
19. To the extent that people are being moved successfully, the
plan is working. Once practically 100 percent Magyar, the Transylva-
nian capital of Cluj is now only 40 percent Magyar, and Hungarian-
language street signs have disappeared. As Magyar families are forced
to move to other areas to find work, their children will increasingly
grow up in a Romanian environment. Magyars, however, are proud
of their heritage, resent the minimal role allowed their ancestors in
official Romanian history, and in fact tend to believe that they come
from a superior culture. As they do not particularly hide this feeling,
they get little sympathy from Romanians, some of whom still nurse a
sense of grievance over 19th and 20th century Hungarian attempts
to “Magyarize” ethnic Romanians. Some have fresher and personal
bitterness over the harsh treatment accorded to Romanians during
World War II before Romanian jurisdiction over Transylvania was
reestablished in 1945.
20. As gradually as Ceausescu tries to move on this issue, he will
run into problems. After a lifetime of personal sacrifices and seen
against the backdrop of an entire population which has just been told
(during the December 1977 Party Conference) that life will be at least
as difficult for another eight years, the Magyars must carry the extra
burden of their nationality. But, given the low quality of life anywhere
in Romania, even the Magyars (unless they receive help from outside)
will probably continue to give priority to personal economic survival
over the flourishing of their culture.
FOREIGN POLICY:
21. It is in this field that Romania is best known. The most basic
reality for Romanian policymakers is the country’s geographic location
