182 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 64. Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, September 17, 1979 SUBJECT What Are the Soviets Doing In Afghanistan? (S) Simply, we don’t know. Speculation is, however, intriguing. (S) There appear to be three possibilities: 1. The entire sequence over the weekend (dismissal of the military in the cabinet; retirement of Taraki; Amin’s announcement of the end of one-man leadership) was stage-managed by the Soviets as a way of getting a more acceptable government installed in Kabul. This doesn’t seem likely. The Soviets made quite a fuss over Taraki last week in Moscow; Taraki would have been a much better figurehead for a national front government in Afghanistan; and the Soviets would not seem to have any reason to do in the military faction. This would seem to be the least likely explanation.2 (S) 2. Amin is doing the whole thing in defiance of the Soviets, facing them with a fait accompli. This would be a high-stakes game for him, but he is capable of it. It is not clear, however, why Amin would now be calling for broadened leadership unless that is solely windowdressing or nothing more than a gratuitous slap at Taraki. (S) 3. Amin started out on his own, but after the dropping of Taraki, the Soviets stepped in, called his bluff, and are now forcing him to accept a collective leadership—something the Soviets have probably been looking for for quite a while. (S) We have no evidence that proves or disproves any of these. High levels of Soviet [less than 1 line not declassified] before the ouster of the military men may denote foreknowledge, but not necessarily complic- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Thornton, Country File, Box 91, Afghanistan: 5/78–12/79. Top Secret; Codeword. Sent for information. 2 In telegram 21969 from Moscow, September 13, the Embassy reported that Taraki was in Moscow September 9–11, during which he secured an “authoritative reaffirmation” of the Soviet Union’s commitment to the Afghan “people,” which the telegram noted was vague, as opposed to a more specific commitment to the Afghan Government. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790418–0686)
