National Security Policy 875 of attack aircraft carriers have materially increased the Navy’s nuclear weapon delivery capability. The 4 CVA 59 (FORRESTAL) class carriers have markedly increased this capability in fleet operations. Included in the naval forces are Marine Corps forces which contribute to the over-­all nuclear retaliatory capability. This includes one Marine aircraft wing in the Pacific (2/3 wing in 7th Fleet and 1/3 wing in other Pacific areas). One Marine division in the Pacific (2/3 division in 7th Fleet and 1/3 in other Pacific areas) and one Battalion Landing Team (BLT) with Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean can contribute to a nuclear retaliatory capa­ bility when deployed into position. Two Marine aircraft wings and 1-­8/9 divisions, all nuclear capable, located within CONUS are avail­ able for augmenting overseas forces. Fleet Marine Force troops rein­ forcing the division in the Pacific had both 8” howitzer and HONEST JOHN equipment while the BLT with the Sixth Fleet was reinforced by an 8” howitzer unit. The present Naval capability for guided missile delivery of nuclear war­ heads from surface ships and submarines is represented by the REGULUS I system for which nuclear warheads are stockpiled. REGULUS I sys­ tem is now installed in 4 submarines and 3 heavy cruisers. There are 11 other submarines equipped with REGULUS radar guidance sys­ tem (TROUNCE) to provide terminal control of a REGULUS missile launched from either a submarine or cruiser. By end FY 1960, one more submarine will be equipped with REGULUS I system. Normally 1/3 to 1/2 of these ships are deployed and contribute to capabilities of unified commands. The first 5 Fleet Ballistic Missile (FBM) submarines authorized, for which money was appropriated by Congress, are under construction. Congress appropriated funds for 4 additional FBM submarines in the FY 1959 budget, plus additional funds to lend assurance to the achieve­ ment of an effective early operational capability for the POLARIS mis­ sile. In December 1958, funds for one of these submarines were released for obligation in FY 1959. Excellent progress has been made in the POLARIS missile development and the system support programs. Nuclear delivery systems organic to deployed major U.S. Army forces contribute to the nuclear retaliatory capability. In Europe, the Army currently maintains 2 REDSTONE missile groups, 8 CORPORAL missile battalions, 5 HONEST JOHN rocket battalions, 5 HONEST JOHN batteries, six 280mm gun battalions (to be reduced to 4 during FY 1960), nine 8-­inch howitzer battalions and five 8-­inch howitzer bat­ teries. In the Pacific, the Army currently maintains one 280mm gun battalion, one HONEST JOHN battalion, two 8-­inch howitzer battal­ ions, three 8-­inch howitzer batteries and 3 HONEST JOHN batteries. Nuclear warheads are stored in the immediate vicinity of the above units thereby insuring maximum operational readiness. New weapons design and missile check-­out procedures have appreciably reduced
