Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII be useful to press the Allies harder on the NATO defense response to Afghanistan, especially the Belgians and Dutch who were apparently not going to make their three percent defense commitment. (S) Dr. Brzezinski then reminded the participants that the President had endorsed the following division of labor concepts for coordinating U.S. and Allied contributions to the security of the Persian Gulf region: 1. Most important is that our Allies increase their commitments to NATO’s defense. This is the greatest contribution they can make while the U.S. is building a security system for the Persian Gulf region. (S) 2. Facilitating U.S. enroute access for military contingencies in the region is the next most helpful thing the Allies can contribute. They should be pressed to provide that access. (S) 3. On military exercises and deployments, we should encourage our Allies to go through with those they have already planned but not to do more at this time. (S) 4. We should encourage the British, French, and Australians to improve their rapid deployment capabilities, but we should not encourage them to go beyond their current plan. (S) 5. We should encourage the Allies to expand their security assistance to key regional countries, particularly Turkey, but also Oman, Somalia, Djibouti, and Sudan. We should encourage them to maintain at least the same level of economic aid to Egypt, Turkey, and Pakistan and to expand economic aid with the smaller countries in the region. (S) Finally, David Aaron observed that another matter of transatlantic concern in the next months was CSCE and the CDE. It was agreed that there would be a follow-on to this meeting next week which would discuss how this issue might affect our relations with the Allies and, if required, what steps we should take after the President’s call to Trudeau on Canadian grain exports.4 (S) 4 At the bottom of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “We must convince the Allies that there will be no business as usual until they help us force the Soviet troops out of Afghanistan. They must face up to this choice. Otherwise, we will all fail, & the Soviets will win this struggle—(They will still have a bear by the tail in Afghanistan). J.”
