800 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement remaining prepared to fight general war, should one be forced upon the United States. This stress on deterrence is dictated by the disastrous character of general nuclear war, a danger of local conflicts developing into general war, and the serious effect of further Communist aggres­ sion. Hence the Communist rulers must be convinced that aggression will not serve their interest: that it will not pay. 12–­a. [Par. 10–­a of NSC 5810/1, amended.] It is the policy of the United States to place main, but not sole, reliance on nuclear weapons; to integrate nuclear weapons with other weapons in the Armed Forces of the United States; and to use them when required to meet the nation’s war objectives. Planning should contemplate situations short of general war where the use of nuclear weapons would manifestly not be militar­ ily necessary nor appropriate to the accomplishment of national objec­ tives, particularly in those areas where main Communist power will not be brought to bear. Designated commanders will be prepared to use nuclear weapons when required in defense of the command. Advance authorization for the use of nuclear weapons is as determined by the President.3 15. [Par. 13 of NSC 5810/1, unchanged.] In carrying out the cen­ tral aim of deterring general war, the United States must develop and maintain as part of its military forces its effective nuclear retal­ iatory power, and must keep that power secure from neutralization or from a Soviet knockout blow, even by surprise. The United States must also develop and maintain adequate military and non-­military programs for continental defense. So long as the Soviet leaders are uncertain of their ability to neutralize the U.S. nuclear retaliatory power, there is little reason to expect them deliberately to initiate general war or actions which they believe would carry appreciable risk of general war, and thereby endanger the regime and the secu­ rity of the USSR. 16. [Par. 14 of NSC 5810/1, amended.] Military planning for U.S. forces to oppose local aggression will be based on a flexible and selec­ tive capability, including nuclear capability for use in cases authorized by the President. Within the total U.S. military forces there must be included ready forces which, in conjunction with indigenous forces and with such help as may realistically be expected from allied forces, are adequate (a) to present a deterrent to any resort to local aggression, and (b) to defeat such aggression, or to hold it pending the applica­ tion of such additional U.S. and allied power as may be required to 3 Paragraph 12–­a of NSC 5906 was approved by the President with the understand­ ing that it is not to be interpreted as a change in policy but rather as a clarification of existing policy with respect to the use of nuclear weapons and the requirement for main­ taining balanced forces. [Footnote is in the original.]
