Human Rights
545
doubling the bilateral development assistance budget by 1982. Thus I
am particularly concerned that efforts to cut back bilateral develop-
ment assistance may be underway. The level agreed upon for Fiscal
Year 1979 and proposed for Fiscal Year 1980 are already well below
those originally deemed necessary to the President’s commitment. Fur-
ther cuts would seriously jeopardize the effort to reach the level set for
1982. Failure to reach our assistance goals would have seriously ad-
verse repercussions for our human rights policy.
Development assistance is the most visible of our aid policies. To
other donor countries, to the Third World, and to critics such as the
USSR, U.S. commitment in this area is seen to indicate that the U.S. is or
is not ready to put its “money where its mouth is.”
Furthermore, development assistance more than any other assist-
ance program, succeeded in channeling resources to encourage human
rights progress. It has responded more directly than any other program
to President Carter’s Directive (PD 30, No. 4)2 that “. . . countries with a
good or substantially improving record of human rights observance
will be given special consideration in the allocation of U.S. foreign
assistance, just as countries with a poor or deteriorating record will re-
ceive less favorable consideration. Programs for each fiscal year shall
be reviewed in this light.”
We are making ourselves effective by “rewarding” governments
which have shown a commitment to promoting the broad range of
human rights of their people. Conversely, by cutting back some pro-
grams, we have materially decreased our identification with repressive
governments and have encouraged them to consider our cuts as an
added cost of continuing their repressive practices. Through the design
of projects, the development assistance program also has been our most
effective way of encouraging recipient governments to bring equity
and grass roots participation into their own programs.
I have one further concern, which is couched in specific rather than
general terms. The latest review of FY 80 aid levels leads me to suspect
that any further cutback would most seriously endanger the India pro-
gram as well as those hard fought for Latin American programs de-
signed to encourage certain countries in their efforts to restore human
rights protections and democratic institutions. Cutbacks in either area
would destroy the precarious balance we have achieved between
political, human rights and other development related objectives in the
FY 80 budget.
2 See Document 119.
