712 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement one time thought we were in general agreement as to principle that without prejudice to our respective views and peaceful pursuit our pol­ icies we would make it clear we would not threaten or initiate war in attempt solve those differences. 24. I said once this had been done, we could in such atmosphere calmly and rationally discuss our differences with real hope that mutu­ ally satisfactory solutions could be found. If we were to be successful in such high purpose it essential we refrain from attempting ­anticipate settlement those disputes or prejudice position of either side with respect our differences. It seemed to me this proposition so self-­evident there could be no objection to it and until recently I had assumed it also accepted by his govt, and our only remaining difficulties were those of words by which it would be expressed. 25. I said in my opening statement Oct 8 I very specifically set forth it was not suggested that either of us should renounce any policy objectives which we felt we were legitimately entitled achieve, but only renounce force in implementing those policies. This was also explicitly set forth in draft I presented Nov 10. I felt satisfied amendments sug­ gested to his draft Dec 1 also carried out same intent. I still feel that is case. I said I thought he and his govt had mistakenly interpreted amendments which suggested there was no intent whatever to preju­ dice his views regarding peaceful pursuit his policies. I did not think there was any better way accomplishing common purpose than in amendments I presented. I still haven’t thought of any better way but again repeat my willingness hear any suggestions he had. 26. I said, however, it has become increasingly clear intent of his govt, apparently from beginning our discussion this matter, was vastly and fundamentally different. It has become clear that purpose his govt is utterly to reverse whole spirit and intent of any such declara­ tion into document which on one hand would explicitly or implicitly constitute unilateral renunciation by my govt its solemn international undertakings as well as its views and policies. On the other hand the intent appears to be to reserve to his govt. right to initiate war to oppose views of my govt. I said I do not believe I was unfairly misrepresenting ­situation if I stated it in simple terms as an attempt to get my govt to say it recognizes his govts right to start war in Taiwan area if it desires to do so, and if it does so my govt renounces its right to defend itself or its allies. This is not declaration of renunciation force, but rather decla­ ration intent of one side use force. Proposition is so absurd, I do not see how some could seriously attempt support it, and if one is to speak of unreasonable demands this is certainly most unreasonable of all. 27. I said I did not question his right to hold his views with regard our dispute Taiwan area, or elsewhere for that matter, no mat­ ter how opposed to them I might be. Nor did I dispute right his govt
