At the beginning of the Sixth meeting of the Committee on Provisional Measures, held on February 18, 1926, Dr. Yen presented, on behalf of the Chinese Delegation, two resolutions, one “Regarding the Estimated Amount of Customs Revenue Derivable from the Interim Surtaxes” (see page 3 of Minutes February 18, 1926) and the other “Relative to the Levying of the Surtaxes as Provided in Article III of the Treaty Relating to Chinese Customs Tariff signed at Washington February 6, 1922” (see page 4 of Minutes of February 18, 1926). In presenting the statements, Dr. Yen stated that the public might think that the Conference had had rather a long vacation, but that, as a matter of fact, there had been frequent and informal exchanges of views and the first resolution embodied a part of the result achieved in the interim. It was pointed out that the period since the last meeting had been devoted to a careful study of the requirements of the Chinese and it had not been an easy matter to reach an understanding, as there were a large number of correlated questions. While they had not reached a complete agreement, it seemed reasonably certain that the figure stated in the Resolution, namely, between ninety and one hundred million dollars, Chinese Currency, as the sum required to meet the needs of the Chinese Government, was really necessary and he felt that the passing of such a resolution would create a most excellent impression not only in China but elsewhere and would prove that the Conference had been progressing in a really friendly and sympathetic spirit. Colonel Peel protested against so important a resolution being circulated so late. He voiced vigorous objection to that part of the Resolution reading: “do resolve and agree that the annual revenue derivable from the interim surtaxes on foreign imports shall amount to between ninety and one hundred million dollars,” and said that it seemed quite impossible to assert in a resolution that the revenue from any particular tax would yield a definite sum. He thought all that could be done would be to agree to the levying of certain definite taxes and to express the hope that these would bring in certain sums. He particularly emphasized that all the discussions which their experts had had on the subject of surtaxes and the views which they had expressed as being willing to agree to certain taxes, were entirely dependent on the other parts of the treaty being satisfactory. Colonel Peel discussed in a general way the abolition of likin, the purposes to which the new revenues would be put, compensation to the Provinces, transit passes
