Afghanistan
885
335.
Letter From the Chairman of the Afghan National Liberation
Front (al-Mojaddedi) to President Carter1
Peshawar, November 25, 1980
Dear Mr. President:
I wish to thank you for all your past help to the Afghan people
and Afghan refugees. The people of Afghanistan shall, with due respect,
remember all the contributions which the friendly nations have made
during this trying period in our history.
It is the graveness of the existing situation facing the Afghan people
however, which prompts me to make an urgent appeal for further
humanitarian assistance to merely enable us to provide the basic means
of survival for a people subjected to the most unprecedented genocide
of our time.
While the heroic struggle of Afghan people is not only for their
own survival but also for the sake of humanity and in defence of basic
human principles and human rights, one can not help but to note that
this defenceless Nation is patiently and perseveringly facing the cruel
and indiscriminate shellings and bombardments of their towns, villages
and even large cities and population centers paralleled with lootings,
burnings, executions, tortures and various other unhuman atrocities.
The Russian military units, these byproducts of atheism and commu-
nism, completely devoid of human dignity and even self respect com-
mit all these crimes in cold blood.
All this, in the course of the Russian aggression in Afghanistan,
has left hundreds of thousands who are wounded, millions who are
facing starvation, an equal number lacking shelter in the face of the
cold season and almost the entire population devoid of medical care,
even to a modest standard. Next to these are near a million and half
people who have been forced to cross over the borders, mostly to
Pakistan, among whom are many weak, ill and wounded people.
Therefore, the extent of existing need for food, medicine and shelter
requires a facility which is completely beyond the material and financial
possibilities of our organization, and thus we find it necessary to call
for help.
Any further assistance you can offer at this time will be deeply
appreciated by me and the freedom fighters as well as by all Afghan
people.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Unfiled
Files, Box 124, Afghanistan: 1/80–1/81. No classification marking.
