842 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement his trip, including a chance to see the President briefly albeit on the golf course; (3) You have been left in Nicaragua as Ambassador now for seven years, and this has been interpreted widely as United States support of the Somoza family, including President Luis, because of your well publicized and quite understandable affection for them; (4) Any invitation to President Luis prior to the complete settlement of the Honduran-Nicaraguan boundary dispute would immediately be interpreted as moral support of the Nicaraguan side of the issue no matter what we might say, unless the Honduran President were invited at the same time, and this we simply cannot do; (5) The schedule for state visits is crowded to overflowing and represents one of our most difficult problems in dealing with our colleagues in the Department and those in the White House who are responsible for such planning; the schedule is tight for an indefinite time ahead as well; and (6) The visits of Presidents-­elect on an informal basis is a completely different kettle of fish from that of an official visit by a President, involving infinitely more detailed planning, more time of our highest officials, more expense, and more problems resulting from the inferences drawn by those Presidents who have not been able to get invitations. Guillermo specifically alluded to the spot that President Luis would be on should we invite President Villeda Morales or President Lemus. You can rest assured that we do not contemplate inviting President Villeda Morales in the foreseeable future. Our plans with respect to President Lemus are not that definite, but we will face that problem if and when it arises. I realize that this is a subject which will continue to plague you, and me, too, but it is not the only tough one in the book. I know that we can count on you to handle your side of it in your usual Whelan-­style diplomacy, which is as good as any I know. With best regards and looking forward to seeing you in June, Very sincerely yours, R.R. Rubottom, Jr. PS: Two letters have just arrived on my desk from you bearing on the above. The one of March 313 mentions the less secure position which Guillermo now holds in Nicaragua. I certainly agree with your estimate of his cooperative attitude here and personally would dislike seeing him transferred. Frankly, I cannot imagine that Luis would be contemplating such a move although I don’t doubt that certain Nicaraguans might be sniping at Guillermo. I certainly hope that he is ordered home 3 A copy of Whelan’s letter of March 31, dealing with Sevilla-Sacasa’s position, is in file 601.1711/3–3158.
