1034 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II icies and programs established by the central government. In fact, central governments might be well advised to enlist community organizations in discussing policies and programs at a formative stage in order to ensure that the policies and programs reflect local realities and enlist community interest and support from the outset. C. Laws and Regulations; Incentives and Disincentives. Population programs must be supported by laws and regulations to refine, coordinate, finance, and implement the determined policy. From the viewpoints of both donor and recipient countries, legal reform is often essential, lest population assistance be negated by outdated laws. Ironically, many developing countries have retained antiquated population-related laws which they inherited from former colonial powers, and which those powers have by now discarded as being incompatible with human rights. Although a good start has been made through the establishment of over 30 Law and Population Projects in developing countries (most funded by UNFPA) to review population-related laws and recommend legal reforms, there is need both to expand the network and to encourage the actual implementation of proposed legal reforms. One of the most important laws affecting population is the regulation of the legal age of marriage. Most informed observers believe that Sri Lanka’s success in moderating fertility rates is related in an important degree to the relatively high age for women at first marriage. It is a regrettable fact that few developing countries today have adequate systems for registering births, deaths, and other vital events. Not only does the dearth of such data have an adverse impact on the application of their laws affecting population, but it also makes it difficult, quantitatively, to assess the cost-effectiveness of population programs and to measure and thus give greater support to those socioeconomic factors which have the greatest impact on moderating fertility rates. The World Population Plan of Action (paragraph 14(f)) states that it is the basic right of all couples and individuals “to decide freely and responsibly the number and spacing of their children and to have the information, education, and means to do so.” The key words here are “freely and responsibly.” The Plan is explicit in specifying that “the responsibility of couples and individuals in the exercise of this right takes into account the needs of their living and future children, and their responsibilities towards the community.” The Plan therefore recommends that a couple or individual limit the number of children if: (a) they are unable to provide adequately for the needs of their living and future children; or (b) the community cannot afford a population growth rate which would jeopardize its ability to provide adequate
