1034
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
icies and programs established by the central government. In fact, cen-
tral governments might be well advised to enlist community organiza-
tions in discussing policies and programs at a formative stage in order
to ensure that the policies and programs reflect local realities and enlist
community interest and support from the outset.
C. Laws and Regulations; Incentives and Disincentives.
Population programs must be supported by laws and regulations
to refine, coordinate, finance, and implement the determined policy.
From the viewpoints of both donor and recipient countries, legal re-
form is often essential, lest population assistance be negated by out-
dated laws. Ironically, many developing countries have retained anti-
quated population-related laws which they inherited from former
colonial powers, and which those powers have by now discarded as
being incompatible with human rights.
Although a good start has been made through the establishment of
over 30 Law and Population Projects in developing countries (most
funded by UNFPA) to review population-related laws and recommend
legal reforms, there is need both to expand the network and to en-
courage the actual implementation of proposed legal reforms.
One of the most important laws affecting population is the regula-
tion of the legal age of marriage. Most informed observers believe that
Sri Lanka’s success in moderating fertility rates is related in an impor-
tant degree to the relatively high age for women at first marriage.
It is a regrettable fact that few developing countries today have ad-
equate systems for registering births, deaths, and other vital events.
Not only does the dearth of such data have an adverse impact on the
application of their laws affecting population, but it also makes it diffi-
cult, quantitatively, to assess the cost-effectiveness of population pro-
grams and to measure and thus give greater support to those socio-
economic factors which have the greatest impact on moderating fer-
tility rates.
The World Population Plan of Action (paragraph 14(f)) states that
it is the basic right of all couples and individuals “to decide freely and
responsibly the number and spacing of their children and to have the
information, education, and means to do so.” The key words here are
“freely and responsibly.” The Plan is explicit in specifying that “the re-
sponsibility of couples and individuals in the exercise of this right takes
into account the needs of their living and future children, and their re-
sponsibilities towards the community.” The Plan therefore recom-
mends that a couple or individual limit the number of children if:
(a) they are unable to provide adequately for the needs of their living
and future children; or (b) the community cannot afford a population
growth rate which would jeopardize its ability to provide adequate
