December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 667 Secretary Vance: Let us consider that. President Carter: I hope that Egypt will accept these proposals. It will be difficult. We will have to do our best. Prime Minister Begin: May I boast. I said that if we make an intellectual effort, we will find solutions. I said that we should not be discouraged. I need the approval of my Cabinet and I need to consult with my colleagues. I’ll tell a story. In Ben Gurion’s Cabinet after independence, there was a very religious member and there was an all-out atheist. Sometimes Ben Gurion tried to get the two of them together. But in my Cabinet I have to get five generals together. They have all led armies to victories. They are used to command, not to taking commands. President Carter: And I have to deal with a Senate. The Senate has at least five presidents or future presidents in it. Secretary Vance: The third issue involves setting a goal for the selfgoverning authority. You said that the date for elections could pose problems, because it would increase the incentive for extremists to attack inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza. We have tried to set a goal while meeting your concerns. We suggest saying that “Egypt and Israel set for themselves the goal of completing the negotiations in one year so that the elections can be held at the earliest possible date thereafter.” They would be setting a goal just for the negotiations, not the elections. Prime Minister Begin: You could say “as expeditiously as possible”. I will have to study this. It is a serious proposal. I can’t give you a reply now. I’ll have to send a cable to the Cabinet. It is a change. Secretary Vance: It is a major change. Prime Minister Begin: We will have to consider this again. I do not have a counterproposal to suggest. I have to consult with Ambassador Blum who is a jurist. (The Prime Minister then recounts an incident from his interview on Issues and Answers concerning a question of why he had appeared on the show.) Do you have any idea about how to handle the question of the exchange of ambassadors? President Carter: I plan to talk to President Sadat this afternoon.5 I will try to get him or whomever he sends over here to discuss this issue. I will talk to him about it. Prime Minister Begin: It shouldn’t be changed. We should leave annex 3 as it is. In that annex it says that the ambassadors should be exchanged “upon completion” of the interim withdrawal. President Carter: He agreed to that, Mr. Prime Minister, because Dayan and Weizman proposed an early withdrawal. I then called Sadat 5 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter spoke with Sadat on the telephone from 4:28 p.m. to 4:31 p.m., March 4. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No memorandum of conversation has been found.
