1128  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
its implementation would require, but ultimately free, great economic 
resources, and that the treaty already had critics, although it served the 
interests of both sides equally. (Comment: These last two points seemed 
specifically directed at Soviet constituencies. End comment.)
5. The Ambassadors began the initialling of the treaty and exchanged 
the pens used for the first page. The Ambassadors then exchanged joint 
and reciprocal statements and Ambassador Brooks presented unilat-
eral statements of the U.S. side (Comment: A list of the statements is 
appended to the end of this cable. Ambassador Nazarkin later delivered 
a unilateral statement of the Soviet side on subtunnels. See Reftel. End 
comment.) The delegations applauded, shook hands, and retired to com-
plete preparation of the treaty for presidential signature. End summary.
6. Subject summary: Public statements; initialling of the treaty; pre-
sentation of joint and unilateral statements. End subject summary.
Public Statements
7. The U.S. delegation, accompanied by Mrs. and Ms. Brooks, Ms. 
Busser, Mrs. Furniss, and Mrs. Jones arrived at the Soviet mission and were 
seated. Ambassador Nazarkin opened the plenary at 11:04 a.m. by wel-
coming Ambassador Brooks and the U.S. delegation and gave the floor to 
Ambassador Brooks. Ambassador Brooks made the following statement:
(Begin text of statement)
Mr. Ambassador,
My delegation and I are pleased and honored to join you in a truly 
historic event—the final plenary of the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks 
between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics. The first such plenary meeting took place here in Geneva 
exactly nine years and one month ago, on June 29, 1982. In 1982, the first 
draft text was all of 59 pages long. The finished document which we have 
before us is over 600 pages long. Today, we will initial the pages of the 
two copies in Russian and the two copies in English, certifying that each 
page is correct and that each word and phrase carries the same meaning 
in both languages. Tomorrow, we will take these documents to Moscow 
for our two presidents to sign on Wednesday3 at the summit.
The completion of the longest and most complex arms control 
agreement ever negotiated is an immense accomplishment. This treaty 
is the first to actually reduce the number of strategic nuclear weapons. 
More importantly, it brings the strategic forces of our two countries into 
a more stable balance at those lower levels.
Our treaty embodies five achievements: equality, deep reductions, 
stability, predictability, and transparency. Equality and mutual respect 
3 July 31.
