Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
25
other international organizations. We should make a major effort at re-
forming and restructuring the U.N. systems.
We Must Analyze International Institutions
We should undertake a systematic political and economic cost-
benefit analysis of existing international institutions in the United Na-
tions systems and outside, with a view to determining the appropriate
level of U.S. support. We should end the current diplomatic isolation of
the United States in international forums by working more closely with
our allies and with moderate elements in the developing world on a
basis of mutual understanding consistent with our respective national
interests.
A stable world order cannot become a reality when people of
many nations of the world suffer mass starvation, when the countries
with capital and technology belligerently confront other nations for the
control of raw materials and energy sources, when open and nondis-
criminatory trade has become the exception rather than the rule, when
there are no established arrangements for supplying the world’s food
and energy, nor for governing control and development of the seas,
and when there are no effective efforts to deal with population explo-
sions or environmental quality. The intensity of these interrelated
problems is rapidly increasing and better mechanisms for consultation
on these problems that affect everyone on this planet must be estab-
lished and utilized.
For it is likely that in the future, the issues of war and peace will be
more a function of economic and social problems than of the military
security problems which have dominated international relations since
1945.
Finally, I said I would touch on the kind of people we need to
administer our foreign policy. I believe that the foreign policy spokes-
man of our country should be the President, and not the Secretary of
State. The conduct of foreign policy should be a sustained process of
decision and action, and not a series of television spectaculars. Under
the current administration, the agencies which are supposed to conduct
our foreign affairs have been largely wasted and demoralized. They
must be revitalized and if necessary reorganized—to upgrade their
performance, their quality, and the morale of their personnel.
In our search for peace we must call upon the best talent we can
find in the universities, the business world, labor, the professions, and
the scientific community. Appointments to our U.N. delegation, to
other diplomatic posts, and to international conferences should be
made exclusively on a merit basis, in contrast to the political patronage
that has characterized appointments under this administration.
