1132 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II advances in technology, life for most people on earth will be more precarious in 2000 than it is now—unless the nations of the world act decisively to alter current trends. Some of the individual findings of the Study follow: World population will increase some 50 percent by 2000, reaching 6.3 billion people. Ninety (90) percent of the growth will be in the LDCs, which will mean that 75 percent of the people of the world will live in the poorer nations. Gross National Product is projected to increase in proportion to population increases on a world average. Economic growth in LDCs will increase somewhat, while it will slow in the industrialized nations relative to past decades. World food production will increase 90 percent between 1970 to 2000. This assumes a doubling of food prices, continued increase in fish production, and ability to expand irrigation and use of fertilizers significantly (since amount of cultivated land will expand only 4 percent). However, world-marine fish catches are not projected to increase significantly beyond current levels. Food consumption (nutrition levels) will be increasingly skewed between “haves” and “have nots”. Energy will be an increasingly difficult problem, and it is unclear how demand will be met. Problems of uneven geographical distribution, and economic and environmental constraints, will influence use and acceptability of coal, oil, gas, oil shale, and nuclear sources. The real price of energy will double by 2000; and the LDCs will increase energy use only slightly. Non-fuel minerals will be generally sufficient to meet projected demands through 2000. However, production costs will rise rapidly. Water will become increasingly in short supply on local and regional levels, as population and economic growth combine to affect both quantity and quality (through pollution). Forests will continue to disappear rapidly, principally in the tropics, where 40 percent of remaining cover will be lost by 2000. Associated problems of erosion, siltation, erratic water supplies, loss of wood and wildlife and (possibly) regional and global climate change will intensify. Agricultural soils will continue to degrade due to erosion, loss of organic matter, desertification, salination and waterlogging. Annually, an area of cropland and rangeland the size of Maine is becoming wasteland. Upper atmosphere pollution, principally by carbon dioxide and fluorocarbons, is expected to increase at rates which (by 2000) may lock us into potentially serious problems of climate change and ozone depletion for the next century.
