264  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
6. If necessity develops you are authorized inform Wang at Tues­
day meeting that while Item One has priority on Agenda until imple­
mentation complete, you will be prepared at following meeting (not 
before Sept. 24 but preferably following week) begin task of making 
up Agenda under Item Two. You will propose that each side come 
to following meeting with list of items which it wishes raise under 
Item Two. Lists would be exchanged at that meeting. After interval 
of about a week in which each side could consider items proposed 
by other, meeting would be scheduled at which agreement would 
be sought on topics to be considered under Item Two. At that meet­
ing effort would be made determine order in which topics would be 
considered.
7. You should inform Wang at Tuesday meeting that request which 
he has publicly made for talks at higher level is procedural and not sub­
stantive and cannot be considered by us as “practical matter at issue”. 
Request does not fall within agreement regarding Geneva talks repre­
sented by mutually agreed communique of July 25. It would nullify the 
agreement we now have to discuss “practical problems now at issue” at 
the Ambassadorial level. We are not prepared substitute another forum 
for this one nor to discuss or agree now as to what would happen when 
current Geneva talks concluded which we would hope would be when 
all practical matters at issue disposed of. Both sides should make max­
imum effort settle “practical matters now at issue” at Ambassadorial 
level as already agreed.
8. You may remind Wang that during discussion topics for item 
two we will feel free return to implementation Item One which will 
always remain in priority position on agenda and we will continuously 
observe such implementation. We have taken due note of fact that 7 
of 29 imprisoned American have arrived Hong Kong. We confidently 
anticipate early release of remainder as well as 12 Americans previ­
ously denied exit permits.
9. FYI ONLY. Topics we propose raise under Item Two are follow­
ing: (1) unaccounted for American servicemen from Korean war and (2) 
renunciation of force. We consider proposing (3) “restitution of seized 
American diplomatic and consular property on China mainland” and 
request your comment on this item.
Dulles
