get any authoritative response or suggestion from the Peruvian
representatives in Washington.
The Peruvian Ambassador appears unwilling to accept any responsibility of
any kind and will act only as intermediary for transmission of
communications to and from his Government. The legal adviser, Dr.
Salomón, has not been to Department except on few occasions; and,
although he has stated that he desires to see a settlement reached, he has
offered no practical suggestions and has not contributed vigorously toward
bringing one about. Mr. Ellis, who attended some of the conferences
between the Plenipotentiaries, has conferred with me on numerous
occasions and appears to believe in a settlement but seems to be unable to
obtain any authority for discussion of a basis for arrangement except upon
the indefinite terms which Peru has expressed.
I think that President Leguía is taking position that Peru has not only won
moral victory but that the president of the Plebiscitary Commission has held
that Chile has frustrated the plebiscite and that Peru, therefore, has legal
grounds for laying claim to entire territory. On October 5 I informed
Ambassador Velarde, Dr. Salomón, and Mr. Ellis that such an assumption
was, in my opinion, wholly erroneous, and that even if General Lassiter’s
findings were eventually approved by the Arbitrator, the parties would be
left simply where they were before the plebiscite and would be subject to
negotiations for a settlement. Whether or not the Arbitrator will hand down
a decision is not yet known, and, should he hand down a decision what it
would be is not known. Arbitrator is at liberty on his own motion to take
into consideration all matters which are connected with the Tacna-Arica
award and to discuss frankly and freely whatever is connected with the
plebiscite. He may modify decision, change it entirely and order an
election, or take such action as he deems equitable.
Although Peru has frequently expressed willingness and desire to settle
question, she has shown every indication of desire to delay the negotiations
indefinitely. Question of settlement of Tacna-Arica dispute is one which
interests not Chile and Peru alone, but every one of countries of Western
Hemisphere; if it is left unsettled, the peace of South America can never
really be assured; and, as world attention has been focused on question for
