3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
438
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Our policy toward the Soviet Union had not changed and does not
reflect any change in U.S. attitudes toward the Soviet Union. We were
seeking to establish better relations between our two countries. We
wanted to see things get back on an even keel. We wanted to see more
and closer exchanges on a whole variety of matters. He believed that
our two countries bore a special responsibility in view of their political,
military and economic power and influence. In our judgement it was in
the best interests of both our nations to establish closer and deeper rela-
tions between us, both from a practical and a political standpoint, as
well as because over many years there had been deep and close friend-
ships between many of our citizens and between our two countries.
There was a bad time for both of us during the Cold War, but fortu-
nately there then came a period when we decided to put that behind us
and improve relations between us. We made progress in that direction.
However, during the past year several factors had divided us and
made relations between us more difficult. One such factor was the dif-
ferent views we held with respect to Africa and the situation on the Af-
rican continent. Another was the different views we held on matters in-
volving human rights and civil rights. Still another were our different
views with respect to the current situation and the trials currently
going on in the Soviet Union. Events of this kind have exacerbated rela-
tions between us, and had unfortunately led to a gap between our two
countries on a number of issues. He would point out, however, that we
had been trying to find common ground and build upon it in the hope
that in the future we can increase the area of that common ground and
get us back on track again. Both the President and the Secretary hoped
very deeply that this can be done. Gromyko would note that in his re-
cent press conference President Carter had spoken about Soviet-
American relations and had stated his deep desire to have good rela-
tions between our two countries. Another important area where we
had common objectives was that of arms limitations, objectives on
which we can build. The Secretary expressed his hope that we would
remember and abide by the Principles of Relations which were signed
by the United States and the Soviet Union when Nixon was President
of the United States.3
Gromyko remarked that that was a good document.
The Secretary believed it was now necessary to turn the corner and
enter upon a new path, take into account each other’s concerns and see
if we can build stronger relations between us in the future. Certainly
that was our desire.
The Secretary had one final word. He had read with great care the
article in Pravda which Gromyko had mentioned. He had decided not
3 See footnote 3, Document 4.
