Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI Reasons for Going Ahead Now —Other countries expect us to take INFCE results into account, and key Allies have already approached us on harmonizing policies. If we do not move soon, the Australians (who are actively negotiating with EURATOM and Japan) could make agreements which would undercut our ability to limit reprocessing and plutonium use. We also need greater fuel supply assurances to meet anticipated criticism at the NPT Review Conference. —Our supply leverage is diminishing and our reliability is in question. Failure to commence explorations now would risk our Allies’ going their own way in their nuclear programs and making the issue an even greater irritant in our relations. We could also lose their cooperation in improving the non-proliferation regime, in particular deterring commercial thermal recycle. —Going ahead with Tarapur and the post-INFCE explorations is entirely consistent. Both actions are designed to support the nonproliferation regime—in the case of Tarapur, to preserve safeguards and controls over U.S.-origin material in India; in the case of post- INFCE, to obtain limits and controls on U.S.-origin material in EU- RATOM (which we currently do not have) and greater nonproliferation cooperation generally including full-scope safeguards as a condition of future supply. Both decisions also serve broader foreign policy objectives. —Post-INFCE explorations will be less sensitive politically than Tarapur, especially since they will be low-key, non-committal and confidential and would be only with Allies who are either NPT parties with full-scope safeguards or, in the case of France, a nuclear weapons state. USG consideration of post-INFCE options has already had some press play (particularly in the trade press). We have had extensive consultations with those most concerned in Congress, and no one has objected to further explorations. Options Let Gerry Smith go ahead with explorations now.6 Postpone Gerry Smith’s explorations until after Congress acts on Tarapur. (A copy of proposed instructions for Gerry Smith is attached for your convenience.) 6 Carter checked the “Let Gerry Smith go ahead with explorations now” and wrote “J” underneath.
