International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
657
Except for the United Kingdom, other developed countries are not
currently expected to be in recession next year. (The projected decline
in U.K. GNP, roughly 1–2 percent over the next 12 months, is due pri-
marily to the Thatcher administration’s policy of cutting government
spending.) Nevertheless, the OECD now forecasts that its members will
grow by only 2 percent in the next 12 months, down from 2¾ percent
previously projected. Over the same period, consumer prices in OECD
countries are expected to rise by 10 percent, 1 percentage point more
than anticipated. The IMF paints a similar picture; it now forecasts a
growth rate of 2 percent for industrial countries in 1980 (unpublished
figure and confidential, not for attribution), which is one percentage
point below their previous estimate. Private forecasts for Europe are
considerably more pessimistic even than these figures imply.
The prospects for LDCs are more difficult to quantify, but the
sketchy evidence we have suggests that the growth rate of non-oil ex-
porting LDCs may be cut from roughly 5 percent in 1978 to perhaps 4
percent this year, most of the reduction being attributable to the oil
price rise. The growth rate will be even lower next year if as a result of
the slowdown in the OECD countries both the volumes and the prices
of their raw materials exports fall.
The current account impact of the oil price rise, both directly and
indirectly through its domestic contractionary and inflationary effects,
will also be severe. Assuming no further rise in oil prices beyond July 1,
the Treasury estimates that the combined current account of OECD
members will shift from a surplus of $8 billion in 1978 to a deficit of
roughly $20 billion this year, with a reduction in the deficit to $13 bil-
lion in 1980 as OPEC countries spend more of their oil revenues.
Non-OPEC LDCs are also hard hit, with their current account deficit
rising from $21 billion in 1978 to $29 billion this year. Treasury projects
a further increase in their deficit to $36 billion in 1980. On the other
side, the OPEC surplus, which was close to zero last year, is forecast to
balloon to $42 billion this year and a slightly smaller figure, $38 billion,
in 1980. Further oil price increases will raise these surpluses.
Policy Implications
This deterioration in the global economic outlook will create a
number of policy problems:
First, the “re-cycling” problem, i.e., the question of financing the
enlarged payments deficits of OECD and less-developed countries. In
the aggregate, the outlook is fairly bright. Although private banks have
increased the proportion of their loans going to countries with pay-
ments deficits, their capital has increased and they have gained consid-
erable experience since 1974 in how to re-cycle funds from OPEC coun-
tries to those in need of balance-of-payments financing. Moreover,
