470 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 156. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 29, 1977 SUBJECT Hungarian-Americans’ Suggestions on the Return of the Crown We are sympathetic to several of the suggestions from the group of Hungarian-Americans described in your memorandum to me of November 18.2 Our reactions to the specific comments made to you are as follows: 1. Take Steps to Strengthen Human Rights in Hungary We are taking a close look at the state of religious freedom in Hungary and will prepare an unclassified summary study of use to interested Americans. We will also be asking Embassy Budapest to seek clarification from the Hungarian Government on questions which have been raised here relating to freedom of religion. During Phil Kaiser’s initial discussions with the Hungarian Government on the Crown,3 he commended for Hungarian consideration the July suggestion of some Hungarian-American leaders to the Hungarian Ambassador that a general amnesty for political prisoners would generate more support here for return of the Crown. The Hungarians replied that they have no political prisoners (we have been unable to identify any) and that the question of such an amnesty was thus difficult. However, they did not reject the idea. 2. Role of Hungarian Churches in the Crown’s Return It has been an essential condition throughout our discussions with the Hungarian Government that the Crown be received by a delegation broadly representative of the Hungarian people and that it include prominent religious leaders of the Catholic, Protestant and Jewish faiths, including the Cardinal Primate. The Hungarian Government readily accepted these suggestions and has assured us that the Cardinal 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box 14, Hungary: Crown of St. Stephen: 12/77. Secret; Exdis. Printed from an uninitialed copy. King forwarded the memorandum to Brzezinski under a December 1 covering memorandum. (Ibid.) 2 See Document 154. 3 Reported in telegram 2916 from Budapest, August 26. See footnote 3, Document 146.
