130 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement I personally believe that one of the main objectives of our own efforts should be to encourage our entire people to see, with clear eyes, the changing character of our difficulties, and to convince them that we must be vigilant, energetic, imaginative and incapable of surrender through fatigue or lack of courage. So, no matter what the preoccupations we daily have with the unfolding scene—­both international and domestic—I feel that our prin­ cipal responsibility is to try unceasingly to create both general and spe­ cific situations under which the consummation of reliable agreements conforming to our ideas of right and justice can be more probable. I have not the temerity to argue that any idea I have advanced is necessarily good; I just say that we have one basic job to do. A part of this is educating and informing our own people—­so that they will support every burden we must carry, and will dedicate themselves to helping seek out new ways to dispel the basic differences between us and the Soviets that, becoming more and more unyielding in character, could finally lead to consequences that could be most unpleasant. My own feeling about this business is simple. Optimism is not the ability to smile because of a refusal to face disagreeable facts; it is the seeking unceasingly (and, if possible, intelligently) for the methods and means to overcome difficulties. With warm regard, As ever, Dwight D. Eisenhower 39. Memorandum of Discussion at the 360th NSC Meeting1 Washington, March 27, 1958 SUBJECT Discussion at the 360th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, March 27, 1958 Present at the 360th NSC Meeting were the President of the United States, presiding; the Vice President of the United States; the Secretary 1 Source: Agenda item 1: Measures To Carry Out the Concept of Shelter; Agenda item 3: Proposed Reorganization of the Department of Defense. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—15 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Drafted on March 28.
