670 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV result. (In the past four decades, 40–200% increases have occurred three times—­each following a crisis involving combat.) The assessment concludes that the consequences of any of these scenarios are enormous. They will likely impact directly on our ability to defend our interests and our allies. Also, since the US has been the core around which western alliances have formed, allied perceptions of US inferiority are likely to lead to severe stresses6—­at the very least—­in these alliances. They could break, others could be formed, and there could be hedging and increased compliance with Soviet desires on the part of former allies. The US has had such a central role in organizing the western world that repercussions would likely be felt throughout the world. I found this assessment, focused on expenditures and investment, to be particularly useful. The adverse overall trends indicated are generally confirmed by the changes we see in more detailed assessments of various military balances: —We see deterioration in the strategic nuclear balance by all the common indicators, static and dynamic which will very probably continue until we deploy the ALCM and, later, the MX. —NATO’s ASW forces have probably improved relative to the Soviet submarine force, and the Central Region ground force balance has been roughly static, but the balance has deteriorated in theater nuclear forces, tactical air forces, and forces on the flanks (particularly the Southern Flank). —(The perceived balances in the Persian Gulf and Korea have also deteriorated, but these have resulted from revolution in one case and new intelligence in the other rather than from differences in US and Soviet military investments.) In the context of policy, all this implies that we have not and will not maintain an overall balance of military power between the United States and its allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its allies on the other at least as favorable as that existing in early 1977, the central requirement laid down in PD–18. We have yet to achieve a 3% annual real growth in defense spending. The FY75–79 average is less than 0.3%. No year reached even 2%. If we continue that trend because of insufficient provision for inflation, competing demands for national resources, or any other cause, the military balance will become perilous over the next five years. 6 Carter underlined the phrase “allied perceptions of US inferiority are likely to lead to severe stresses” and wrote in the right margin next to it: “U.S. officials’ wringing of hands doesn’t help.”
