Human Rights 55 19. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs (Hartman) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, February 22, 1977 Meeting at NSC on Human Rights Problems Marshall Shulman and I, accompanied by Mark Garrison, met with Brzezinski, Aaron, Schecter and Hyland on February 18 to discuss coordination of tactics in handling human rights problems. Without attempting to reach decisions, we discussed the following points: —A possible Administration statement, with a worldwide gloss, suitable for use in lieu of addressing specific questions each time a new one arises. No agreement on venue or timing, but a consensus that it would be useful to produce a draft to look at (our contribution is at Tab 1). —In any case, there was a general feeling that we should try to move away from reacting to every new human rights development, provided that is the President’s desire. Zbig thought the President would listen to advice on this point. —The Bukovsky meeting at the White House (the Vice President, possibly a handshake with the President at that time).2 Consensus: Bukovsky will make a media circus of it and will probably criticize any effort to come to terms with the Soviets; it would be unwise to tangle with him publicly at that time. —The President’s press conference, sometime this week: Bukovsky and the Sakharov correspondence will probably be major items.3 —We need some human rights initiatives not related to the Soviet Union (Warren Christopher has a project under way to accomplish this). 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840116–1200. Confidential; Nodis. Drafted by Garrison (EUR/SOV). A handwritten notation on the memorandum reads: “CV OBE.” 2 Reference is to Soviet dissident Vladimir Bukovsky, who was released from a Soviet prison camp in December 1976. For information concerning the meeting with Bukovsky at the White House, see footnote 12, Document 38. 3 The President’s press conference took place on February 23. For a transcript, see Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, February 28, 1977, pp. 242–48. For additional information about the Sakharov correspondence, see footnotes 2 and 3, Document 18.
