30
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
9.
Memorandum from the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 19, 1977
SUBJECT
PRM/NSC–23 Issue: Arms Control for Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Systems
Harold Brown, as Chairman of the PRM/NSC–23 Policy Review
Committee, has forwarded (Tab A)2 for your review and decision the
subject issue. At Tab B is a decision paper which summarizes the issue,
discusses the options and provides agency positions. The more detailed
paper done by the PRM/NSC–23 study group is at Tab C.
Arms control is but one aspect of overall U.S. policy toward mili-
tary, civil and intelligence space activities. Other elements include our
survivability measures, our ASAT capabilities and the military utility
of space to U.S. strategic and tactical forces. Arms control is not a sub-
stitute for survivability measures, although it could affect long-term re-
quirements. As we have discussed before, there is a definite interrela-
tionship between arms control of ASAT and many other space related
issues. With these considerations in mind, the PRM–23 study devel-
oped four approaches to ASAT arms control as follows:
Approach One: No Agreement: This approach is important because
the Soviets may not be willing to agree to any substantive and equitable
ASAT limitations. They may feel the U.S. is merely attempting to im-
pede activities in a realm where they have advantages.
Approach Two: Emphasis on Peacetime Problems: This would not limit
the capabilities of ASATs, but would focus on peacetime problems,
proposing “rules of the road” and a ban on peacetime interference to
emphasize the importance of satellites to strategic stability.
Approach Three: Selected Limits to Control the Scope of ASAT Activity:
This would in effect create a partial sanctuary by prohibiting ASAT
systems which do not yet exist.
Approach Four: Relatively Comprehensive ASAT Arms Limitations:
This would attempt to preclude significant arms competition in ASAT
systems.
A useful summary comparison of the approaches is provided at
Tab C in Table 4 including possible provisions and problems.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 41,
Folder 3, PRM–23 [3]. Top Secret; Talent Keyhole; Comint.
2 Tab A is Document 7. Tab B is the attachment to Document 7. Tab C is Docu-
ment 6.
