International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1019 tion Council, and the International Planned Parenthood Federation, the performance evaluation effort attempts to: —assess the impact and cost effectiveness of population programs, both national efforts and external assistance, and —assess the effect of economic, social, and political factors which may have an influence on fertility and which provide a context for population programs. This will involve the development of data on past, present, and projected resources dedicated to efforts to reduce population growth at country, regional, and global levels from all sources. These data will be used to examine the efforts not only of AID but also of donors receiving AID support, including the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, other external donors, and recipient governments’ own national programs. The data collected and evaluations made will be measured against specific global priorities and objectives which have been established. I. Demographic Data Section I summarizes the demographic situation in the host country over five-year periods (1965–1975). Most demographic data are not definitive and the range and trends are indicated. Specifics are reflected in Appendix A6 along with the source of the information. II. Program Setting Section II discusses the general setting in which the national program functions, including the socio-economic phenomena that may relate to the fertility reduction process and the various political, religious, cultural, legal, administrative, managerial, and other constraints that impede progress in developing a self-sustaining population program. Information for this section is summarized from data contained in the Development Assistance Program (DAP), AID program documents, Sector Reviews, Area Handbooks, Project Evaluation Summary, the World Bank, and the UNFPA. III. The Population Program Section III describes the stage of population policy development, the degree of commitment to the policy, and the establishment of demographic goals. The national program is summarized—its administration, the rationale under which it operates, and the participation of other Govern- 6 Attached but not printed is the undated “Selected Demographic and Social Indicators” table.
