Romania 581 of personal consumption is only two-thirds the level of Bulgaria and one-half that of East Germany. Housing is cramped (especially since the earthquake in March 1977), wages are among the lowest in Europe, high-quality consumer goods are extremely scarce, and there is no letup in sight at least through the next five year plan (1985) when Romania is supposed to leave the ranks of the “developing” nations. 8. Romania’s forced draft industrialization has brought the country to an economic crossroad. The country is entering a new era of tightening resource constraints. It can no longer throw more labor, or capital, at economic problems and hope to solve them. It is running out of both. Depending mostly on labor intensive methods, it has a labor shortage (a program to transfer office workers to “productive” work in factories and fields was begun last year). Although it is an oil producer, Romania has recently become a net energy importer, mainly because its in-ground crude oil and gas reserves are 20 percent depleted leaving only about a 10-year supply. [Headquarters comment: Using current technical procedures and equipment, it is difficult to extract any more than 25 percent of the reserves contained in a deposit.]2 It must switch from extensive to intensive development, that is, it must increase efficiency and generally improve the ingredients in the economic formula. 9. There is evidence that the leadership is recognizing these problems, as it has announced some measures of decentralization and improved quality controls. It will take some time, however, before the speeches are translated into concrete directives at the factory level. A problem in implementing any changes is the lack of a consultative mechanism with the workers. Although government and party personnel changes announced on 8 March appear to be aimed mainly at the economic sector, it seems doubtful that substantive reforms will take place in the near future. 10. It is not at all clear, however, that the leadership is ready to deal with the important strains in the country’s social fabric brought about by rapid industrialization. Since the beginning of World War II, the population has been told to make personal sacrifices for the benefit of the collective good. These sacrifices continue, as Romania has an extremely high rate (one-third of its national income) of reinvestment. Although living standards have improved, Romanians generally give credit not to government policies but to improvement of world living conditions in general. Many have relatives in the West and know that, by comparison, life in Romania is primitive. Although Romania is a net food exporter, shortages of staple foods are constant, and we have heard about villages stopping meat-exporting trucks near the border. 2 Brackets in the original.
