842 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 257. Paper Prepared by the Presidential Commission on World Hunger1 Washington, June 8, 1979 RECOMMENDATIONS CONCERNING HUNGER FOR THE PRESIDENT’S USE AT THE TOKYO SUMMIT I. Introduction The countries meeting at the Tokyo Summit2 have the ability to do something about world hunger. Despite impressive increases in world food production, the total number of people who are chronically malnourished is greater today than a decade ago. Most of the world’s hungriest people live near the site of the Summit and in sub-Saharan Africa. Severe hunger also exists in Latin America and the Middle East, and even our own country is not immune to malnutrition. The Commission believes that by placing issues of food and agriculture high on the Summit agenda, the participating nations have correctly accorded priority to what is perhaps the single most important task now facing mankind. Of all the challenges facing the world today, agreement on the joint actions of all countries necessary to eliminate world hunger may be the most important, and may also provide the most solid basis for other international actions to assure world peace. After extensive study and review, the Commission’s major findings with regard to world hunger and malnutrition are: • that the world food problem is less a matter of periodic famine than of chronic and increasing malnutrition; • that hunger is primarily a problem of poverty rather than of food supply, at present; 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P790087–2107. No classification marking. Transmitted under cover of a June 15 memorandum from Linowitz to Vance and a June 8 memorandum from Linowitz to Carter. (Ibid.) Another copy is in the Carter Library, RG 220, Presidential Commission on World Hunger, Subject File, 1978–1980, Box 16, Tokyo Summit File, 1979. 2 The G–7 industrialized nations met in Tokyo June 28–29. A declaration released at the conclusion of the Summit reads in part: “We will place more emphasis on cooperation with developing countries in overcoming hunger and malnutrition. We will urge multilateral organizations to help these countries to develop effective food sector strategies and to build up the storage capacity needed for strong national food reserves. Increased bilateral and multilateral aid for agricultural research will be particularly important. In these and other ways we will step up our efforts to help these countries develop their human resources, through technical cooperation adapted to local conditions.” The full text of the Tokyo Declaration is printed in Department of State Bulletin, August 1979, pp. 8–9. For documentation on the Tokyo Summit, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume III, Foreign Economic Policy.
