Romania
647
After expressing his appreciation for Dr. Brzezinski taking the time
to meet with him, Mr. Andrei noted that President Ceausescu had
received the news of the meeting between Dr. Brzezinski and Andrei
with pleasure. Mr. Andrei then handed Dr. Brzezinski a letter from
President Ceausescu in answer to President Carter on the Middle East.2
Remarking that unfortunately time was limited due to the necessity
of responding to Gromyko’s latest SALT proposal, Dr. Brzezinski stated
that President Carter had asked him to transmit his greetings to Presi-
dent Ceausescu and to tell President Ceausescu how much he valued
his relations with the (Romanian) President. President Carter recalled
President Ceausescu’s perceptive comments on international issues.
Mr. Andrei then gave Dr. Brzezinski a book dedicated to Ceauses-
cu’s visit to the United States and said he would convey to President
Ceausescu President Carter’s remarks. He stressed that Romania was
determined to work for the development of U.S.-Romanian relations
in the spirit agreed at the Ceausescu-Carter meeting and that the RCP
had highly evaluated the meeting between President Carter and Presi-
dent Ceausescu. Noting that his desire was to see an improvement in
relations, Mr. Andrei said that it was in this spirit that he wished to
raise three problems presently affecting bilateral relations.
The first was related to the defection of Ion Pacepa. This had created
no little tension. Andrei noted that Romania had asked for Pacepa’s
extradition, but that it understood the difficulties which this would
present. Romania believed nonetheless that a decision not to allow
Pacepa to remain in the U.S. would help U.S.-Romanian relations. Mr.
Andrei stated that Pacepa had been working for some time for the CIA
and that he had been involved in financial scandals in the Federal
Republic. He repeated that Romania would like to see Pacepa’s stay
in the United States voided.
The second problem raised by Mr. Andrei related to (unspecified)
employees in the U.S. Embassy in Bucharest who he claimed had been
inciting Romanian citizens not to return to Romania while they were
abroad, particularly people in the field of science and technology. Mr.
2 In a letter dated September 23, Ceausescu praised the agreements reached at Camp
David between Egypt and Israel, but restated the Romanian position that peace in the
Middle East could only be achieved by inclusion of all involved parties, including the
Palestinians. Ceausescu noted that the accords did not oblige Israel “to withdraw not
only from the Sinai, but from the West Bank, Gaza, and Golan [Heights] as well, respec-
tively from all Arab territories occupied in the wake of 1967 war.” Ceausescu also called
for resumption of the Geneva Talks on the Middle East and assured Carter that Romania
would continue to “bring its active contribution to the instauration of a climate of lasting
peace and full security in this area.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: Presi-
dent Nicolae Ceausescu, 2/77–12/78)
