930
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
delivery times.3 These issues, to include availability and condition of
support equipment need to be addressed prior to proceeding beyond
this conceptual agreement. Items of support equipment must be identi-
fied and screened, resulting in uncertainties at this time in requirements
for calibration and repair, and delivery dates.
B. Since Stinger is only now entering the U.S. inventory and Viper
and other systems are not yet in production, it is premature to consider
transfer of these systems. We will give Yugoslav requests for samples
priority attention as soon as it becomes possible to consider transfer
of these systems.
C. With regard to Roland, since Yugoslavia is in the Franco-German
sales territory, the GOY should discuss such purchases with the French
and Germans. We have broached the subject of Roland for Yugoslavia
to the French and believe it possible that a sale of limited numbers
would be approved. Obviously, we will support such a Yugoslav
approach.4
3. We will find an additional $30,000 in IMET funds and can make
room at Leavenworth, Maxwell, Newport or certain other schools
(excluding the US Army War College) if the Yugoslavs are interested
in expanded attendance either in FY 80 or 1981. In previous informal
discussions on this subject the Yugoslavs have cited problems with
making available the right kind of officer and completing his English
language training. If the Yugoslavs desire courses in FY 80, we would
have to take reprogramming action soon including congressional notifi-
3 Siena met with Yugoslav officials on January 10 to discuss the U.S.-Yugoslav
military supply relationship in preparation for Graves’s visit. In a January 19 memoran-
dum, he reported that the Yugoslav Government attached primary importance to receiv-
ing information on the availability of the Viper, Stinger, and Harpoon weapons systems.
Siena recommended that the Department of Defense complete a study on the availability
of weapons systems previously denied the Yugoslavs. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68,
Yugoslavia: Military: 1/79–1/80) On March 13, Vujatovic told Eagleburger that the
Yugoslav Government would welcome an Army team to Yugoslavia to discuss Yugoslav
requirements. (Telegram 2049 from Belgrade, March 13; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800129–0341) On March 15, Larrabee reported the Yugoslav position
to Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR,
East/West, Larrabee Subject Files, Box 69, Yugoslavia: Military, 2–3/80)
4 In a March 28 memorandum, Larrabee informed Brzezinski and Aaron of Bow-
man’s discussions within the Four Powers group with respect to supplying weapons to
Yugoslavia. While some weapons systems were considered too sensitive to provide to
Yugoslavia, the Quad agreed to provide some of the systems Belgrade requested while
more advance systems could be provided at a later date. Regarding the bilateral U.S.-
Yugoslav military cooperation, Larrabee wrote that Defense was prepared to offer the
Yugoslav Government small numbers of more advanced systems for training purposes.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 3–4/80)
