Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —No group financed and appointed by the USG (whatever the legislative/executive mix) will have credibility abroad as truly objective, or free of US policy influence. At the same time, neither will the Government be free from the policy consequences of actions, statements, and programs initiated by the foundation. —NGOs here or elsewhere which accepted its support (and especially its money) may come to be seen as tools of US policy, and their effectiveness gravely undermined. —The human rights awards look like gimmicks, and would be seen as self-serving public relations ploys. (Remember Doonesbury’s marvelous series last summer on a human rights award banquet?)3 —A better way to aid the victims of human rights violations is through the UN’s High Commissioner for Human Rights. American attempts to resettle refugees in other people’s countries would be especially open to misunderstanding. The strongest aspect of the proposal is the information-gathering, research and analysis service such a Foundation could perform. Zbig is unfortunately right that we in the government have not found time to think through the problems of understanding, much less promoting, human rights in different cultural and political contexts. This part of the proposal is similar to your “clearing house” idea, although as I understand it you would prefer a private organization.4 I have mixed feelings about whether, and if so how, such a group should be linked to the government. —A private organization would have more credibility, especially if it were not made up of Americans alone. —A group funded and appointed by the executive branch and legislature together would do more to institutionalize human rights advocacy, beyond this Administration. —An organization funded by several governments might offer both institutionalization and credibility, if it were not limited to 3 Reference is to Pulitzer Prize-winning cartoonist Garry Trudeau’s syndicated newspaper comic strip “Doonesbury.” 4 On February 13, Christopher addressed the annual meeting of the American Bar Association in New Orleans. After providing an overview of human rights accomplishments and detailing some of the public efforts undertaken by the administration, Christopher broached the idea of a human rights database: “What is needed is an objective, widely respected clearinghouse for human rights information on all countries of the world. This would be an important resource for us and others interested in taking human rights conditions in other countries into account in policymaking. It would thus both inform our decisions and authenticate the existence and severity of human rights problems.” (Department of State Bulletin, March 1978, p. 31) The full text of Christopher’s speech is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.
