Chapter 2, January–June 1989 163 — There are a number of technical issues with respect to tagging and it is not yet certain an acceptable tagging regime can be devised. Some believe that the inability to tag missiles would significantly undermine any NDM limits. Others believe that an acceptable tagging regime, if developed, would strengthen our ability to discriminate legal from illegal stages, and note that the U.S. ability to verify compliance with NDM limits is not solely dependent on tagging. Options. A large number of possible NDM regimes exist. All fall within one of two broad approaches: — Seek numerical limits on no nondeployed ballistic missiles. — Seek numerical limits on some nondeployed ballistic missiles. These approaches are discussed further at Tab C. Six options have been identified: — Option 1—Require numerical limits on mobile ICBMs, heavy ICBMs, modern ICBMs (including SS–17 and 19) and all future types of ICBMs or SLBMs. (OSD) Includes SS–17, 18, 19, 24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and all future systems; intended to avoid capturing the D-5. — Option 2—Require numerical limits on mobile ICBMs, heavy ICBMs, and modern ICBMs (excluding SS–17 and 19). (Current position) Includes SS–18, 24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and any future systems meeting the “modern ICBM” definition. — Option 3—Require numerical limits on mobile ICBMs and modern ICBMs and SLBMs (excluding SS–17 and SS–19). (ACDA) Includes SS–24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and any future modern SLBMs or ICBMs. — Option 4—Require numerical limits on mobile ICBMs and “modern” ICBMs (excluding SS–17 and 19). (State) Includes SS–24 and 25, Peacekeeper, Small ICBM, and any future systems meeting a definition of “modern ICBM” which would be modified to capture only ICBMs that are transported fully fueled. — Option 5—Require numerical limits on ICBMs that have been deployed in a mobile mode. (JCS fallback) Includes SS–24 and 25, Peacekeeper (if deployed in a mobile mode), Small ICBM, and any future mobile ICBMs. — Option 6—Do not require numerical limits on any non-deployed missiles. (JCS) Includes no systems. Issue 2—Missile Destruction. President Reagan’s August 1988 guidance directed evaluation of an additional treaty requirement that for every launcher destroyed in reducing to new limits, one missile associated with that type of launcher must also be eliminated. Following
