1979 587 thereby reduce the survivability of the remainder. The air and truck alternatives do not have this feature. (TS) This scenario would draw fire from the Left, which doesn’t care about the basing much but wants to kill M–X (and will probably try to kill Trident 2, at least as a hard target weapon, if M–X is cancelled). The Right, of course wants to see M–X go forward and, even more perhaps, to victimize the President if it doesn’t; it cares less about the basing mode. As things stand now, this scenario would be a measurable, but not overwhelming, net plus for SALT ratification. The anti-SALT votes will not be changed; but their persuasiveness with the moderates will be lessened. The President will look like a man who can stand tall on defense, even over his own earlier feelings. There is no question that this perception would be good for SALT. He would have to comfort himself in a way that avoided the appearance of being pushed by the Pentagon into supporting M–X because of SALT. This would make him look vacillating to all and especially untrustworthy to pro-­defense sentiment. (TS) 2. Marginal Scenario: Augmented DYAD. In this scenario, the President would say he was, in essence, choosing to rebase ICBMs in what all agree to be the single most survivable basing mode, in SSBNs. Trident 2 would be our new ICBM and would be accelerated to, say, 1986.3 We would also speed up development of a) a cruise missile carrier,4 b) a follow-­on ALCM, and c) a possible advanced penetrator aircraft for the very late 1980s.5 We would also stress improvements to C3I, basing, and transwar support to assure that the SSBN and air-­breathing legs would be surviving, enduring, flexible, and inherently diversified. We would also keep most of the Minutemen in their silos for synergistic protection of aircraft, limited operations, and possible launch-­on-­warning. (TS) The trouble with this scenario is that the headline would be “Carter Cancels M–X”. Many critics would contend that a combination of Soviet missile programs, Soviet hard bargaining at SALT, and disdain for US strategic power in the Administration had basically run the US out of the ICBM business while the Soviets remained comfortably in their silos.6 (TS) 3 Brzezinski underlined the words “to, say, 1986” and wrote “1) Trident II—­ accelerated—[illegible]” at the bottom of the page. 4 Brzezinski underlined the words “a) a cruise” and wrote “2) ALCM carrier” at the bottom of the page. 5 Brzezinski underlined the word “late” and wrote “3) [illegible]” at the bottom of the page. 6 Brzezinski drew a vertical line and wrote “some mix?” in the left margin next to this paragraph.
