March 1952–February 1953
295
last week may have upon future of Iran, or to make firm recommenda-
tions re policies which US shld pursue re Iran in light of recent
developments.
2. Altho situation is depressing we do not believe we shld throw
up our hands while Iranians rush by in mad and suicidal career like so
many million lemmings. Our tentative views are that there shld be
prompt and radical changes in policies of both Brit and ourselves. We
do not believe even most sensitive and suspicious Britishers can say
after events of last seven days that US has not supported up to hilt their
policies re Iran. They can not charge that failure of these policies was
due to lack US cooperation. They might say that plans miscarried be-
cause Shah failed them. If Shah shld be given chance to speak he might
insist in his own defense that he cld go no further than he had gone in
face of Iranian public opinion particularly when he had no idea what
kind of terms Brit had in mind for oil settlement. In any event in fore-
seeable future Shah is likely to be negligible political factor in Iran.
3. Following resignation Qavam, Natl Front deps for at least two
days acted as revolutionary committee in control of all governmental
institutions including armed forces. Members of this informal com-
mittee told military and police whom to arrest; it exerted considerable
authority over Natl Front gangs. What control Mosadeq in future will
be able exert over these Natl Front leaders who have tasted fruits of
power is not yet certain. We are also not in position as yet to judge ex-
tent to which Tudeh has been and will in future be able to ensnare and
corrupt Natl Frontists at various levels. We cannot just now speak with
any confidence re future armed forces. Our tentative understanding is
that morale of certain groups of officers and certain units has been shat-
tered but that armed forces as whole are not at present in state of de-
moralization. Altho Natl Front heretofore has in general been anti-
army certain elements in Front are taking attitude that since army of
future is to be “natl army” instead of “Shah’s private army” it is in in-
terest of country to reorganize it into modern effective force. We have
as yet little reliable information re developments in provinces. In some
of larger cities there appear to have been demonstrations resulting in
violence and bloodshed. We know of no area which at present is not
under control of central govt.
4. During most frenzied hours of rioting Americans were almost as
great hate target as Qavam, Brit and Shah. Incitations against US and
Americans were primarily work of Tudeh altho certain Natl Front
leaders, bitter at what they consider to be our policy of supporting Brit
and refusing to give financial aid to Iran, undoubtedly gave certain
amount encouragement to anti-Americanism. Natural suspicions of
Iranians re foreigners, perhaps justified by centuries of experience, con-
tributed to cause them to believe various malicious rumors propagated
