Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 415 Unique Identifiers 13. In July 1989, the United States proposed that technical experts from each side provide a briefing and demonstration of their most mature concept for unique identifiers. The U.S. proposal provided for follow-­up meetings of experts for further discussion and investigation of these concepts. In addition, the U.S. proposed that the experts could develop a plan and schedule for a series of joint identification experiments for the most promising concepts. 14. On November 30 and December 1, experts from each side met to implement the first step of the U.S. proposal. The U.S. side provided a briefing of the U.S. tagging concept and demonstrated how to fabricate, apply and read reflective particle tags (RPT). The Soviet side provided briefings of four tagging concepts: internal excitation scintillators, “holograms,” silicon semiconductor detectors, and a digitalized reader for an RPT-­like tag. Both sides agreed that further discussions involving technical experts could be conducted next round. In addition, the Soviet side hinted that, sometime in the spring, it could be ready to provide the U.S. side a demonstration of some or all of its four tagging technologies. 15. In preparation for Round XIII, Washington should review lab-­prepared assessment of the Soviet technology briefing to prepare questions for the Soviets during expert discussions next round and to identify possible approaches to joint experiments. Short Time of Flight (STOF) 16. U.S. initiated discussions with Soviets during Round XI on banning SLBM STOF launches, believing that Soviets shared interest in banning depressed trajectory flights. U.S. tabled text of parallel unilateral declarations on STOF and attempted to engage the Soviets during the expert sessions prior to Wyoming ministerial. Early this round, the Soviet side tabled a counterproposal that it claimed was intended to preclude the possibility of a surprise attack. A ban on depressed trajectory was only one aspect of the Soviet counterproposal; others included stand-­off zones for SSBNs, heavy bombers, and aircraft carriers, and banning ALCMs, SLCMs, and heavy bombers that incorporate stealth technology. Subsequent discussions revealed that the Soviet side considered the U.S. STOF proposal to be “the most difficult” of the V&S measures. Nazarkin contends that the Soviet military is suspicious of this initiative. 17. I recommend that, while our proposal should formally remain on the table, the U.S. not pursue the STOF proposal at this time. Verification uncertainties mean that any agreement on STOF could, at
