January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1071
lated his instructions. He noted that he had not been satisfied by his
talks with Secretary Brown.
Secretary Vance wondered if the problem was related to the kinds
of equipment, delivery dates . . .
Vice President Mubarak said both. He said there was tremendous
pressure in his country for arms. Secretary Brown had said the F–16s
would not be delivered until 1984. What were they going to do all this
time? He noted that Qadhafi had recently met with an Egyptian general
who had been taking a course in London and who went secretly to
Libya. Qadhafi tried to persuade him to “do something” in Egypt. The
generals came and told them about the meeting, which took place three
weeks ago. Qadhafi promised many things. Secretary Brown said he
could not offer the F–15.
The President said that he had had a call from Prime Minister Begin9
which was a much more positive report than the one he had just read.
Prime Minister Begin always emphasizes the things on which there
was agreement or perhaps ignores or minimizes the areas of disagree-
ment. However, there is no way to avoid the questions of autonomy
and Jerusalem.
Vice President Mubarak said that solution of these issues would
solve all the problems of the Middle East. President Sadat cannot un-
derstand why Prime Minister Begin spends all of his time talking about
normalization. He talks for hours about normalization and leaves out
the other problems.
The President said that some people know how to filibuster. We
must recognize that Prime Minister Begin has a serious political
problem in Israel and he does not want to talk about Jerusalem, au-
tonomy and the Palestinian question. In the President’s own judgment,
the paragraph in the Camp David accords will have to be the basis for
agreement. Ambassador Linowitz wants to explore some reference to
sovereignty and religion. On the Palestinian question, it needs PLO rec-
ognition of Israel’s right to exist and a statement of acceptance of Reso-
lution 242. The Moslem nations must see evidence of some progress
otherwise the U.S. position in the area will be damaged.
The United States will try to expedite the delivery of F–4s and
F–16s. It is not desirable to propose F–15s at this time. The Congress
would react adversely. The President was aware of Egypt’s desire to
have the F–15, but he asked President Sadat to trust his judgment on
this question. The President said he would consult with Congress
about allocating additional grain for Egypt, although it might be corn
9 See Document 327.
