Chapter 4, February–April 1990  645
ought to inform the other that the situation is emerging. It is similar to 
the SS–23 situation. We transferred these to our allies before the INF 
treaty. We didn’t hide this fact from anyone, we just didn’t announce it. 
And yet our ministers are saying now that we should have informed 
you.
Baker: That’s because INF covers the SS–23.
Akhromeyev: Only nuclear arms.
Bartholomew: The current START text says once we’ve worked out 
an acceptable range, all ALCMs that exist, whether they’re nuclear or 
conventional, will count as nuclear. And where future ALCMs are con-
cerned, only nuclear ALCMs will be in the treaty. So the current ones 
will all count as nuclear if they are over a certain range. What we pro-
pose, and I thought we agreed to in Moscow, were ways to distinguish 
whether an ALCM was nuclear or not. For future ALCMs, we’re going 
to work out ways to distinguish what was nuclear and what was in the 
treaty.
Baker: This was your distinguishability concern and that’s why we 
went along with OSI. That’s something we accepted.
Shevardnadze: Well, we’re not going to reach a result in this discus-
sion. We should agree today about the many elements that we’ve dis-
cussed and we should try to find a compromise proposal. For example, 
the issue of dropping verification and OSI for SLCMs is one that you 
want us to do, what’s the tradeoff if we drop that? This is the way we 
should be speaking. No treaty is going to be signed without compro-
mise. That’s what it will take. And I think that yesterday and last night 
Bartholomew and Akhromeyev had a constructive discussion. When I 
listen to Akhromeyev I thought I saw certain prospects for compromise. 
If so, that’s the way we should act. If it’s just going to be an exchange of 
mutual complaints, we’ll each have a lot, and we won’t get anywhere. I 
am for a reasonable approach. You’ll have to say to us about range what 
we need and whether there is any solution possible. Tradeoffs are going 
to necessary but they will have to be reasonable ones.
Baker: We’ve talked a lot about range. We’ve spent a lot of time 
on it. One of the main problems we have is that on our side, rightly 
or wrongly, after we left Moscow, we felt there were only three issues 
to resolve. Now you say suppose I give up verification, what will you 
pay for it? On our side, our assumption was that we had already done 
that. The way to approach things now is to acknowledge that there are 
eleven issues between us and put together a package approach.
Akhromeyev: I have a package.
Baker: I am talking about tradeoffs in the eleven. Why don’t you 
think about what sort of proposals you would suggest on the three 
issues that we both agreed were outstanding when we left Moscow?
