Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
57
sive, long-term program will be applied to provide more assured sur-
vivability through evolutionary changes to space systems. For critical
missions, a distributed system architecture shall be considered for re-
ducing single, critical nodes, including highly survivable emergency
systems of limited capability for use in times of crisis and to back up the
first line systems in case of system failure or attack. Civil systems (e.g.,
communications) used for critical military functions shall have a level
of survivability commensurate with their planned use in national
emergencies. (S)
d. Anti-Satellite Capability. In accordance with applicable executive
directives, the United States shall seek a verifiable ban on anti-satellite
capabilities, excluding electronic warfare. DoD shall vigorously pursue
development of an anti-satellite capability, but will not carry to produc-
tion those elements which are included in any treaty with the Soviets.
Beyond that, some R&D should be continued as a hedge against Soviet
breakout. The progress of ASAT arms control negotiations will be re-
viewed annually to determine if negotiations with the Soviet Union
continue to be fruitful relative to the threat posed by Soviet actions in
space, and consequently to determine if the U.S. ASAT efforts are still
adequate. The space defense program shall include an integrated attack
warning, notification, verification, and contingency reaction capabil-
ity which can effectively detect and react to threats to U.S. space
systems. (TS)
3. The United States foreign intelligence program shall include a
space program to acquire information and data required for the formu-
lation and execution of foreign, military, and economic policies; to sup-
port the planning for and conduct of military operations; to provide
warning; to support crisis management; and to monitor treaties. The
following policies shall govern the conduct of this program. (S)
a. Protection of Sensitive Information. The nature, the attributable col-
lected information, and the operational details of intelligence space ac-
tivities will be classified, and as necessary to protect sensitive aspects,
will be controlled in special compartmented security channels. Col-
lected information that cannot be attributed to space systems will be
classified according to its content. Security restrictions on intelligence
space satellite products will be selectively relaxed by the DCI to imple-
ment the following changes to permit wider use of space-derived intel-
ligence information. (S)
—The fact that the United States conducts satellite reconnaissance
for intelligence purposes, without disclosing the generic type of ac-
tivity, will be classified CONFIDENTIAL (Exempt from the General
Declassification Schedule) and handled outside the special security
control system. (C)
