1979  563
	
Tab A
	
Paper Prepared in the National Security Council2
Washington, undated
SUGGESTED PRESIDENTIAL ACTIONS
• Deliver a major, nationwide address on the importance of the 
Armed Forces and of their special relationship with the President. Put 
Vietnam behind us by eliminating the “second-­class citizen” stigma 
that has been attached to the military since that conflict. Recognize the 
wartime and peacetime sacrifices of the military community, with a 
special bow to the families of the KIAs/MIAs (who are still regarded 
with considerable reverence in the military community). Recognize 
also the special demands placed on the Services as a result of our more 
complex two-­tracked approach to national security—­arms plus arms 
control. (Suggest: Memorial Day, Armed Forces Day, Veterans Day, or 
Vietnam Veterans Week.)
• Continue the above theme in every subsequent major address 
(where feasible), including State of the Union message.
• Deliver a major, nationwide address on SALT TWO, explaining: 
the hard choices that were made and why they were the right ones; 
that we are committed to essential equivalence; and that JCS advice 
played a prominent role in making these choices. Announce the M–X 
decision or expand on it. (Suggest: the AF Academy Commencement 
Ceremony.)
• Announce “quality of life” decisions (e.g., the military retirement 
policy, Ethics law, pay caps, selective service decisions, etc.) at the open-
ing of press conferences or in other fora with nationwide audiences. If 
the decision will be unpopular in the military community, announce it 
as the Commander-­in-Chief expecting his subordinates to rally to the 
decision.
• When traveling, attempt to visit an important military installa-
tion enroute or near the destination, with appropriate pomp and pub-
licity. Where possible, inspect facilities and talk to enlisted personnel. 
Attend important missile, aircraft or ship launchings (or significant 
tests).
• After the fact, publicize any direct Presidential involvement in 
military exercises or crises (e.g. Yemen), to demonstrate a readiness and 
determination to take actions as Commander-­in-Chief when necessary.
2 Confidential; Sensitive.
