246 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 6. First, then, the report on the “Adequacy of Government Research Programs in Non-Military Defense”—­a study prepared by the Advisory Committee on Civil Defense of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Research Council, under the chairmanship of Dr. Lauriston Taylor of the Bureau of Standards, with the assistance of consultants from within and without the Government. The study lists research areas in which the initiation or acceleration of projects might save lives or enable survivors better to cope with their environment. One of the principal conclusions of the Committee appears to be that the low priority hitherto placed on civil defense makes it difficult to attract high calibre scientists into civil defense research projects. DR. TAYLOR MR. STANS—Comment. 7. a. The purpose of the second Study, to have been made by AEC in consultation with Dr. Killian, was to appraise the upper limits of mas­ sive concentrated nuclear detonations and their by-­products which could be tolerated by the peoples of the world and by the world itself. The question had arisen in the minds of laymen as to whether a massive nuclear exchange, involving the detonation simultaneously or within a few hours of many millions of kilotons, could be sustained by the peo­ ples of the earth and by the earth itself. It was desired to have the most qualified scientific opinion upon this question. b. The formal study prepared by AEC assumes four instances of massive nuclear exchanges in the Northern Hemisphere (varying in intensity from 10,000 MTs to 1 million MTs) and examines the average effect of the radiation fallout therefrom on all peoples in the Northern Hemisphere outside of the areas in which the nuclear weapons were actually detonated. This study, although a partial answer to the ques­ tion, does not deal with all aspects of the problems. Therefore, Dr. Libby has agreed to make a broader statement, to be followed by Dr. Killian. DR. LIBBY DR. KILLIAN 8. a. The third study is concerned with the survival of populations in the period following their coming out of shelter, after a massive nuclear exchange. ODM and FCDA requested Stanford Research Institute to undertake this study within the terms of an existing research contract. Three representatives from Stanford who worked on the study are here this morning. b. The study conclusions have not been approved or disapproved by ODM and FCDA; and are still being evaluated by the successor agency, OCDM. c. The study assumes (1) a hypothetical attack initiated by the Soviet Union upon the United States in 1965, directed at both military and
