Human Rights 99 Recommendation That you approve the strategy outlined above which will require you to voice support for the Humphrey Amendment and opposition to Badillo-Harkin language in some forum which will be determined in the near future. Tab A Paper Prepared in the Department of the Treasury7 Washington, undated Administration Position on Human Rights Amendments (1) The Badillo Amendment undermines the ability of the United States to promote human rights objectives effectively in the international financial institutions. (a) Its automatic “no” votes destroy any negotiating flexibility on our part. (b) Therefore, neither donor nor recipient countries have any incentive to work with us on improving the human rights situation. (c) Furthermore, virtually all loans would go ahead over our objections, thereby revealing the ineffectiveness of such an automatic approach for all to see. (d) The result is that we would be locked into a sterile, ineffective position. (e) Indeed, we can become isolated in our efforts and thereby reduce our effectiveness in mobilizing support from other nations for better human rights conditions. (2) By contrast, the Humphrey Amendment would enable us to significantly advance the cause of human rights. (a) Our ability to support, expedite, or oppose specific loans and bank policies would give us considerable negotiating leverage. (b) For example, we could “ransom” some prisoners or reduce other offensive practices by calibrating our positions on particular loans—even if the offending country maintained some offensive practices. (c) We could work with other donor countries, getting their support for our initiatives in return for our taking positions “less offensive to the integrity of the institutions.” 7 No classification marking. No drafting information appears on the paper. According to an April 13 memorandum from Bennet to Christopher, Bergsten sent Bennet a copy of the Treasury paper under an April 13 memorandum. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 17, Human Rights Interagency Group I)
