National Security Policy  725
Our basic national security interests require that we continue to 
exercise positive and dynamic leadership not only in political and mil­
itary fields but also in the economic fields.
That is why the Department of State is convinced that every 
action we take that adversely affects our ability to maintain a dynamic 
expanding domestic economy and weakens the ability of our allies to 
maintain their political and economic stability, has serious implications 
for our national security.
Let me conclude by saying that, in our judgment, the organizational 
means are already available through which national security consider­
ations can be brought to bear in the most important cases involving pro­
posals for restrictive measures. This is true in escape clause cases, where 
the Trade Policy Committee is responsible for advising the President. It 
is also true in cases arising under the national security amendment to the 
Trade Agreements Act, which provides that the advice of all interested 
agencies shall be sought in arriving at a recommended course of action. 
Measures taken under Section 22 are the most outstanding exception 
to this generalization. Furthermore, considerations of national security 
cannot be brought to bear in determining whether restrictive action 
should be taken in other cases, such as antidumping cases. However, 
these exceptions do not affect the general conclusion that the exist­
ing machinery is generally satisfactory and is working well. It is the 
Department’s view that it would not be desirable, if indeed politically 
feasible, to attempt to revise existing legislation to insure the inclusion 
of appropriate provisions permitting national security considerations to 
be taken into account in all cases involving restrictive action.
I do not mean to suggest that there is no need for action in this 
field. We are much aware of the need for more information as a basis 
for policy determinations. As you know, a number of studies are cur­
rently underway which will provide an analysis of the causes of recent 
changes in our foreign trade position. An interdepartmental committee, 
under the chairmanship of the Department of Commerce, will search 
for the answers to a number of pertinent questions. Have advances in 
productivity in the US lagged behind those occurring elsewhere? Have 
our major costs increased too rapidly? Have we, through price supports 
and import restrictions, artificially raised the costs of raw materials to 
our own manufacturers? Does our domestic tax system militate against 
investment and technological improvement?
At the initiative of the Department of State the Committee for a 
National Trade Policy is also devoting special attention to the problem 
of our foreign trade position.
Increasing protectionism is not the answer to the problem of stim­
ulating advances in productivity. It would insulate domestic industries 
from pressures to reduce costs and thereby make them less competitive.
