unevenly upon the commodities which had been listed as “B” Grade; that
some commodities in the “B” Grade should bear less than 15 per cent and
some more than 15 per cent. So many distinctions and apparent
discriminations arose that the American Delegation proposed that there
should be created, instead of the three classes already proposed, some six to
eight grades of rates, ranging from low grade necessary goods at 7½ per
cent to highest grade luxuries at 25 per cent, keeping in mind what rate a
given commodity might bear without substantial diminution of the trade in
it. This suggestion was adopted by the Chinese in revising their
classifications. The American, British, French and Italian Delegations were
in substantial accord with regard to the amount of revenues to be raised by
the increase of duties and following numerous informal discussions a
schedule of rates and classifications was finally agreed upon by the foreign
Technical Advisers but the schedule has not yet been approved by the full
Committee having jurisdiction over rates.
As concerns the Washington Treaty surtaxes, the general plan involved the
preparation of a list of luxuries which would bear the higher surtax rate of 5
per cent and all other commodities to bear the 2½ per cent surtax. Many
revisions were required and many schedules, estimates and tables were
prepared, both as regards the interim surtaxes and the Washington surtaxes.
A considerable number of these will be found as enclosures to this report, as
also will memoranda showing the attitude of the various Delegations.8
 
Consolidation of Debts.
As in the case of Rates of Surtaxes, the question of the Consolidation of
Debts required many informal conferences among the Delegates and
Technical Advisers. In fact, except in an incidental way, this subject was
discussed but little at any formal sittings of a committee or sub-committee.
The interests, both foreign and domestic, were so divergent and the Chinese
Delegates were so sensitive to a public airing of this question, that
practically all discussion and negotiation in connection with this important
phase of the Conference work took place in informal sessions of the
Delegates and Technical Advisers. There was an evident desire on the part
