738 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 167. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, November 20, 1979 SUBJECT NORAD False Alarm (C) (TS) On 9 November 1979, a spurious missile attack warning was inadvertently introduced into the computer system at the NORAD Combat Operations Center (NCOC) in Cheyenne Mountain. As happened in this case, the system design properly and automatically transmits such warnings to appropriate national and regional command centers in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Understandable concern over this event by those unfamiliar with the technical and procedural safeguards in our strategic warning system has raised questions both here and abroad concerning the potential for precipitous action in a real or simulated crisis. The following report summarizes the genesis of the false alarm, the actions taken as a result, and my conclusions regarding the reliability of the warning system. (TS) The immediate cause of the incident was the inadvertent introduction of a test attack scenario into the automated NCOC missile warning system display. To the NCOC operations staff, the attack indications were not immediately identifiable as spurious when the display appeared, and they properly initiated alerting and verification procedures appropriate to indications of a mass missile raid. Concurrently, a Threat Assessment Conference (TAC) was called by the Deputy Director for Operations in the National Military Command Center (NMCC) to evaluate the threat. The TAC is an emergency conference one level below the Missile Attack Conference; the latter includes the National Command Authorities. As a result of this conference and the many quickly identifiable anomalies, the threat was clearly, correctly, and conclusively evaluated as spurious in less than six minutes of the first alarm. Because of this evaluation and the earlier recognition of the many anomalies before the official assessment of the threat as spurious, a Missile Attack Conference was deemed unnecessary. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 42, Missile Warning Incidents: 11/79–8/80. Top Secret. Carter wrote in the upper right corner of the memorandum: “Harold, This was a serious mistake and should have been reported to me immediately. J.” Brzezinski sent the memorandum to Carter under cover of a November 21 memorandum, which Carter initialed. (Ibid.) Odom sent both Brown’s memorandum to Carter and the covering memorandum to Brzezinski for his signature under cover of a November 21 memorandum. Aaron wrote on Odom’s memorandum to Brzezinski: “ZB, This is an unbelievable fuzzy-­ball. It is not possible to figure out what happened. I think Harold should be told to give us an explicit statement of what happened.” (Ibid.)
