270
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Secretary Vance will be discussing this issue at the UN4—he meets
with the French Foreign Minister today5—and you will want to com-
pare notes with him before you depart for Europe.
Without knowing how Secretary Vance is handling this in his
talks, let me make a few points:
—An “all parties” conference on Lebanon is probably not in the
cards, since the parties include Syria, the PLO, Israel, and the Christian
militias, as well as the Sarkis government.6 I do not see these disparate
groups all sitting down with one another.
—There may be some prospect for us to organize talks among
“friends of Lebanon”—France, Saudi Arabia, the Vatican, Jordan. We
should be a bit cautious in taking our cues on Lebanon from Egypt or
Israel in present circumstances. Both have their own axes to grind.
—Lebanon’s problems will not be solved by a “new charter.” A
fairly good political formula was worked out in late 1976 when Sarkis
was elected President. (It provided for an equitable sharing of power
among the various political communities in Lebanon.)
With those caveats in mind, we should recognize that there will be
no solution to the Lebanese crisis until the following steps are taken:
—The Syrian army disengages from the areas of confrontation
with the Christian militias in Beirut. This requires the introduction of a
loyal Lebanese armed force.
—The creation of a Lebanese army/gendarmarie loyal to Sarkis
and responsive to his orders. (This seems to be politically impossible,
but the effort has to be made.)
4 Vance referenced Carter’s September 28 remarks in his statement at the opening of
the UN General Assembly in New York on September 29, stating that Carter had “made
clear” his “determination to spare no effort to assist in finding a solution to the Lebanese
tragedy.” The current UN force, Vance argued, “has done much to stabilize the situation
in that part of the country, and we call upon all to support this effort to reassert Lebanese
sovereignty . . . As the President said yesterday, it is time for us to take joint action to call
for a conference of those who are involved and try to reach some solution. It may involve
a new charter for Lebanon.” (Department of State Bulletin, November 1978, p. 49)
5 Vance discussed the situation in Lebanon, Carter’s September 28 statement, and
his UNGA speech with French Foreign Minister Louis de Guiringaud on September 29.
In telegram 251591 to Paris, October 4, Christopher summarized the conversation, re-
porting that the French “expressed keen interest in possible USG initiative for a confer-
ence on Lebanon and urged full consultation with France and others before any such
meeting be called.” Vance explained to Guiringaud “that USG was still examining all op-
tions to break Lebanon impasse,” emphasizing that “no decisions had yet been taken,”
but promised the French “full and early consultations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D780405–0833)
6 In a telephone conversation on the evening of September 29, Parker raised Carter’s
press conference remarks with Boutros. Parker reported in telegram 5700 from Beirut,
September 30, the Lebanese were “disturbed that idea of this importance would be
floated without consulting them.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780399–0724)
