732 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Korea. These commitments for a common defense are very valuable to the people involved in those other areas, and of course they are extremely valuable to us as well. In recent years it’s become increasingly evident that the well-being of those vital regions and our own country depend on the peace, stability, and independence of the Middle East and the Persian Gulf area. Yet both the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the pervasive and progressive political disintegration of Iran put the security of that region in grave jeopardy. I want to reemphasize what I said in my State of the Union Address on January 23d, and I quote: “Let our position be absolutely clear: An attempt by any outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an assault on the vital interests of the United States of America, and such an assault will be repelled by any means necessary, including military force.”8 Peace is what we want. Peace is what we have maintained. Peace is a prerequisite to progress. Peace is a policy of our country. The maintenance of peace must be predicated on adequate American strength and a recognition of that strength, not only by our own people and our allies but by our potential adversaries as well. We have been provoked in the last few months. Every action has been designed to take advantage not of our military force, which is formidable and unequaled, but on the benefits of the use of our alliances and on economic, political, and diplomatic efforts. The steps that we are taking on our own, and with the cooperation of others, involve complicated measures, considerable expense, and a careful balance between the collective security needs of the region involved and its political realities. These political realities, again, are difficult to understand, extremely complex, and in every instance rapidly changing. We are making good progress. We must, and we will, make more progress. The necessity of common action in the Southwest Asian region is dictated not by any belligerence on the part of peace-loving nations, but by the clear strategic threat that stems from the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. A failure to respond convincingly to that contemptuous act of aggression would only invite its repetition. Beyond the violence done to Afghanistan’s independence and its people, the Red Army troops consolidating their hold there are also taking positions from which Soviet imperialism could be extended more deeply and more dangerously in the politics of this vital area. Afghanistan had long been a buffer against outsiders seeking to dominate 8 See Document 138.
