was given me privately by my Italian Colleague. The Italian aim at economic penetration is clearly shown, especially in Articles 6 (establishment of bonded warehouses), 9 (right of Italian companies to operate in Albania), 10 (monopolies), 13 (equal rights for imports, exports, transit or warehousing goods, transportation in national bottoms), 14 (rights of captains and boats or barges to navigate interior waters), 16 (use of interior means of communication, ports, etc.), 17 (coastal shipping), 18 (fishing). The Yugoslav Government is opposed to the treaty on this account and may cause serious opposition to be raised against its ratification by the Constituent Assembly or subsequent legislative body. The British, it is said, object especially to the provision covering monopolies and have succeeded in focussing public attention on Article 10. The Italians, however, have countered by expressing a willingness to fix the interpretation of that article by an exchange of notes. My Italian colleague desired me to support him with regard to Article 10 on the ground that it was in consonance with the demands put forward by the American, Italian, and French Governments on March 2nd, 3rd and 4th, of last year for conformity by the Albanian Government to the policy of the open door. In reply I pointed out that the article, as now phrased, might be interpreted in the sense that no concession of any character whatsoever might be accorded to foreigners by the Albanian Government unless Italian capital participated therein; that, for example, telephone service, the country was too small to admit of more than one operating company. The American view would be met, I thought, if open and fair international competition were assured for all concessions, whether monopolistic or otherwise. Doubtless, certain of the Italian negotiators hoped that Article 10 might pass unchallenged which would have given Italy a veritable “strangle hold” on Albania. My Italian colleague did not, however, combat my criticisms with much vigor and mentioned the proposals, referred to above, to fix the interpretation of that article by an exchange of notes with the Albanian Government. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Should the revolution which is now in progress result in a decisive victory for either side a longer period of calm might follow and consequently of
