Panama  979
Mission in Panama over the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone in mat-
ters affecting the relations between the United States and the Republic of 
Panama or any other nation. We said further that we would submit for 
your consideration draft letters to be sent by you to each of us confirming 
this relationship. I enclose for your consideration these draft letters.2
Secretary Brucker concurs in this memorandum.
CHRISTIAN A. HERTER
Christian A. Herter
[Enclosure 1]
Draft of a Letter from the President to the Secretary of the Army 
(Brucker)3
Dear Mr. Secretary:
It is my desire that there should be clarification of the relationship 
between the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in Panama 
and the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone in matters affecting the 
relations between the United States and the Republic of Panama or any 
other nation.
I therefore direct that in the exercise of his functions the Governor 
of the Canal Zone shall consult with the Chief of the United States 
Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of Panama on all matters which 
may have foreign affairs implications, and with respect to such mat-
ters shall be guided by the foreign policy considerations set forth by 
the Chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission in the Republic of 
Panama. In the event of their failure to agree with respect to any pro-
posed action to which the chief of the United States Diplomatic Mission 
in the Republic of Panama shall object for reasons of foreign policy, 
such action shall be deferred pending a mutual decision thereon by the 
Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of State.
I would appreciate it if you would issue appropriate instructions to 
the Governor of the Panama Canal Zone.
I am sending a copy of this letter to the Secretary of State for his 
information.
Sincerely yours,
2 On September 12, the President signed and transmitted the texts of these letters 
to Secretary of State Herter and to Secretary of the Amy Brucker. (Eisenhower Library, 
Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series)
3 Drafted by Long.
