Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II membership, one can almost guarantee there will be strong differences of opinion and dissension within the Commission. But this can be useful and requesting an options paper minimizes the risks. We recommend that you look to the Commission as one mechanism for identifying and assessing hunger policies and programs and presenting options for consideration. Certainly it will provide an important information base whether or not you accept all their recommendations. Bourne and Brzezinski feel the the emphasis of the Commission should be primarily on building public attention and support for this issue rather than too heavy a focus on conducting additional studies.6 DECISION Focus primarily on conducting study and policy formulation. Focus primarily on building public support with policy formulation secondary.7 As described in the Resolutions, the Commission would focus on hunger in the United States as well as internationally. We question the advisability of attempting to deal with the fundamentally different issues of domestic and world hunger within the confines of a single commission. For this reason, we recommend that the Commission concentrate on world hunger,8 but that domestic policies and programs be assessed so this experience can, where applicable, be brought to bear. Some of us feel (Bourne and Brzezinski) that the Commission should informally9 broaden its scope to serve as a vehicle for building support for foreign assistance in general, consistent with your decision memo on that subject,10 and the evolving program to gain public support in this area. This broad approach might not be acceptable to some of the Congressional sponsors, if it was explicit. However, the choice of chairman can be an important factor in the focus the commission adopts. DECISION Emphasis on world hunger (Bergland, Eizenstat, Schultze)11 International and Domestic Hunger World Hunger and General Foreign Assistance (Bourne, Brzezinski) 6 The President wrote in the margin: “Collate studies already done.” 7 The President approved this option. 8 The President underlined the phrase “world hunger.” 9 The President underlined this word.
