478 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Summary of Survey: Most of the persons questioned qualified their remarks; therefore, the above is something of an oversimplification. A basic pattern of expectation emerges, however, from a consideration of this and other data available. There will be no serious invasion attempt against the Dominican Republic within the next six months and if there should be one, it will not be successful. The present government, will probably survive until the death or serious incapacitation of Trujillo. This is not likely to happen (barring death by violence) within less than two years or more than ten, but when it does a military junta will take over after a period of violence. Such violence will likely occur within a year (or two at the outside) after the Generalissimo’s death and the emergent military junta will probably not include any of the Trujillo family. Several of the Trujillo family now show a potential to assume control including Lt. General Jose Trujillo Garcia and Brig. General Virgilio Trujillo. Except for one dissenting vote, all participants in the above survey discounted “Ramfis” as a prospective political entity except, perhaps, transitionally. He is not popular with the Armed forces, is not noted for perseverance, and is not thought to be highly motivated toward continuing in his father’s footsteps. Comment: Although the majority of those queried did not predict it, there is enough evidence to support a prediction that the military junta possibly will set the stage for a more democratic government. Recently, one of the reporting officers had a conversation with an influential professional man who essentially corroborated the statements previously made by other sources relating to the role of the professional class in the post-Trujillo era. He referred to a “democratic explosion” in the Latin American area and emphasized the existence of competent persons in Dominican society who would be capable of giving a more democratic twist to the Dominican Government when the time arrives. He also stated that his group of friends has undergone considerable harassment in recent times. The crux of the matter is likely to be whether or not this group can prevail over the insidious attempts of the Communists to infiltrate Dominican power circles on Trujillo’s exit. The Embassy agrees with the views of the professional mentioned above that there no doubt exists competent persons in Dominican business and professional circles not only capable of producing, but undoubtedly desirous of a more democratic regime, but it is of the strong opinion that these groups are not now willing to risk or assist in a change. Numerous persons of these groups have repeatedly mentioned to Embassy officers that they are most apprehensive in regard to the Cuban situation with particular emphasis on the Communist menace and the obviously socialistic share-­the-­land-­and-­wealth programs of Castro. The majority of commercial and professional Dominicans probably harbor no personal love for Trujillo as there are few that the 29 year Era
