3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
664
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
concludes the matter. We would expect that the Soviet Union, for its
part, would not take exception to such a statement.
It seemed to the Secretary that this would be a practical way of
dealing with a difficult problem that must be resolved if we want to
achieve what he believed both countries wanted to achieve, i.e., im-
provement of the relations between us and final ratification of the
SALT treaty. We made this proposal after a great deal of thought and
had taken into account the sensitivities of the Soviet Union, as well as
the problem and sensitivities that this situation had created for our
nation.
In Vienna President Carter had indicated to President Brezhnev
the great sensitivity in the United States to Soviet forces in Cuba as well
as the broader effects in this hemisphere of what was happening in
Cuba. He emphasized how important it was that each of our countries
take into account the sensitivities of the other. Therefore, he thought
Gromyko would understand the special nature of this problem arising
out of the facts presented. He would very much hope that Gromyko
would further reflect on this situation and on what we had suggested
before rejecting what we had proposed, thereby creating a very deeply
troubling situation for all of us.
Gromyko said that from everything the Secretary had said it fol-
lowed that the US side was interested not in actually establishing the
facts and the true situation, but wanted to adapt the situation to its alle-
gations, to the myth and inventions that had been concocted. He had
carefully listened to what the Secretary had said and saw that basically
the Secretary had repeated what had been said before, even though in
different words. As for himself, he had presented the Soviet evaluation
of this matter and would once again assure the Secretary that he did not
want to leave anything unsaid or conceal anything, and that he did not
harbor any malicious thoughts or hostile plans against the United
States. It would indeed be absurd for the Soviet Union to harbor any
such plans. Yet, he would note that a great deal had been said in the
United States about the alleged danger to the security of the United
States presented by the existing Soviet training unit in Cuba. All this
was sheer fabrication and nothing else. If Gromyko were to say any-
thing further on this matter, he would simply be repeating what he had
already told the Secretary and he saw no need in doing that. He would
only add that if the US Administration failed to put an end to all
the hullabaloo and propaganda created around that issue, Soviet-
American relations would certainly be harmed. The consequences of
such deterioration would, of course, be the responsibility of the United
States and not the Soviet Union. The Soviet view was quite different. It
was that both the Soviet Union and the United States should very solici-
