Paraguay 1003 of this country. He mentioned the tremendous cost to the U.S. public of our foreign aid efforts since the last war and the fact that protests from the overburdened taxpayers are making it increasingly difficult as the years go by for the government to secure Congressional appropriations to continue the assistance programs. Mr. Rubottom stressed that we are together in the hemisphere and in the free world. He also stressed the gratitude which the United States feels toward Paraguay, a valued and respected partner, for her cooperation and support toward the realization of common ideals. Mr. Rubottom praised the high moral standards of the hard-­working Paraguayan people and their ability, in the face of adversity, to uphold the good name of their country. Mr. Rubottom thought the Minister would agree (and he said he did) that in the past the United States had demonstrated its willingness to help Paraguay solve her problems. Referring to the Minister’s earlier allusion to what Paraguay regarded as slowness on the part of the Development Loan Fund in attending to Paraguay’s requests, Mr. Rubottom pointed out that the DLF is a new organization which has encountered a number of delays in getting under way. Nevertheless, the DLF had already definitely committed $6.1 million for use in Paraguay which placed Paraguay in the forefront among the Latin American countries which had obtained benefits from the DLF. Furthermore, the DLF was actively considering additional loans for Paraguay. Mr. Rubottom said that there is no doubt in his mind that Paraguay will, in the coming years and as she grows, continue to qualify for loans from the United States, although we naturally could not commit outselves to any projects or amounts in advance of dear justification by cases. The Minister laughed and said, “There you go, speaking as a banker!” The Minister then described what Paraguay is doing with regard to the problem of river transportation. He told of a $1.9 ­million agreement signed recently with Spain for the purchase of three river ­steamers and five barges; and of current negotiations with Japan over a proposed $3.8 million deal for the purchase of five cargo ships, a refrigerated barge and a cattle boat. He stated that if an agreement is consummated as expected, it will mean the entry into Paraguay of
