National Security Policy 285 85. Memorandum of Discussion at the 375th NSC Meeting1 Washington, August 7, 1958 SUBJECT Discussion at the 375th Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, August 7, 1958 Present at the 375th NSC Meeting were the President of the United States, presiding; the Vice President of the United States; the Acting Secretary of State; the Secretary of Defense; and the Director, Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization. Also present were the Secretary of the Treasury; the Attorney General (participating in Item 6); the ­Director, Bureau of the Budget; the Chairman, Council on Foreign ­Economic ­Policy (participating in Item 5); General Thomas D. White for the ­Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Deputy Secretary of Defense; the Director of Guided Missiles (for Item 3); The Assistant to the President; the Deputy Assistant to the ­President; the Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Director, International ­Cooperation Administration; the Special Assistant to the ­President for Atomic Energy (for Items 1, 2 and 3); the Special Assistants to the ­President for the Atoms for Peace Program, for Information Projects, for National Security Affairs, and for Security Operations Coordination; the White House Staff Secretary; Mr. Howard Furnas, Department of State; Assistant Secretary of Defense Sprague; Dr. George B. ­Kistiakowsky, President’s Science Advisory Committee (for Item 3); the Acting NSC Representative on Internal Security (for Item 6); the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the Director, NSC Secretariat. There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the main points taken. [Omitted here are agenda items 1–5.] 6. TECHNICAL SURVEILLANCE COUNTERMEASURES (NSC Action No. 1640; NSC 5618; Memos for NSC, same subject, dated July 22 and August 8, 1957, and June 24, 1958; NSC Action No. 1774) Mr. Gray presented the Annual Report of the NSC Special ­Committee on Technical Surveillance Countermeasures. (A copy of Mr. Gray’s brief­ ing note is filed in the minutes of the meeting, and another is attached to this memorandum.) The President asked whether there was any possibility of placing electronic “jamming” devices in such rooms as the Cabinet Room to 1 Source: Agenda item 6: Technical Surveillance Countermeasures; Agenda item 7: U.S. Policy on Antarctica. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—3 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Drafted on August 8.
