International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
705
It is unlikely that COMPACT, particularly the unions, will publicly
support this formulation, mainly because of the exclusion of incom-
plete receivers. This exclusion was recommended by virtually all
agencies because they felt it did not provide meaningful protection for
U.S. workers. I would propose to try to negotiate OMAs at the lower
end of the ranges indicated (especially in the second year), if I can bring
COMPACT to a more favorable posture.
The Department of Labor feels that the above approach will not
provide sufficient relief to the domestic industry and recommends that
you implement a global quota for two years at 1.4 million complete re-
ceivers and 3.05 million incomplete receivers each year. Labor would
also exclude 12 inch and under receivers but feels that it is critical to in-
clude incomplete receivers and to have global coverage of imports.
Under this option, OMAs could be negotiated later with Taiwan and
Korea. It is considered likely that COMPACT would endorse this
approach.
Should you decide to approve either of the relief options, we will
provide you with a proclamation to be signed by June 30. Every effort
will be made to keep your decision secret until after the Summit.
II. Terminate Relief
COWPS, CEA, IDCA, and Justice support termination of relief for
the following reasons:
1. Domestic firms have adjusted to import competition. Domestic
production and exports were at record levels for 2 years. Capital invest-
ment, capacity, capacity utilization, and productivity all increased. In-
ventories and imports declined, and U.S. firms have initiated signifi-
cant cost savings measures, and substantially rationalized production
by moving labor-intensive subassembly and component operations
offshore.
2. Four foreign firms have moved their final assembly operations
to the United States, joining three others already in the U.S. market.
These entrants helped cause the significant decline in complete color
television imports from Japan.
3. Despite the OMAs, domestic employment has declined. Contin-
uation of relief is not likely to stop this trend. As the U.S. industry con-
tinues to rationalize, production will become increasingly automated,
and job losses should continue.
4. Domestic producers can better compete with imports in terms of
price. During the OMAs, some domestic manufacturers have become
competitive in the low-priced private label market in which they previ-
ously had been unable to sell.
5. Termination of relief will remove a distortion in the interna-
tional color television market place and the small consumer cost caused
by trade diversion.
