Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX We should signal to the Yugoslavs our interest in improving and modestly expanding the current arms transfer relationship. Any such forthcoming message, however, should (a) not raise false Yugoslav expectations, especially with regard to the level of technology we will transfer; (b) not impose a significant political cost on the US if the Yugoslavs are unresponsive; and (c) not put the US in the position of pressing arms on an uninterested recipient. Accordingly, the Yugoslavs should be informed in substance that: —we want to contribute to the security of an independent and non-aligned Yugoslavia; —the maintenance and improvement of the arms transfer relationship, in our view, would contribute to that objective; —nevertheless, both sides must recognize that there are limits on the amount and kinds of arms which can be transferred. These constraints include: —a shared reluctance to undertake USG financing; —limits on the level of technology which can be transferred; —shared interest in not jeopardizing broader political relations (i.e., US-Soviet and Yugoslav-Soviet relations); —need to assure that the systems are defensive and could not threaten our security nor that of our friends and allies. These constraints, which would include a ban on the transfer of offensive air and naval systems, will limit the arms transfer relationship with Yugoslavia. They are consistent with the PD–13 guidelines.5 Limited procedural improvements also should be proposed. For example, we could designate Ambassador Eagleburger as the focal point for US action on arms transfer requests and invite the Yugoslavs to name a counterpart in Belgrade. If the Yugoslavs demonstrate a strong preference for having such exchanges in Washington, similar arrangements could be made between the State Department and their embassy. A formal consultative mechanism, however, should not be offered. Since our purposes are primarily political, the State Department should have the lead in determining the timing of this initiative, as well as that of responses to specific Yugoslav arms requests. The State Department also recommends that it be asked to conduct an interagency study to develop specific guidelines to facilitate our responses to subsequent Yugoslav requests. Peter Tarnoff
