506 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV vulnerable but we won’t yet have deployed its ultimate replacement. The first two would involve initially installing Minuteman on the air-­ mobile aircraft if we decided to go forward with that option, or installing it on a modification of its current transporter to create a road-­mobile system. (C) The Air Force is very cool on both of these possibilities. They feel that the components of the air-­mobile system other than the missile can be deployed only 1–2 years in advance of a new missile, and thus deploying Minuteman in the system isn’t worth the cost and effort. (C) In the case of the road-­mobile option, they believe that the system could be available somewhat sooner, but that its military value would be small. Given these facts and the fact that almost none of its components would be usable in any of the long-­term solutions that employ a new missile—­including off-­road mobile—­they think it is a waste of money. These arguments seem pretty reasonable. (S) [5 lines not declassified] This would provide more military capability than the proposed road-­mobile MAP system, and the decision to do it need not be made right now. (S) On balance, then, I believe that we should plan on raising alert rates, if necessary, to tide us through the early ’80s.5 In the context of an ongoing program to modernize the ICBM force, the perceived strategic balance should be acceptable. (C) RECOMMENDATIONS That you ask Harold to carry out an evaluation of alternative plans for modernizing our strategic forces to include the MAP and Air-Mobile concepts. His resulting analysis and recommendations should be forwarded for your approval by April 2nd.6 (C) That you signal the strongest reasonable level of support for modernizing the ICBM force by providing sufficient funds in both the FY 79 supplemental and the FY 80 budget for beginning full-­scale development of both a new missile and a new basing scheme.7 (C) That Harold Brown and the Chiefs take the lead in explaining this situation to the Congress. 5 Carter placed a checkmark in the right margin next to this sentence. 6 Carter placed a checkmark in the right margin next to this paragraph. 7 Carter wrote “?” in the right margin next to this sentence.
