Arms Control and Disarmament 1355 Admittedly the policing of this agreement would not be easy but an international inspection agency could be created which could deter­ mine compliance fairly accurately for each side. And, as a matter of fact, such a policy would penalize us so little that we might continue it for some time even if Russia did not cooperate. Actually, the only tests of any size and importance which now appear could not be carried out underground, would be in connection with the development of anti-­ missile missiles and some “plowshare” tests. While a majority of the Committee recommends that the first proposal be the one made, it would be possible to go still further if necessary and eliminate all above-­ground testing for a period of, say, two years. This would make it much harder to develop anti-­missile missiles. It would also prevent tests on some peaceful uses such as “ditch-­digger” unless special exceptions were made for them, possibly under international inspection. Such an agreement could not be readily policed, especially on small weapons, and would probably be evaded by the Russians unless there were extensive policing inside Russia, but it would practically eliminate any addition to fallout during the period the agreement was effective. The Committee is unanimously agreed that to go any farther than this in the restriction of testing would seriously endanger the security of the United States. 330. Record of Telephone Conversation Between Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles1 The Sec. said we had certain complications on the reply to Khru­ shchev about the experts to be set up to detect testing. The British say, and he is inclined to agree with them, that if we set this up as British, French and the USSR, this will be picked up in France and used by a lot of people there, saying the French were being pushed around, etc. Sec. said you could go back to bilaterals but pick our experts from whatever country, including UK and France, or you could say that in view of the fact that the UK has made explosions and in view of the fact France is 1 Source: Question of including the U.K. and France in U.S.-­Soviet discussions on detecting testing. No classification marking. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations.
