Chapter 5, May–June 1990  763
to the air force. When you refer to resubordination, you made no refer-
ence to the TU–22M, you spoke of Sukhoi, Mikoyan, etc. Then what is 
the problem in this case? Why are you not satisfied with our proposal?
Bartholomew: Very simply, in part because what has been done 
with one aircraft type today demonstrates what can be done with 
another tomorrow.
To do the job and lay this issue to rest, we need a number as well 
as a commitment on range, because then we can say we have resolved 
this problem, the Soviets have given us two assurances—­political barri-
ers against intercontinental potential—­range combined with an assur-
ance that they will not build up beyond a certain number. These two 
are important together. The problem I would face, and in fact already 
faced in meetings yesterday, is that a number that excludes certain air-
craft simply by resubordination is a number that cannot be credibly 
defended. It doesn’t help to solve the problem, it complicates the prob-
lem and raises the questions I talked about. The sooner we can turn 
the page here the better. There is no better time than now during this 
meeting between our two leaders. This solution would not prejudice 
your position on CFE.
Karpov: As to in-­flight refueling, this can be positively addressed. 
As to naval aircraft, there is a problem here.
Bartholomew: The problem is not naval, the problem is the inter-
continental potential of Backfire. The problem is this aircraft which is the 
political as well as the substantive issue that it is. We know of the strong 
Soviet interest in naval arms negotiations. We don’t expect you to stop 
pressing us because you agreed to include naval Backfire in the 400. But 
this is not the way to get to naval talks. We are trying to solve a problem 
of Backfire, not naval arms. There is no better moment, the impact of 
resolving this would be larger than this issue, important as this issue is. 
When after long resistance we agreed on 880 SLCMs, we just said OK. We 
didn’t say this mission, that mission; we cut it clean.
Karpov: The main thing for the US is not to give intercontinental 
capability to the TU–22M. This should be made the substance of the 
Soviet statement. I suggest leaving aside the question of numbers. In 
light of the Soviet agreement not to give it intercontinental capability, 
including refueling, that whould settle the question.
Bartholomew: That proposal takes us backwards. Because the 
issue is not whether the Soviet Union is ready to give us the number, 
the question is relating the number to issues outside the problem we 
are trying to solve by excluding naval Backfire. May I say the problem 
again is that if we exclude Backfire aircraft simply because of their sub-
ordination to one service as opposed to another, given the possibility of 
resubordination from one service to another this is not a real limit. You 
have not addressed this problem yesterday or today.
