naval force. Fifth, “in landing United States naval forces it should definitely be understood that they are landed for the protection of foreign life and property and that they will not, except under orders of the higher American authorities, be used to oppose any organized occupation of the International Settlement by the armed forces of the Nationalist Government”. Sixth, inclusion of foreign occupied areas to west and north of Settlement boundaries within the defense area is as fully justified and necessary now as in 1924 and 1925 in view of the large foreign population.

3. The Legation is in agreement with Gauss and Armstrong on all the foregoing points although it does not consider that the defense of the extra Settlement areas referred to would be justified at the imminent risk of collision with organized Cantonese forces unless, first, defense of these areas is a military necessity incidental to defense of the Settlements proper, or, second, their occupation should prove necessary for the protection of foreign residents, on which principle forces would be landed at any point irrespective of its administrative or territorial status. 4. With regard, however, to fifth point, I am of the firm opinion that the integrity of the International and French Settlements must be maintained under any circumstances even should it mean collision with organized Cantonese forces. Otherwise, occupation of other settlements, denunciation of extraterritoriality and widespread and systematic disregard of foreign lives and interests would in all probability be only a matter of time. Should a landing force be required, I regard it as essential that its main objectives and the scope of its responsibility should be definitely understood in advance. Such a force should know which it is there for, the purpose of protecting both the integrity of the Settlements and foreign life and property or only the latter. 5. I request frank expression of the Department’s views on this matter, as well as upon the other points which have been raised, in order that I may be in a position to discuss the subject with my colleagues if and when occasion demands.
