Uruguay  1151
on a strong quid pro quo basis, Mr. Rubottom believed that the interests 
of Mr. Taylor’s company and of the United States as a whole would best 
be served by a solution of the political problem.2
Having said this, Mr. Rubottom said he had heard from Mr. Dillon 
regarding the outcome of his conversations a few days earlier with Mr. 
Waugh. This indicated an agreement between the two that the Bank 
was ready to announce a $25 million line of exporters credits contin-
gent upon a settlement of the meatpackers problem. After a discus-
sion of the matter, Mr. Dillon had authorized Mr. Rubottom to let Mr. 
Waugh know that he had misunderstood the primary importance of the 
balance-­of-­payments loan, the granting of which would, in accordance 
with conversations in the Vice President’s office, be made contingent 
upon settlement of the meatpackers claim. Mr. Rubottom stressed that 
the line of exporters credits represented normal business and should be 
handled without any reference whatsoever to the meatpackers problem.
Mr. Rubottom then made the following specific proposed in 
response to Mr. Waugh’s request:
1. That the Bank agree to announce a line of exporters credits.
2. That the Bank agree to consider a balance-­of-­payments loan on 
the basis of partial gold coverage and commitments by the Uruguayan 
Government to undertake necessary stabilization measures.
He added that the Department was, in the meanwhile, working 
strenuously on other aspects of the Uruguayan problem, including 
elimination of the countervailing duty on wool tops and compliance 
with our agreement in GATT to make concessions on three canned neat 
items.
Mr. Waugh stated that he agreed thoroughly with Mr. Rubottom’s 
analysis of the political problem. The only area in which he differed 
was the amount of reliance to be placed on Uruguayan promises. He 
2 In a memorandum to Dillon dated June 4, 1958, prepared as a briefing paper for 
the Deputy Under Secretary’s meeting with Thomas Taylor that afternoon, Assistant 
Secretary Rubottom stated the following: “The packers believe that there is no hope of 
coming to a fair settlement with the Uruguayan unless the U.S. Government intervenes 
energetically. As a first step, the packer propose that the U.S. freeze exiting Uruguayan 
assets in the United States, as was done with Egyptian assets during the Suez crises.” 
Rubottom further stated, however, that he doubted the wisdom of these tactics, and 
noted that Uruguayan President battle Beres had already assured Vice President Nixon 
in Montevideo that the matter would be equitably settled, that the issue between the 
meatpackers and the Uruguayan Government was primarily a legal one, and that any 
attempt to “Bludgeon Battle into meeting the packers’ terms would be the single most 
effective way of assuring the failure of our efforts for better relations.” (Rubottom Files, 
Lot 60 D 553, “Uruguay 1958”). In a covering memorandum to Dillon, Rubottom added 
the following point: “The action proposed by the packers would also add fuel to the fires 
of ‘review’ of our Latin Americas policies now going on on the Hill. Badly as they have 
been treated, I doubt that the steps they want would get very much public or political 
support.” (Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Uruguay 1958”)
