Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 413 RV Inspection and Heavy Bomber Exhibitions 3. On December 8, the U.S. and Soviet heads of delegation exchanged letters providing for heavy bomber exhibitions that will begin with the Soviet exhibit of the bear. Sides are close to completion of a conformed text of letters to agree on trial RV inspections as well. 4. Sides did not reach final agreement on the RV inspection letters when the Soviet side balked at the U.S. proposal that the Soviet side commit to demonstrate procedures on the “most modern MIRVed version” of the SS–18. Soviet head of delegation said that there was insufficient time to get Moscow’s agreement to changing their draft letter to clarify that the most modern MIRVed version of the SS–18 would be shown. On December 9, U.S. head of delegation handed Soviet head of delegation an amended draft letter that would obligate each side to show the “most modern MIRVed version” of each of the agreed missiles, i.e., the Peacekeeper, the SS–18, the Trident II, and the SS–N–23. Soviet head of delegation preliminary assessment was that this formulation would be very helpful in Moscow. 5. U.S. side awaits Soviet response to the amended RV inspection letter. We may receive word during Nazarkin’s visit to Washington late this week and attempt to reach closure on this issue. Telemetry Encryption/Data Denial 6. Reftel summarizes current state of play on the telemetry encryption issue and suggests steps to address this issue during the inter-­ round period. Original telemetry guidance specified that the U.S. should seek only an interim solution to the encrypt (#)3 that the time and complexity required to reach an interim solution is about the same as that required to resolve the issue in the long term. Consequently, I believe that Washington should consider resolving the telemetry issue as a separate agreement of indefinite duration. 8. Unexecuted telemetry guidance: START Guidance XII–002,4 paras 9 and 10: allowing U.S. side to agree to indefinite duration agreement that could be superseded, and providing specific information for U.S. ballistic missile test ranges. Also negotiating group did not execute guidance authorizing U.S. side to list specific older Soviet systems which could be exempt from the requirement to make measurements and broadcast telemetry from non-­test range locations. Negotiating group opted to wait until the Soviet side provides answers to U.S. 3 “Omission: Para 6 line 5 and Para ‘7’ omitted. Corrections to follow.” [Footnote is in the original.] 4 Reference is to telegram 8896 from NST Geneva, October 12. (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D890881–0184)
