44  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
“The talks so far have been confined to the matter of return of civil­
ians to their respective countries.” Since this wording conforms text of 
first agenda item I agreed to change.
Next meeting 10 a.m., August 10 at Wang’s request.
Gowen
Note: Advance copy to Mr. Waddell (FE) 10:30 a.m., 8/8/55, CWO/FED
44.	
Telegram 354 from Geneva1
Geneva, August 8, 1955, 6 p.m.
354. From Johnson.
At fourth meeting August 8 10 am Wang began referring my 
statement restraining orders previously placed by US Government on 
Chinese now all rescinded and that foreign nationals in US including 
Chinese could leave without applying for permission. Wang said he 
welcomed my statement but added he must frankly point out it not 
altogether consistent with actual situation prevailing to date. Actual 
situation is that although US Government has rescinded departure 
restrictions on number of Chinese students who applied to leave long 
ago, Chinese students are still subjected all sorts of obstructions and 
many prevented from leaving up to present. All Chinese nationals who 
want to leave subjected to interrogation by Immigration Service and 
FBI and forced express their political opinions. Some even detained for 
this reason. Many others for fear of interrogation do not apply to leave 
and many who previously applied have reconsidered for same reason. 
Many Chinese nationals who applied to leave long ago up to present 
unable depart.
An example this is case Dr. Tsien who went US 1934 to study aero­
nautics. After graduation 1938 was engaged in teaching at California 
Institute of Technology and Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Now holds position at Cal Tech. Is one of few authorities on rockets 
in US. When Dr Tsien was leaving US August 1950 US Secret Service 
seized his baggage on charge contained classified material. August 
23 he further notified not to depart and that investigation his activ­
ities pending. September 7 arrested by Immigration Service and not 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–855. Confidential.
