1956 1201 international relations would deteriorate into chaos. This first agree­ ment between us had tremendous importance and potentialities for future our relations. I had entered into it with much hope and opti­ mism. Failure carry it out had sorely tried that hope and optimism as well as patience. I did not understand how he could term our pointing out clear fact of failure carry out this agreement as distortion and slander. Procrastination entirely part his authorities. They were ones that have it in their power stop their procrastination in carrying out this agreement. Did no good try confuse and obscure this issue by talking about lists Chinese in US. Both of us knew perfectly well under terms agreed announcement no obligation on part US to furnish any list Chinese in US. Both of us knew perfectly well such lists have no relation to ability Chinese in US return his country if desire do so. There only one question: are they able return if desire do so? Both of us knew perfectly well not been single case any obstruction to their return alleged through mechanism established that purpose. 10. I continued other immediate objective sought by my government was renunciation force which would specifically apply to most serious dispute between us. That objective also not been achieved. Whenever appeared we close to achieving it his side had retreated into pleas of domestic affairs, internal affairs, sovereignty, other such terms. Use of such terms did not obscure fact that his governnment still refused make clear-­cut unqualified renunciation force. Here again procrastination entirely on his side. I had tried throughout discussion of this to point out first and immediate question not whether this internal affair or interna­ tional affair or any other kind affair or otherwise to get into merits of this whole complicated issue. 11. I continued overwhelmingly most important and first aspect of it was whether we going to permit our differences—and certainly there are differences—to plunge our two peoples into cataclysm of war. This transcendental issue and cannot be concealed by distorting pro­ posals I made by making them appear say things did not say or by making other proposals which avoid issue. He simply could not get around fact my proposals been simple and straightforward. Without prejudicing his position in any way—in fact I had specifically said so in my proposals—we simply make it clear that renunciation force did specifically apply to Taiwan, he simply could not get around fact it his side which continues threaten use force that area if could not otherwise attain ends. He could not get around fact it his side which thus far pro­ crastinated and refused renounce use threat force that area. 12. I continued had hope he would give up insistence we digress from this fundamental issue to subordinate matters. Until this fun­ damental issue resolved, hard see how subordinate matters could be
