642
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the first three weeks of September, before you leave for the UN. Among
the issues we should consider is how to develop a better forum for the
North-South dialogue. The UN Committee of the Whole is plainly not
an optimum mechanism.
6. Foreign Service Reform. The enactment of the Foreign Service leg-
islation should be one of our highest priorities.10 It will not require
much time on the floor of the Senate or the House, and does not im-
pinge on the other restraints set forth at the beginning of this
memorandum.
7. Trade Agreements with the PRC and Soviet Union. The approval of
these trade agreements should be one of our principal legislative goals
for 1980. To gain this approval, especially in the Soviet case, will re-
quire a mobilization of business support as well as sensitive dealings
with the interests groups. Once approved, we should give a strong im-
petus to the implementation of the agreements.
8. A Non-Isolationist Energy Policy. Our evolving energy policy has
some “Fortress America” overtones. One of our responsibilities in the
next 18 months is to ensure that we do not isolate ourselves on this
issue. One way to do this—and a way that could have great substantive
benefits as well—would be to explore fully the possibilities of joint de-
velopment of the tar sands in Canada and Venezuela. There is wide
agreement that these tar sands deposits are an enormous source of po-
tential energy which could be developed if sufficient capital is made
available from governmental sources. We should make sure that our
new energy legislation is flexible enough to permit such joint
development.
9. Normalizing Diplomatic Relations. The United States had less-
than-normal relations with 13 countries when we came into office. We
now have reduced that to 10 countries: Albania, Angola, Cuba (In-
terests Section), Equatorial Guinea, Kampuchea, Iraq (Interests Sec-
tion), North Korea, South Yemen, Vietnam, Zimbabwe/Rhodesia. We
should improve this record during the last 18 months, asking ourselves
in each instance whether a continuation of the current anomaly serves
any national interest. Normalization in some instances may prove to be
politically impossible, either from a domestic or international stand-
point. However, there are other instances where we can make progress
without impinging on any of the constraints set forth at the beginning
of this memorandum. Vietnam will be one of the most difficult, but also
one of the most important. Progress in our relations with all three Af-
rican countries on the list would seem a reachable goal. An end to the
isolation of Rhodesia would be especially welcome.
10 See footnote 56, Document 123.
