456  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
For our part, we propose US visits to radars located near Pechora 
and Baranovichi. These radars perform similar early warning functions 
to the radars at Thule and Fylingdales. I am interested in hearing your 
reaction to the ideas I have put forward across the board on arms con-
trol. Then let us have Ambassadors Bartholomew and Karpov go to 
work. They can report back to us later in the day.
I do want to raise one issue that is a matter of concern to us. 
President Bush raised in Malta the modernization of your remaining 
SS–18s. We worry that the modernization will offset and compensate 
for the 50% reduction. As President Bush said, we view the continuing 
modernization of SS–18 as inconsistent with the new kind of relations 
we are trying to forge. Quite apart from that I think they do create a 
problem for ratification of the treaty. We don’t want to recreate the sit-
uation we had with SALT II. Many Senators—­both conservatives and 
liberals—­have said to Nazarkin that they can’t understand why you are 
committing the kinds of resources you are to that program when you 
have the kind of economic needs that you have. Anyway, let me move 
on the ALCMs and get into some of the details.
Let me turn over to you the paper that we have on ALCMs5 which 
spells out the details of our approach. As you can see from the paper, 
we are not able to go with your position on “as equipped” for the 
counting rule but we are able to modify our position in a way that we 
think is significant. On the counting rule, we’d like to see an attribution 
of ten warheads each to the B–52 and B–1 and any future heavy bomber 
that carries ALCMs. To take care of your concern that our attribution 
rule would leave room to equip bombers with numbers vastly greater 
than ten, we propose that we agree that no bomber may be equipped 
with more than twice the number that might be attributed to them. 
This would set a ceiling on the maximum number. Under this approach 
we would attribute eight warheads to each TU–95 and eight to each 
TU–160. As with the US there would be an attribution of ten for any 
future heavy bomber that might be constructed.
On distinguishability: we propose that non-­nuclear ALCMs be 
distinguishable from nuclear ones on the basis of external differences 
observable by National Technical Means and also visible on site inspec-
tion. This is the point that moves towards your position. Non-­nuclear 
ALCMs not distinguishable in that manner would be permitted but 
would be counted as nuclear under overall limits.
Shevardnadze: You are saying that they would be counted against 
the limits on ALCMs?
5 Not found. See footnote 3, Document 71.
