Human Rights
521
controversial provisions including those on abortion and capital pun-
ishment, and there is also the question of whether the Genocide Treaty
and other UN documents should be handled first. State’s assessment,
with which we agree, is that nothing could be accomplished unless we
assign ratification a relatively high priority and in particular, unless we
enlist the vigorous support of the human rights community—of whom
many have a special interest in Latin America.
If you approve, we intend to work with State and Madeleine Al-
bright in undertaking additional informal consultations with Senate
leadership and staff concerning the possibilities of moving ahead with
ratification. In parallel, we would also meet with the human rights
community, and would then submit a suggested priority assignment
for ratification.
It doesn’t appear at first glance as though ratification of all the
human rights treaties is a terribly important issue, but as the current
Pravda propaganda campaign illustrates, our failure to ratify these in-
ternational documents makes us vulnerable to the argument that our
human rights policy is “solely for export”.3 It is incongruous when set
alongside our aggressive human rights policy.
Also, the Senate’s failure to act provides the President with a potent argu-
ment against those who maintain that Congress is the chief actor on human
rights. In this case at least, the President has taken important solid ini-
tiatives which the Congress has failed to follow through on. This is an
argument we should make much better use of, and we will think about
ways to do so.
3 In telegram 19745 from Moscow, August 17, the Embassy reported that Pravda had
capitalized upon an August 9 speech Young delivered in New York, in which he refer-
enced the failure of the United States to ratify the Genocide Convention as “the taking off
point for an aggressive attack on the administration’s human rights policy.” The Em-
bassy summarized an August 17 Pravda column, noting that Pravda’s Washington corre-
spondent had asserted that “Americans are beginning to understand, however, that the
human rights policy proclaimed by the administration is intended exclusively ‘for ex-
port’ and has no influence in the U.S. itself.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D780338–0997) In telegram 19933 from Moscow, August 21, the Embassy
noted that the Soviet press “continues to belabor propaganda theme that the U.S. abuses
human rights at home while promoting them for selfish (usually anti-Soviet) purposes
abroad.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780341–0955) In the
NSC Global Issues Cluster’s evening report for August 21, Tuchman Mathews referred to
the “propaganda campaign” and the failure to ratify various human rights agreements,
adding: “but it is clear that the continuing failure to ratify does not comport well with an
aggressive policy on our part. This argument falls on receptive ears in many Third World
countries and it is therefore perhaps worth considering whether to raise the priority of
these agreements in next year’s legislative reports.” (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening
Reports: 7–8/78)
