1980  845
—There may be come [some?] political liability associated with the 
President leaving the continental United States.
An alternative seaborne concept, of considerably less cost, is to 
develop our land-­based systems such that they are readily deployable 
on ships, tugs, or barges which could operate on inland waters or in 
coastal areas. This would provide an additional measure of flexibility 
and mobility in a COG system.
Airborne Platforms
Our current COG system relies heavily upon airborne assets, 
[5 lines not declassified]
The [less than 1 line not declassified] also has some major drawbacks:
—[6 lines not declassified]
—C3 and staff configuration are such that the President will prob-
ably be unable to execute his functions as Chief of State or Chief Exec-
utive, in addition to his requirements to command theater nuclear and 
conventional forces.
For these reasons, it would be imprudent to rely exclusively upon 
[less than 1 line not declassified]
As with seaborne platforms, it may be possible to combine a land 
mobile system with airborne carriers, such as C–130s. Under this con-
cept, the land-­based system could embark on aircraft and be moved to 
various parts of the country, depending upon the attack pattern.
Land Based System
Several land based deployment concepts were also evaluated by the 
Working Group. For analytic purposes, these deployment modes were 
treated as discrete sets. Operationally, these concepts could clearly be 
mixed. (Other somewhat different modes of deployment could evolve 
and expansions of specific mixtures could be developed in response to 
a changing threat.)
Detailed analyses were performed on basing modes with (a) ded-
icated prepared sites and stationary or semi-­mobile operation; (b) des-
ignated unprepared sites and stationary or semi-­mobile operation; and 
(c) a fully ground mobile concept.
—Dedicated Prepared Sites. Sites are selected in low-­risk areas and 
will have fall-­out protection, connectivity to the commercial telephone 
system, life support supplies and access to designated ground vehi-
cles. Since these preparatory steps are austere, some added advanced 
preparation may be required. Depending on the threat, from 20 to 650 
of these sites were used in the analysis. If used in stationary operation, 
all sites must be equipped with full communications packages. The 
successor and his team would disperse at random to one of the sites 
and leapfrog between the sites.
