1222 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI studies and research on disarmament issues. While we are not enthusiastic about proposals to revitalize the UN Disarmament Commission, should momentum build behind such proposals we would not oppose it provided its mandate were clear and limited. The Soviets will continue to press for a world disarmament conference as a follow-up to the SSOD. The US continues to believe that the conditions which exist now or in the foreseeable future do not justify setting a date for a world disarmament conference. However, the US will announce support for a second SSOD to be held in several years. US Del may agree to draft language on disarmament machinery ad referendum and should report such language to Washington for approval in substance. Del may accept minor editorial changes on final text, but should inform Washington of all changes. 7. Possible Soviet initiatives. We anticipate that USSR will offer a number of initiatives when Foreign Minister Gromyko addresses the SSOD. Such Soviet initiatives are likely to include the following: A. Negotiations on an agreement to halt production of nuclear weapons; B. A treaty banning all new types of mass destruction weapons C. Assurance of non-use of nuclear weapons except in case of aggression against USSR or its allies by another nuclear power; D. Negotiations on renunciation of “nuclear neutron weapons”; E. A halt to development and production of new and highly destructive conventional arms; F. A freeze by permanent members of the Security Council and their allies on their armed forces and conventional arms. US Del should report all Soviet initiatives in detail and may indicate that the USG is giving them appropriately careful study. Guidance will be provided subsequently on how US Del should respond to each Soviet initiative. 8. Specific Issues. A. SALT. US Del should seek to work out language with the Soviets on SALT to propose for the final document; along lines of the language discussed at last PrepCom. While others, in particular the Mexicans, may wish to leave their mark on such language, it is particularly important that we not permit others to force a split between the US and USSR on this issue. Language on SALT issue should be consistent with
