1222
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
studies and research on disarmament issues. While we are not enthusi-
astic about proposals to revitalize the UN Disarmament Commission,
should momentum build behind such proposals we would not oppose
it provided its mandate were clear and limited.
The Soviets will continue to press for a world disarmament confer-
ence as a follow-up to the SSOD. The US continues to believe that the
conditions which exist now or in the foreseeable future do not justify
setting a date for a world disarmament conference. However, the US
will announce support for a second SSOD to be held in several years.
US Del may agree to draft language on disarmament machinery ad
referendum and should report such language to Washington for ap-
proval in substance. Del may accept minor editorial changes on final
text, but should inform Washington of all changes.
7. Possible Soviet initiatives.
We anticipate that USSR will offer a number of initiatives when
Foreign Minister Gromyko addresses the SSOD. Such Soviet initiatives
are likely to include the following:
A. Negotiations on an agreement to halt production of nuclear
weapons;
B. A treaty banning all new types of mass destruction weapons
(MDW);
C. Assurance of non-use of nuclear weapons except in case of ag-
gression against USSR or its allies by another nuclear power;
D. Negotiations on renunciation of “nuclear neutron weapons”;
E. A halt to development and production of new and highly de-
structive conventional arms;
F. A freeze by permanent members of the Security Council and
their allies on their armed forces and conventional arms.
US Del should report all Soviet initiatives in detail and may indi-
cate that the USG is giving them appropriately careful study. Guidance
will be provided subsequently on how US Del should respond to each
Soviet initiative.
8. Specific Issues.
A. SALT. US Del should seek to work out language with the So-
viets on SALT to propose for the final document; along lines of the lan-
guage discussed at last PrepCom. While others, in particular the Mex-
icans, may wish to leave their mark on such language, it is particularly
important that we not permit others to force a split between the US and
USSR on this issue. Language on SALT issue should be consistent with
language of UNGA Res 32/87.3 US Del may agree ad referendum to
3 UN General Assembly 32/87 G, December 12, 1977, called for the United States
and the Soviet Union to limit and then reduce the number of nuclear weapons in their re-
spective stockpiles.
