3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
454
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
tion of peace treaties between Israel and all its neighbors. The other
document is titled “A Framework for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty
between Egypt and Israel.”3 Our Ambassador will transmit these docu-
ments to you. Together, they provide a constructive framework for the
resolution of the tragic and difficult conflict between Israel and her
Arab neighbors. I believe that a historic step toward peace in the
Middle East has thus been taken.
Because the Palestinian issue has been so central to the Middle East
dispute, the first document concentrates on developing an agreed basis
which will permit the progressive resolution of that issue over the next
five years. The parties to the Camp David meeting agreed on the need
for a five-year transitional period during which the inhabitants of the
West Bank and Gaza will establish a self-governing authority with full
autonomy to replace the Israeli military government. Israel will retain a
military presence only in specified locations for security purposes. To
negotiate the details of the transitional arrangements, Jordan will be in-
vited to join the negotiations. There is a provision in the agreement for a
Jordanian role in the maintenance of security, if Jordan so desires.
During the five-year transitional period, the Palestinians will also
participate in negotiations with Egypt, Israel, and Jordan (if Jordan
agrees to participate) on the final status of the West Bank and Gaza. The
Palestinians have a right to join the negotiations on a peace treaty be-
tween Jordan and Israel. These negotiations will be based on all the
provisions and principles of United Nations Security Council Resolu-
tion 242. There will be no new Israeli settlements in the West Bank and
Gaza during the negotiations to establish the self-government in this
area.
These arrangements recognize the legitimate rights of the Pales-
tinian people and will permit them to participate in the determination
of their own future. The Palestinians will decide how they shall govern
themselves, their representatives will take part directly in the negotia-
tions affecting their future, and their elected representatives will vote
on the agreement on the final status of the West Bank and Gaza.
This document also provides for security arrangements and com-
mitments to peace which should be part of a comprehensive settlement
between Israel and each of her neighbors.
The second agreement, “A Framework for the Conclusion of a
Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel,” affirms both Israel’s will-
ingness to restore to Egypt the full exercise of its sovereignty in Sinai
and Egypt’s willingness to make peace and to establish normal rela-
tions with Israel. In the course of the Camp David negotiations, agree-
3 For the text, see Department of State Bulletin, October 1978, pp. 9–10.
