668 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI Tab C Summary Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting18 Washington, undated SUMMARY MINUTES POLICY REVIEW COMMITTEE MEETING ON ARMS TRANSFERS (List of Attendees Attached)19 Dollar Volume Ceilings Brown argued against dollar volume ceilings, citing the following reasons: 1) reduces our flexibility; 2) encourages purchasers to cluster orders early in the fiscal year; 3) encourages use of the ceiling as a floor; 4) would lead to enormous accounting problems; 5) might spur Congress to put ceilings or even subceilings into law. Brown said the arguments for dollar volume ceilings include: 1) the political attractiveness of ceilings; and 2) the fact that it is the only sure way of doing what we said we would do in the conventional arms area. Brown, Warnke, and Benson recommended that instead of imposing a ceiling, we should state that we will agree to sell less each year, something that has occurred over the past two years anyway, and something which would indicate our commitment to restraint. Warnke and Lance recommended further that the President announce that we will have “significant reductions” in arms sales. Smith stated his opposition to a ceiling, maintaining that we will have trouble with our allies if we set an arbitrary ceiling at the outset of a fiscal year. Brzezinski said that he thought ceilings would allow the President to fulfill his pledge to reduce the transfer of arms, and that ceilings would tell the U.S. public and the world, especially other suppliers, that the President intends to scale down the transfer of arms. Brzezinski stated, however, that he would recommend focusing on weaponry since that is what contributes most significantly to the arms race. Vance stated that he believed there was a need for a ceiling in the early years of the new arms sales policy, because it would help us discipline ourselves and manage the program more effectively than would a general statement on reduction. Aaron stated that, given the President’s strong statements on this subject, defense of the new policy would be a political impossibility without a number indicating some percentage reduction or ceiling. Vance agreed, and Brzezinski stated that, excluding allies 18 Secret. 19 Attached but not printed.
