1590 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement a point where we must find ways to avoid the dangers to which we are exposed. Essentially it is a problem of how to mark time until the basic decisions are made in Washington and London. There are three different ways of marking time which we might follow. The simplest would be to call for a recess of two or three weeks with a definite date set for resumption. We could do this on the basis that Macmillan’s discussions in Moscow need to be considered in Washington before the conference here can go ahead. I do not think this course would prejudice whatever decision off may be adopted with respect to stopping or going on with the conference. It is, of course, not probable that the Soviets would agree to such a course without a good deal of propaganda as to why we are suggesting it. It is however pretty clear to the public already that the conference is in fact awaiting decisions which will defend upon the outcome of discussions while Macmillan is in Washington and it might therefore not be too difficult to justify a temporary recess publicly, by frank rec­ ognition of this fact. The second possibility is to reduce our schedule of meetings over the next three weeks as much as we can. We have in fact already begun to do this. We secured Soviet agreement to having no meeting Friday and we can do this from time to time in the coming fortnight. Even if the Soviets refused to cancel particular meetings, this tactic still has an advantage since their refusal puts the responsibility of talking on them. However this course gives the Soviets the choice of what we talk about and to that extent is disadvantageous. Even with a reduced schedule we might be faced with eight to ten meetings during the next three weeks in which Western initiative and control would be difficult to maintain. Finally we could relax somewhat our present sharp focus on con­ trol issues and begin talking about the minor things involved in the draft treaty articles that we have already tabled. This would help to avoid the danger of getting prematurely into too detailed discussions on control but would at the same time relax pressures on the Soviets on the key control issues. It would also involve the risk that the Soviets might agree to some of the minor articles which could create a mislead­ ing impression of progress in the negotiations and create some awk­ wardness if our decision is to end up soon. On balance I believe that from our point of view here a recess of two or three weeks would be the least disadvantageous course of action. I realize that of course you have to take into consideration fac­ tors broader than those which influence our thinking here. Whatever course of action we follow there is one difficulty which I hope we can resolve just as soon as possible. We have of course been careful not to say anything to our British colleagues here about the pos­ sibility of a wind-­up of this conference. I believe, however, they clearly
