776 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI On the phasing of reductions, our understanding is that the Soviet side has stated it prefers not to put the reductions schedule for heavy ICBMs in the treaty itself, but is prepared to give assurances that the reduction of heavy ICBMs will parallel those of other forces. We will accept an exchange of letters or an agreed statement for the phasing of reductions of heavy ICBMs provided there are specific numbers for the threeand five-­year points. With these two steps—­more flexibility on testing and phasing of reductions not in the treaty—­and with language on heavy ICBMs in the joint statement on future negotiations, we could consider the heavy ICBM issue closed. This is a fair resolution, and would put a difficult issue behind us. Nazarkin: I would like you to be more specific on your phasing proposal. Bartholomew: We need a plan for reduction of heavy ICBMs, with precise points for years 3 and 5. The Soviet side has told us it will reduce SS–18s proportionally with the other reductions. It is not clear exactly what that means. We could clarify this through an agreed statement or an exchange of letters, including the specific points at 3 and 5 years. We wouldn’t have to include the SS–18 numbers formally in the treaty text dealing with the reductions. Karpov: Two points. On the schedule of reductions, I don’t see a serious problem. We are prepared to confirm that the reductions will be proportional—­at the end of 3 years, 50; at the end of 5 years, 50; and at the end of 7 years 50; at a minimum for a total of 154. Burt: The concept is continuous reductions. 50 per period is about in the ball park. There is a three-­year period and then two and two. The three-­year period should have more than 50, we will look at that. Beyond that I won’t say. Karpov: The flight testing issue seems to be more difficult for us. Roughly you are suggesting the same requirement as 2 tests per year. From that standpoint, 7 tests per 3 years does not change a lot. The question is why Soviet heavy missiles are to be limited while other missiles—­the MX and Trident II—­are not so limited. In the case of Trident and MX, missiles with many RVs, they are about the same as the SS–18. I fail to understand why there should be limits on flight testing of the SS–18 and not the others. Burt: That is very clear. Unlike the Trident II, unlike the MX, unlike every other system, the Soviet Union has agreed it will not deploy a new type of heavy missile. We have proposed not only no new types, but that the existing types wither away. The Soviet side did not accept this concept, and in a major concession we dropped the concept of withering away. We are now prepared to accept testing sufficient to maintain the reliability of existing systems. We heard earlier that 2 flight tests
