760
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
They want most of all the development of an Iranian agency which
has the primary responsibility of not only supervising the tribes, but
will have a responsibility for their welfare. They want a bureau of tri-
bal affairs that has welfare functions over and beyond policing
responsibilities.
Upon leaving the camp one could not help but notice a change in
the atmosphere. I was specifically informed that they had carried their
discussions far into the night and that they had made one definite deci-
sion: they would not have any future contacts with members of the
Tudeh party, that they would not talk to anyone as an intermediary be-
tween them and the Tudeh party. They stated that they now realized
that the Tudeh party would only use the Ghashghaies to their advan-
tage and they were very anxious to impress upon me that they would
not receive in the future any other representatives. It should be men-
tioned that the Tudeh had definitely promised them all of the ammuni-
tion that they would need as well as helping them with arms and com-
munications. It is apparent that they will now have nothing to do with
this.
The following day after my return home I was informed by Bah-
manbegui that a message had been sent to one of the sub-tribal chiefs
by Khosrow that they were going to make peace with the government.
In evaluating the present situation I believe that much progress
has been made as a result of Mr. Henderson’s contacts and relation-
ships which have been maintained with Khosrow by Embassy officials
in the past as well as the efforts which have been undertaken by repre-
sentatives of the Iranian government. I do not believe that the Ghash-
ghaies will undertake any armed activity unless they feel that they are
being subjected to pressure or that an unfortunate incident should
occur between members of the tribe and the military. However, I have
been given assurances that they will make every effort to prevent any
incident occurring and that if one does occur they will do their best to
keep this from spreading into a larger conflict.
They will stage some forces near the vicinity of Shiraz. This will
not inconvenience them this year because of the extreme drought in the
south. They will benefit by remaining in this area until after the first
rains. They will probably not give open support to the present gov-
ernment, but will refrain from taking any anti-government action. They
believe that this government will fall through intrigues of the royal
court and that then they will have an opportunity to support a con-
structive third government. If this does not happen and there are no in-
cidents within the next two or three months and they feel assured that
this government has strength, there is a good possibility that they then
may support it. If this government remains in office for two or three
