reparations. France on the one hand has lent, itself, considerable sums to poorer Allies and these sums amount to almost half of her external debt. She had on the other hand provided for the reconstruction of the devastated regions which constitute a heavy charge on her budget. Germany, who should have met these expenses, has not done so. French opinion could, therefore, legitimately ask that France should only pay her creditors in proportion to the payment made by her debtors. Such an opinion tended to a general compensation of interallied debts and to subordinate France’s payments for the settlement of her debts to those of Germany for the reconstruction of the devastated regions. This opinion, which appears so eminently fair, is moderate, since it places on the same footing the debts between Allies contracted in a common cause and Germany’s debt for the reparation of the ruins which she caused. It was expressed many times by the British and French Premiers; but it was not accepted by the Government of the United States. 3. However, the French Government has never repudiated the war debts of its country. But it would be very difficult to make French opinion accept a method of settlement in accordance with the principles which have always been maintained by the American Government: Integral maintenance of the nominal amount of the debt; treating this debt independently of payments by Germany. But the adoption of such principles can only be reconciled with very easy conditions of settlement. It is in particular indispensable that the amortization table should show a long moratorium and very small annuities at the start in order to permit France: one, to wait until the Dawes Plan has entered into a period of effective application; two, to settle external commercial debts and in particular the debt due by reason of the purchase of American stocks; three, to wait for the time when the expenses resulting from the war (pensions, annuity allowances for reconstruction) shall begin to decrease. It is under these conditions that French public opinion may be led to adopt such a plan as the following which is only submitted in a purely unofficial and private manner: Fixing the nominal amount of the debt to the amount of this debt in capital, that is to say at $2,933,000,000; complete moratorium for
