472 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III I would like to see agreement to double the capital of the World Bank, which is $31 billion now. The World Bank handles its affairs well. I would like to see the World Bank used as the main instrument for the development process. I hope we can return to this. Also, the level of aid as a percentage of GNP has substantially declined. This is a bad sign. On retroactive terms adjustment, we have reduced debt. Let’s face it, the LDCs will never repay their loans. It would have some meaning in LDC eyes if we move more in this direction. Schmidt: This is the first time we are discussing the LDC issue. You should feel free to put up new ideas on this new subject. Giscard: At the next meeting we should give more time to North/ South policy. Regarding the paragraph on COMECON, we should say we invited once more COMECON to do their share in assisting LDCs. Carter: We should say we deeply regret the failure of COMECON countries to do their share of financial assistance to LDCs and invite them once more to do so. Schmidt: I have a proposal to make outside of the text—that is a joint procedure among ourselves envisaging further action. Our notetakers will bring to our attention proposals made in this field. We should evaluate our situation in the field of development aid. In less than two years the developing countries will become aware that the common fund would not really help them. We should prepare for this. I should also say that nothing has been done on the study of export earnings since our meeting at Rambouillet. Trudeau: We should say that we will meet before the next Summit to tackle this problem. Were you counting on our aides to assess progress in the next 6 months? Schmidt: Yes. They should assess progress across the board. Carter: I would like to propose that we meet in Japan before the end of June next year. Schmidt: Our notetakers and aides should follow up our discussion. Giscard: We should say that our officials will meet toward the end of the year to review progress. We should not announce a date for another Summit because the economic situation may make a meeting necessary at one time or another. We should say that the next meeting will take place as and when circumstances make it desirable. Fukuda: Followup is an important matter. I would like to urge on you that we say we will followup in an appropriate phrase in the communique. Schmidt: I agree. We should also say we have instructed our Ministers to, by the end of ’78, convene in order to review progress in car-
