3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
854
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
long-planned Five-Year Review Conference of the parties to the Biolog-
ical Weapons Convention had convened in Geneva and was in session
at that time. (S)
The USG raised the matter in Moscow on March 174 and informed
the participants in the Geneva Conference of that action. The USG fur-
ther promised to report the results of consultations with the Soviet
Government to the parties to the BWC. In responding to the USG de-
marche, the Soviets acknowledged that a number of deaths had oc-
curred due to an anthrax epidemic in Sverdlovsk in April 1979, but as-
serted that it was the intestinal form of anthrax resulting from
contaminated meat. The USG again raised the issue with the Soviets on
March 28 and proposed expert consultations as called for in Article V.
The Soviet Government repeated its earlier explanation and denied the
request for consultations. Most recently, in June, the USG reiterated its
concerns to the Soviets and re-emphasized its interest in pursuing ex-
pert consultations as provided in Article V. The Soviet Government has
again repeated its simple denial and refused its request for consulta-
tions to resolve the issue. (S)
The concerns which originally led the USG to raise this issue with
the Soviet Government are as follows:
There is located in the south of Sverdlovsk a military facility which
is subordinate to the section within the Soviet Ministry of Defense
which is responsible for biological and chemical warfare. This facility is
contained within a heavily secured perimeter and operates in secrecy.
It includes structures, including animal pens, which suggest that it is
engaged in research and/or production activities involving biological
effects on living organisms. Other physical characteristics of the facility
include structures suitable for storage of explosives. The facility was
built before 1972 (i.e., before the signature of the Biological Weapons
Convention), and it remains in active use up to the present time. (S)
According to reliable reports, during the first weeks of April 1979,
at least 40 persons died in Sverdlovsk after experiencing pulmonary
and other symptoms normally associated with inhalation anthrax.
Many additional cases were reported in the following weeks, and a
large hospital in Sverdlovsk became devoted exclusively to the treat-
ment of anthrax cases—under military control and strict secrecy. (S)
Anthrax is an animal disease caused by a bacterial organism which
may infect humans who are exposed to it. There are three forms of an-
thrax, which are distinguished by the manner in which the spores enter
the body. Cutaneous anthrax, the most common form, is caused when
spores enter through a cut in the skin of a person handling contami-
4 See Document 269.
