942  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
14. The Flag
In addition to the items of discussion described above, it is believed 
that mention should be made of the Panamanian request that the 
United States fly its flag in the Zone. A decision on the request has been 
delayed as a result of congressional opposition. Because of the negative 
attitude of the House of Representatives and the reported strong pos-
sibility of the Gross Amendment being included in the Department of 
Commerce appropriations bill,6 it is not recommended that steps be taken to 
fly the Panamanian flag in the Zone before more educational work can be done 
with Congress. Governor Potter’s precedent of March 1 in displaying 
ceremonial Panamanian flags received no unfavorable comment from 
Congress which leads to the belief some of the “sting“ of this issue may 
have been drawn. The House Foreign Affairs Committee as yet has not 
made public its attitude toward flying the Panamanian flag.
15. Gorgas Hospital Plan
The President wrote to Under Secretary Dillion on March 107 pass-
ing on an idea he had received from Mr. Ralph Cake, a director of the 
Panama Canal Company, that the facilities of Gorgas Hospital in the 
Canal Zone be used for a large scale training program (1000 trainees per 
annum) for the benefit and advancement of medical science in Latin 
America. The President asked for Mr. Dillon’s comments in time for 
the March 21 meeting on Panama.8 We found that some preliminary 
work had been done several months ago and U/MSC has prepared 
a reply which states that the concept of such a program has struck a 
receptive note in the Department and would have a beneficial impact 
on our overall Latin American relations. ARA believes that the concept 
is much broader in scope and therefore should not be considered solely 
in the context of United States-Panama relations.
6 For the text of the Department of Commerce and Related Agencies Appropriation 
Act of 1961 (Public Law 86-451), enacted on May 13, 1960, see 74 Stat. 93. The text of the 
Gross Amendment read as follows: “Provided further”, That no part of any appropriation 
contained in title II of this Act shall be used to construct a flagpole, platform, or any other 
device for the purpose of displaying the flag of Panama in the Canal Zone, the sovereign 
control of which is vested in the United States Government by virtue of long standing 
treaty.”
7 Not printed; the record copy of the President’s letter to the Under Secretary of 
State is in the Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary Records, “Panama.”
8 In a memorandum dated March 20, Under Secretary of State Dillon informed the 
President that he had requested a prompt study of the feasibility of the training program 
but recommended that since the survey’s conclusions would be unavailable for review at 
the time of the meeting on March 21, the President should postpone making a final deter-
mination on the proposal until after the completion of the feasibility study. (Eisenhower 
Library, Whitman File, Dulles-Herter Series)
