1028 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 251. National Intelligence Estimate1 NIE 11–5–60 Washington, May 3, 1960 SOVIET CAPABILITIES IN GUIDED MISSILES AND SPACE VEHICLES THE PROBLEM To estimate Soviet capabilities and probable programs for the development of guided missiles, and the major performance character­ istics and dates of operational availability of such missiles. In addition, to estimate the technical capabilities of the Soviets in space, including the earliest possible dates of achievement of important future space ventures. (The period covered runs through about 1965, except where otherwise stated.) NOTE This estimate entirely supersedes the Summary and Conclusions of NIE 11–5–59, dated 3 November 1959, and the Memorandum to Holders of NIE 11–5–59, dated 19 January 1960. In addition, it updates and should be used in conjunction with the Discussion in NIE 11–5–59, pertinent paragraphs of which are cross-­referenced at the beginning of each section in this estimate. Annexes to this estimate entirely supersede the following portions of NIE 11–5–59: Annex A supersedes Table 3 of Section VIII (Possible Soviet Space Development Program); Annex B supersedes Section IX (Summary Tables). THE ESTIMATE 1. During the last six months we have acquired new evidence on Soviet guided missile capabilities and programs, generally confirming progress along the lines indicated in NIE 11–5–59 and in some cases resulting in refinement or modification of our estimates. Our princi­ pal acquisitions relate to: (a) Soviet ICBM characteristics and contin­ ued test-­firing activities; (b) characteristics and deployment of Soviet surface-­to-­air missiles; (c) Soviet surface ships for missile launching; and (d) Soviet research and development in cruise-­type surface-­to-­ surface systems. Despite this improvement in our knowledge of some Soviet missile programs, serious gaps in our information still exist, especially regarding Soviet ballistic missile production and concepts of deployment, research and development on second generation ICBMs 1 Source: “Soviet Capabilities in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles.” Top Secret. 21 pp. DOS, INR–NIE Files.
