1978 307 In both cases, under current policy sufficient weapons will be allocated to destroy Target 1 (recovery resources), before they are allocated, with decreasing emphasis, to the other targets in the order indicated. The paper makes the point that this order of priorities applies only to the allocation of weapons, not to the temporal order in which the targets might be attacked. It does, however, also seriously question the current emphasis on targeting recovery resources. I would underwrite that concern in spades. The high priority currently given recovery resources surely puts the cart before the horse. If we should get into a general nuclear war, the first priority has to be the destruction of those enemy forces which have the capability to do serious damage to ourselves and our allies. We ought to take every measure we can to protect ourselves so that we survive in the best possible shape before we begin trying to prevent our opponent from recovering after the war. Recognizing that the characteristics of our weapons may limit the number we wish to direct towards military targets, nonetheless, it would still make much more sense to reorder the priorities as indicated in the third column of Table 1, so as to give top priority to enemy nuclear forces and C3, while relegating recovery resources to a residual fourth place.8 8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left margin next to this paragraph and wrote below it: “Who strikes first?” 72. Memorandum From Samuel Huntington of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, August 2, 1978 SUBJECT PRC Meeting on Civil Defense You should read the Summary for a quick survey of the major issues and options. This memo covers some of the politics and arguments lying behind them. The Agenda Paper sets forth three topics for discussion. 1 Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Deputy, Meetings File, Box 7, PRC Meeting: 8/3/78. Secret. The PRC met on August 3 to discuss PRM/NSC–32.
