810 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II nomic and Business Affairs Julius Katz noted that Bourne’s March 17 draft message “contains a number of unrealistic or controversial proposals,” and added that it “is important that the Department clear the final version.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780068–0745) Katz also provided Cooper with a copy of the Department of State’s response to Bourne’s draft, prepared by Frederick McEldowney of the Food Policy Division, Office of Food Policies and Programs, International Resources and Food Policy, Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs, which recommended that Bourne redraft the message with the Department’s assistance. (Undated Department of State Comments on Draft Message to Congress; Draft Charter and Executive Order to the Commission on Domestic and International Hunger and Malnutrition; ibid.) Tarnoff had sent the Department’s comments to Bourne under cover of an undated memorandum, which McEldowney had drafted on April 4. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780067–1963) Cooper, in an April 11 memorandum to Bourne, referenced the Department of State’s proposed changes and commented: “The subject matter of the Working Group’s paper is obviously important and the issues associated with it are being dealt with in several fora such as the UN Overview Mechanism, the UNCTAD, and the MTN.” Cooper continued, “Because these issues bear on many important aspects of foreign economic policy—and the current draft contains major changes in them—it is vital that the Department be permitted to clear the final paper which goes forward to the President. On at least two previous instances we were told we would have the opportunity to clear on such messages, but papers went forward to the President without our having had an opportunity to review them. If there are any difficulties in reshaping the paper along the lines suggested in Tarnoff’s memorandum, please let me know.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780067–1962) Bourne subsequently circulated a revised draft at the end of May. The Department of State’s response to this draft, which Deputy Executive Secretary of the Department of State David Anderson sent to Bourne on June 6, is in the National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780099–0004. In a June 21 memorandum to Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Charles William Maynes, Paul Brynes, Agency Director for Agriculture in the Bureau of International Organization Affairs, discussed the most recent version of the proposed message to Congress: “The latest draft message to Congress on World Hunger (late May) was on the surface a vast improvement over earlier drafts. It had, however, very little revolutionary substance, very few bold new thoughts. Previous drafts were extremely poor but at State’s insistence the im-
