252 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I We see the following agenda: —Soviet policy in the Middle East is a test of whether we can work together to promote the general international objective of building a lasting peace, or whether the USSR will be bound by the narrower national interests of maintaining its alignment with the most radical elements of Arab politics.8 —We will continue to work for a Geneva conference, but the question is whether the Soviet Union will use its influence to create the necessary preconditions—both procedurally and substantively—or simply try to isolate Israel while fueling an arms race. —Soviet behavior thus far raises some serious questions for us. Similarly, we are puzzled by Soviet policy in Africa: —The US has taken the lead in trying to arrange a peaceful settlement in Southern Africa—but we have had little support from the USSR—indeed, we have mainly heard criticism.9 —Both countries should have learned lessons from Vietnam and Angola that involvement of the two strongest powers in explosive regions turning regional conflicts into confrontations can only lead to disasters. 3. Arms Control The US has taken the initiative in almost every area of arms control, in SALT, the test ban, and the Indian Ocean, proposals for discussing ban on interference with satellites, and discussing civil defense. —Constant criticism from the Soviet Union suggests to us that the Soviet Union is more interested in making propaganda points than negotiating: the campaign against our SALT proposals and the neutron bomb are cases in point. Nevertheless, we are now prepared to move to a broad front: —We will continue to press for an end to all nuclear explosions as soon as possible; the Soviets have only raised political conditions. If we want to demonstrate a genuine interest in halting proliferation of nuclear weapons and reducing the threat of war, then a comprehensive ban without political conditions, or exceptions for peaceful tests, is an issue where immediate progress is possible. We do not even rule out a temporary cessation of all testing to give the negotiation a momentum. It is now up to the Soviet side. 8 In the right-hand margin slightly above this paragraph, the President wrote: “Mid E–SU coop?” 9 Immediately below this point, the President wrote: “S Africa–SU Coop?”
