252
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We see the following agenda:
—Soviet policy in the Middle East is a test of whether we can work
together to promote the general international objective of building a
lasting peace, or whether the USSR will be bound by the narrower na-
tional interests of maintaining its alignment with the most radical ele-
ments of Arab politics.8
—We will continue to work for a Geneva conference, but the ques-
tion is whether the Soviet Union will use its influence to create the nec-
essary
preconditions—both
procedurally
and
substantively—or
simply try to isolate Israel while fueling an arms race.
—Soviet behavior thus far raises some serious questions for us.
Similarly, we are puzzled by Soviet policy in Africa:
—The US has taken the lead in trying to arrange a peaceful settle-
ment in Southern Africa—but we have had little support from the
USSR—indeed, we have mainly heard criticism.9
—Both countries should have learned lessons from Vietnam and
Angola that involvement of the two strongest powers in explosive re-
gions turning regional conflicts into confrontations can only lead to
disasters.
3. Arms Control
The US has taken the initiative in almost every area of arms con-
trol, in SALT, the test ban, and the Indian Ocean, proposals for dis-
cussing ban on interference with satellites, and discussing civil defense.
—Constant criticism from the Soviet Union suggests to us that the
Soviet Union is more interested in making propaganda points than ne-
gotiating: the campaign against our SALT proposals and the neutron
bomb are cases in point.
Nevertheless, we are now prepared to move to a broad front:
—We will continue to press for an end to all nuclear explosions as
soon as possible; the Soviets have only raised political conditions. If we
want to demonstrate a genuine interest in halting proliferation of nu-
clear weapons and reducing the threat of war, then a comprehensive
ban without political conditions, or exceptions for peaceful tests, is an
issue where immediate progress is possible. We do not even rule out a
temporary cessation of all testing to give the negotiation a momentum.
It is now up to the Soviet side.
8 In the right-hand margin slightly above this paragraph, the President wrote: “Mid
E–SU coop?”
9 Immediately below this point, the President wrote: “S Africa–SU Coop?”
