62
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
3. Regarding economic assistance, Newsom said the U.S. hopes to
continue its long-time help for the development of Afghanistan. He
noted legislative restrictions on aid to countries which are determined
to be Communist and to countries which do not respect human rights
as well as importance to our assistance programs of narcotics control
and projects meeting basic human needs. There would be questions in
Congress about continuing U.S. assistance to Afghanistan and we
would have to be prepared to defend our projects. U.S. provides sup-
port to IFIs which sponsor large infrastructure projects. U.S. willing
to pursue its assistance programs in Afghanistan provided USAID
personnel are treated the same as others in terms of access to govern-
ment, travel and general support. If GOA desires, U.S. is sympathetic
to continuing its assistance in Helmand River Valley and could go
forward with $3.8 million for this project. Newsom said U.S. is willing
to discuss other projects in agriculture, health and education and noted
possibility wheat project in Baghlan Province in northern Afghanistan.
IMET and Fulbright program also mentioned.
4. Major elements of DRA foreign policy: All three GOA leaders
stressed Afghanistan’s independence and its desire for friendly
relations with all states, particularly the Soviet Union and the U.S.
and Afghanistan’s immediate neighbors. Taraki said Afghanistan will
follow policy of genuine non-alignment although this does not mean
GOA will be silent on important international issues nor will it fail to
react to “attack” from any quarter. At same time, Afghanistan has long
history of independence and will not rpt not become subservient to
any country nor allow any nation to interfere in internal affairs of
Afghanistan. No country will be allowed to station troops in Afghani-
stan. Dost and Amin assured Newsom that Afghan revolution was
internal event and that even Soviets were taken by surprise. GOA
would be non-aligned and its long history of independence from
foreign domination was example for other Asian countries. For its
development programs, Afghanistan looks forward to receiving assist-
ance from its friends abroad, especially the Soviet Union and the U.S.
5. Relations with U.S.: Taraki and others expressed genuine interest
in continued friendly relations with U.S. (it was noted that three mem-
bers of DRA Cabinet are Columbia University graduates). On assist-
ance, Taraki repeated preference for commitment of large Soviet-style
lump sum, commitment from which GOA could draw for projects
of its choice. However, he indicated understanding of congressional
appropriation process and asked for list of areas in which U.S. could
assist so that GOA could compare with its requirements under five-
year-plan now being prepared. Taraki said he would instruct his people
to discuss details of aid program with Embassy Kabul. Taraki appeared
uninformed on IMET program and said he would ask Minister of
