Afghanistan 129 Cons: Deepens U.S. involvement in the conflict. Possibilities of plausible denial are decreased. May provoke vigorous Soviet countermeasures. 7. Unconventional Warfare Support—Phase II Train 65 Afghan resistance cadre as guerrilla warfare instructors. Skills taught will include: small arms, mortar and recoilless rifles, demolitions, ambushes, raids, small unit tactics, night operations, land navigation, caching, air reception, psychological operations, mobile warfare, night movement, tactical communications, and intelligence collection. Selected members of the groups will be trained in CW communications and others will be trained in anti-air and anti-armor weapons. The training would take 10–12 weeks [1 line not declassified]. Costs: [amount not declassified] (FY 1979–80) Pros: Same as Option 6 Cons: Same as Option 6 8. Unconventional Warfare Support—Phase III Provide resistance groups with supplies of arms and demolitions.3 Build up arms stocks in Afghan resistance base and safe areas. Continue Phase II training, employing 15 Afghan instructors selected from the Phase II training course. Develop underground resistance support within the Afghanistan population through the cadres trained in Phases I and II. Arrange air support for delivery of arms and other supplies. Five thousand men would be supported in this Phase over a 4–6 month period, [1 line not declassified]. Costs: [amount not declassified] —Ordnance, [1½ lines not declassified] [amount not declassified] —5 STOL aircraft [1½ lines not declassified] [amount not declassified] —Personnel [amount not declassified] —(FY 1980–81) Pros: Same as Option 6 Cons: Same as Option 6 9. Unconventional Warfare Support—Phase IV Commence coordinated resistance operations in Afghanistan. Expand areas of population and resistance control. Continue training 3 According to an NSA intercept, the first report found to reach U.S. officials on Afghan insurgents’ success in obtaining foreign arms came on November 13, 1978 [text and less than 1 line not declassified]. The intercept relayed that “rebels in Eastern Afghanistan have succeeded in obtaining Chinese weapons, either from Pakistan or the PRC, and communications between the area and Kabul are cut off.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, USSR in Afghanistan (1978))
