1955 195 proposal. Therefore its bargaining value is correspondingly reduced. Thus their desire to get to item two is probably principal lever which would move them towards accepting our position. Effectiveness lever difficult estimate and Wang may be doing good job dissimulation. However I have feeling their desire get to item two still far from strong enough to overcome their very strong reluctance give up their posi­ tion to degree that would be required to give advance commitment on time limit for release remaining Americans. Believe it would be mistake to interpret Wang’s flexibility on wording “agreed announcement” as any indication softening their position on substantive issue remaining Americans. While at moment risk may not seem great I continue be concerned that there could at any time be development which would further delay release those Americans whose release can now be obtained. Gowen 154. Telegram 661 from Geneva1 Geneva, August 31, 1955, 8 p.m. 661. From Johnson. 1. I opened 12th meeting today by handing Wang revised draft agreed announcement incorporating changes Deptel 654. Full text my remarks and draft as given Wang being forwarded air pouch tomorrow. 2. In my remarks I noted changes from and similarities to his August 25 draft noting (a) I had added “will further adopt appropriate measures” to paragraph 1 US section this to be applicable to authoriza­ tion to be given GOI; (b) use of “will authorize” in paragraphs 2; (c) res­ toration “in any such case” in paragraph 2(A) to make clear functions to be performed only with regard to those who desire return; (d) deletion “on behalf of government of” paragraphs 2(B) on grounds assistance to Americans largely from private sources. PRC could make whatever arrangements it wished with GOI; and (e) suggestion restoration July 25 language in introductory para. 3. I concluded that on important question time his phrase “as soon as possible” not satisfactory and urged acceptance “promptly” instead. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–3155. Confidential.
