Romania
653
him to convey, through the Secretary, greetings of friendship to Presi-
dent Carter and best wishes for health and success. Ceausescu recalled
with pleasure his most recent visit to the United States. Andrei gave
the Secretary a book, on behalf of Ceausescu, commemorating the visit.
The Secretary expressed appreciation and said the President continues
to talk about his meetings with President Ceausescu and their impor-
tance for relations between the two countries. The President strongly
believes that it was a most positive and constructive visit. He had asked
that his own warmest regards be conveyed to President Ceausescu.
3. Bilateral relations—Andrei said that, in a meeting with President
Ceausescu just before leaving for the UNGA, he had directed Andrei
to make clear that he intends to carry out all of the understandings
reached during his US visit both with respect to bilateral cooperation
and to international issues. Ceausescu, Andrei said, attaches great
importance to good US-Romanian relations and to their further devel-
opment. Based on Ceausescu’s desire to create the best conditions for
development of relations and to eliminate matters not consistent with
this approach, Andrei said, he wished to present several issues in which
he would request our cooperation in eliminating. He would talk openly
as the Secretary and the President had talked with President Ceausescu
during his visit. Andrei said the two countries should not allow certain
issues to cast a shadow over our good bilateral relations. President
Ceausescu was convinced that President Carter would appreciate the
constructive manner in which these matters were being raised.
4. The Pacepa case—To be frank, Andrei said, the fact that the US
Government has given the right of entry and stay to Pacepa has created
certain tensions, especially in light of the personal, friendly relations
established earlier between the two Presidents. It was GOR’s view,
based on its information, that Pacepa had worked for the CIA for
several years. However, Andrei said, the US had a different view on
this question. Romania requested that the US cease all types of such
activities vis-a-vis Romania. It was not through such covert actions,
Andrei said, that good bilateral relations had developed. Nor was it
through covert activities that Romania had contributed to establish-
ment of US–PRC relations, to the negotiations to end the Vietnam war,
to direct contacts between Begin and Sadat and to a general resolution
of the Middle East conflict. Andrei said he was persuaded that the
Secretary understood these considerations.
5. The Secretary, in response, said the US understands Romania’s
concerns regarding the Pacepa case. President Carter believes strongly
that we must now put this matter behind us. Also, the Secretary said,
he wished to reiterate his strong interest and that of the President in
continuing the excellent relations which had developed between the
US and Romania. With regard to the Minister’s reference to cooperation
