National Security Policy  541
on major issues. Nevertheless, they have already committed themselves 
considerably, and we believe that the crisis may be severe, with consider­
able chance of miscalculation by one or both sides. We do not believe that 
the Soviets intend to modify the main lines of their policy on the German 
problem as a whole, but will continue to insist on maintaining the pres­
ent division of Germany. They regard the preservation of Communist 
control in East Germany as essential to the maintenance of Communist 
power in Poland and Eastern Europe as a whole. They hope to consol­
idate their control of that area and to force Western recognition of the 
legitimacy and permanence of the Communist regimes there.
13. Soviet disarmament policy, which has at times shown some 
flexibility, is designed at a minimum to earn credit for the USSR as 
the leading proponent of “peace.” Actual Soviet proposals are aimed 
mainly at the withdrawal of US military power from Western Europe 
and other bases, and also at discrediting and inhibiting US reliance 
on nuclear weapons. While it is possible that the USSR would accept 
some limitations on its own military posture in order to further these 
objectives, the Soviets would almost certainly not consent to any very 
extensive scheme for mutually inspected disarmament. We believe that 
there is little likelihood that the Soviets will desire a broad disarma­
ment agreement strongly enough to move their policy significantly in 
the direction of the positions now held by the Western Powers.
Intra-Bloc Relations
14. In the last year a major effort has been undertaken to consol­
idate the unity of Bloc states. The conference of Communist parties 
in November 1957 launched the so-­called antirevisionist campaign in 
order to curb deviationist tendencies which threatened in 1956 to elim­
inate Soviet influence from Poland and Hungary. The latter regime is 
again effectively under Moscow’s control and the Gomulka govern­
ment in Poland, while still preserving Party autonomy and some degree 
of independence in its internal policy, is showing itself more deferen­
tial to Soviet guidance. As compared with Stalin’s methods, Moscow’s 
authority in the Satellites will continue to be exercised discreetly out 
of deference to national sensitivities. In the very long run, we believe 
there will be a tendency for direct Soviet control over these states to 
be diluted. Popular dissatisfaction will remain widespread in Eastern 
Europe, but we believe that the recurrence of popular revolt or of an 
attempt by a Satellite Communist Party to defy Moscow on vital issues 
is unlikely at least over the next few years.
15. The scale of China’s power and the fact that the Chinese 
Communist Party has long been organizationally independent of the 
USSR has made the Sino-Soviet relationship more nearly one of equal­
ity. The parallelism of material, strategic, and ideological interests will 
continue to weigh decisively in favor of cementing the alliance of the
