Afghanistan
211
a. It would reassure the Saudis of the USG’s interest in resisting
the spread of communism in the Middle East;
b. It could develop a precedent for using the Saudis as an intermedi-
ary, concealing U.S. involvement, to support friendly political elements
or other covert assets elsewhere in the area.
5. The lack of radios to coordinate their activities has placed the
insurgents at a tactical disadvantage vis-a`-vis the DRA. It compels the
insurgents to operate on a piece-meal, local basis, and consequently the
DRA is able to deal with their raids one at a time, bringing preponderant
strength to bear on the area of the insurgent attack. Coordinated simul-
taneous attacks in several areas would force the DRA to stretch its
forces much more thinly in dealing with these attacks and significantly
improve insurgent chances of success. Radios would also permit rapid
transmission of intelligence on DRA activities from one insurgent unit
to another, and could also be used to spread propaganda.
6. To establish a basic communications net for the insurgents, we
would provide 16 transceivers with power supply and related equip-
ment: 12 to serve as active units, and four to be held for spare parts;
We would also provide 100 walkie-talkies for tactical use. All equip-
ment would be of foreign manufacture or sterile U.S.-made equipment.
Risk: The provision of foreign-made (or marked) radio equipment
should involve relatively little risk of exposure.
Cost: 16 transceivers and related equipment (including delivery)
100 Walkie-talkies [amount not declassified]
[amount not declassified]
Tab G7
Options 3-a, 3-b, and 3-c
Washington, undated
Option No. 3-a
Broker Saudi agreement to pay for munitions for the insurgents, with the
Pakistanis actually making the purchases abroad
1. Discussion: The Saudis, once made aware of our willingness
to expend significant sums of money aiding the insurgency (See TABS
C & D), could be asked to provide funds for use by the Pakistanis to
purchase munitions. If the Saudis are amenable to this, we could
7 Secret; Sensitive.
