Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Negev—with speeches by Israeli President Navon, the Mayor of Beersheva,6 Begin, and two by Sadat. The common themes of peace and normal relations flowed through all of the speeches. However, President Navon, who undoubtedly thought he was doing a good thing by giving his speech in excellent Arabic, used an Arabic word which Sadat heard as meaning “give”; (i.e. “giving the Sinai back to Egypt”). This caused Sadat to drop whatever prepared text he may have had and to extemporize quite simply but eloquently. His main points were that security does not lie in land but in a relationship of friendship and that peace can not come unless there is respect for the land of others. He almost explicitly said that sovereignty over the occupied lands belongs to the Arabs and that Israel is not giving back the land but simply restoring the appropriate exercise of Arab sovereignty in it. However, Monday’s Jerusalem Post reports that Navon had showed privately afterwards his actual text and the similarly sounding word in Arabic meant “returned”. The Post says Sadat and Navon got on well and the misunderstanding was put to rest. Later at an assembly at the university it was Sadat’s turn to offend. He commented that the Arabs had taken care of the Jews through their centuries of life in the Middle East. And Begin, in an otherwise temporate speech at the university, brought together in one compact paragraph virtually every negative statement he has ever made about the “so-called PLO.” President Tekoah, of the university, announced the university’s decision to establish a multimillion dollar fund for research in areas related to desert development, invited Egyptian scholars to participate and to join in the management of the fund. While claiming substantial achievements for Israel in this area, he graciously said that Israel has much to learn from Egypt and his remarks were an elevated point in the day’s proceedings. In short, all of the speakers were well-intentioned and for the most part managed not to sour the atmosphere but, one way or another, introduced enough sore points to keep the course from being completely smooth. 8. The day’s several meetings—from the Rest House at El Arish to the 1-hour inaugural flight aboard Sadat’s aircraft—seemed to all of us to enhance measurably the relationships between the two sides at all levels. From what we can tell, a good deal of useful business was done, although Secretary Vance will have to fill in some of the details in the following: —The Secretary and Sadat were alone for a time before Begin arrived, and the Secretary intended to suggest that Sadat talk to Begin about the problems for the peace process caused by some Israeli actions, such as new settlements, the crackdown in the West Bank, and the bombings in Lebanon. 6 Eliyahu Nawi.
