Chapter 1, 1988 13 4. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, September 23, 1988, 8–9 a.m. PARTICIPANTS 1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat, FAIM/IS Records, Lot 89D250, Miscellaneous Papers of George Shultz and Charles Hill, Personnel Sensitive ’86. Secret. Drafted by Zarechnak. The meeting took place in the Vice President’s Residence. For the memoranda of conversation of Shevardnadze’s September 22–23 meetings with Shultz and Reagan, see Foreign Relations, 1981–1988, vol. VI, Soviet Union, October 1986–January 1989, Documents 170–177. U.S. Vice President Bush Secretary Shultz Dr. Zarechnak, interpreter U.S.S.R. Foreign Minister Shevardnadze Amb. Bessmertmykh P. Palaznchenko The Vice President began the conversation by telling Foreign Minister Shevardnadze that he appreciated his coming to see him in spite of his busy schedule. Secretary Shultz was the expert on all of the issues which were being discussed with the Foreign Minister, so the Vice President wished to make a few remarks from the heart about U.S. policy and its future, without dwelling in detail on the issues which were being covered between the Secretary of State and the Foreign Minister. The Vice President indicated that he did not want to use this meeting for political purposes, or to say, directly or indirectly, that it would affect the political race. Perhaps at the end of the meeting they could discuss what they would say to the press. But first, he wished to give the Foreign Minister equal time. Shevardnadze said that he first of all wished to express best wishes from General Secretary Gorbachev. Just recently Shevardnadze and Secretary Shultz had spoken about the present state of U.S.-Soviet relations and had noted that during the past three or three and a half years a unique relationship had developed compared to what it had been in the past. Shevardnadze continued that he agreed with the Vice President that they ought not to go into specific issues, specially in view of the fact that the Vice President had already participated in the establishment of the new directions and the new atmosphere of U.S.- Soviet relations and of the international political climate as a whole. The Vice President noted that he would like very much to ask Shevardnadze to convey to General Secretary Gorbachev and to others his convictions that the U.S.- Soviet relationship was on a sound basis and moving in right direction, and that if he were elected President, he would continue the relationship on the basis of the four pillars that
