Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 6. With regard to the arc of instability along the Indian Ocean, we need to respond collectively, and that is a fitting subject for a special discussion in Guadeloupe. In the meantime, we may have to take some steps to convince the Soviets that we will back our friends in Iran, come what may. The disintegration of Iran, with Iran repeating the experience of Afghanistan, would be the most massive American defeat since the beginning of the Cold War, overshadowing in its real consequences the setback in Vietnam. (S) 7. It means, finally, making a basic decision on whether we will seek a breakthrough to peace in the Middle East sometime in the first half of 1979. The West Europeans can help us, if you choose to push hard, and we should make an early decision on this matter. I fear that without such an effort, the Middle East will become increasingly radicalized as it accommodates itself to the reality of U.S. inability to obtain a wider settlement and perhaps also to provide protection to the region from the Soviets. There is a subtle interaction between the problem of Iran, Turkey, and the Middle East, and a United States lead on these issues is quite necessary. You have been pointing in the right direction, and we should now mobilize our allies for more overt support on behalf of our efforts. These efforts, moreover, should be fitted into the larger framework which I have sketched out above. (S) If you agree, some comments to that effect at Guadeloupe might provide your colleagues with the needed feeling that the United States has historical direction. If you do not agree, some alternative statement would still be desirable, for in either case the yearning for American leadership must somehow be met. (S) 2. Facts Trends in World Opinion Toward the U.S. and USSR Newly analyzed evidence on foreign opinion toward the U.S. and the USSR indicates that adverse trends, dating back nearly two decades, have been reversed in the last several years. From the early 1960s until the mid 1970s, sympathy for America was eroded by Vietnam and Watergate, while distrust of the Soviet Union was eroded by detente. As a result, the earlier favorable gap between Soviet and American standing in the eyes of European and Japanese publics narrowed dramatically. More recently, however, scattered but quite consistent polling results suggest that U.S. standing is beginning to recover, though it remains below the highs of the early 1960s, while Soviet standing by contrast has plummeted to depths unequalled in nearly two decades. (U) The changes now apparently underway in Europe and Japan suggest that the U.S. is recapturing the political-ideological initiative that had slipped to the Soviets during the 1960s. In a parallel development,
