1090 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI denuclearized by the new Canal Treaty (except for transit rights) and notes that, through this treaty, Panama has accepted transit rights. 8. France. Gros says he has “unofficial information” that the French may announce their intent to sign Protocol I during the SSOD. 9. USSR. Gros believes there are “indications” of a change of position on the part of the Soviets toward Protocol II. When Lopez Portillo visits Moscow in mid-May, he will raise the question with the USSR on behalf of all of Latin America. The timing will also nearly coincide with the SSOD in New York. Thus, while there is no assurance, Gros thinks a favorable Soviet announcement is “very possible.” He added that the Soviet Ambassador told him April 20 that there were “possible signs” of a change of Soviet attitude. Thompson 435. Memorandum From Robert Pastor of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, April 28, 1978 SUBJECT Your Question About the Treaty of Tlatelolco I have obtained the relevant portion of Brezhnev’s statement2 on signing Tlatelolco, and it does not appear that he intends to sign it with any reservations—at least he did not refer to any reservations in that statement. The statement follows: In accordance with its principled line of reducing the threat of nuclear war, the Soviet Union has also adopted a decision to become a party in a relevant form to the International Treaty on Banning Nuclear Weapons in Latin America. Thus we, like the other states possessing nuclear weapons, will take upon ourselves the obligation not to help in the acquisition of nuclear arms by Latin American states, and also not to use such weapons against the states that are parties to the treaty. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 45, Latin America, 12/77–7/78. No classification marking. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Hunter and Tuchman. 2 See “Address by President Brezhnev [Extract],” April 25, 1978, in Documents on Disarmament, 1978, pp. 256–258.
