826 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II As you know, analyzing the causes of world hunger and malnutrition and finding solutions to these often intractable problems is no easy task. Both the private and public sectors in our country and in other countries have been making considerable efforts in the post-World War II period to resolve these problems. Progress has been made but, worldwide, the number of hungry and malnourished is growing. Obviously, more needs to be done and I am pleased you and the members of your Commission will assist in this effort. Some of the most important issues which I believe the Commission should address are the following: —Increasing food production worldwide, but particularly in food deficit developing countries. Developing country food production increases in recent years have exceeded the 4 percent target agreed to for the United Nations Second Development Decade. This favorable performance, however, is primarily attributable to favorable weather conditions, rather than to basic underlying reforms having been made in the food and agriculture sector. Inadequate economic and political policies and conditions still prevent sustained food output increases in many developing countries, and in addition reduce private and public investment in the agricultural sector. Other constraints to expanded food output in developing countries must also be overcome. Examples of these are inadequate management and shortage of trained manpower, capital shortages, inadequate and inappropriate technology, substantial post-harvest losses due to inadequate storage facilities, and productivity losses due to people debilitated by hunger and disease. —Dealing effectively with problems of under-consumption and malnutrition. Though there is at present no widespread famine in the world, many millions of people (estimates range between 400 million and one billion) do not have an adequately nutritious diet. Underlying this problem is the issue of effective demand among groups of people within individual countries. We have learned that economic growth and prosperity in a given country does not necessarily produce additional benefits including access to necessary food supplies for the poorer members of society. While the problem is focused in the poorer developing countries, it is worldwide in scope. —Feeding the hungry and malnourished requires significantly improved food distribution systems both among countries and within the poorer developing nations. The food crisis of 1972–74 evidenced many instances of localized famine in countries and regions where adequate food supplies were available, but inadequate transport systems made it impossible to deliver the food where it was needed most. Improved distribution systems also involve ensuring a better local and regional food supply/demand balance.
