848
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
July 9, when it became evident that the Tudeh Party had information
of the plot’s existence. The plot unraveled when the initial attack,
moved from Tehran to Hamadan, resulted in premature gunfire. (Intel-
ligence Information Cable, [document number not declassified], August
14; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle
East File, Box 36, Subject File, Iran Cables & Press, 8/80)
In a July 10 memorandum, Gary Sick of the National Security
Council Staff wrote David Aaron, the President’s Deputy Assistant for
National Security Affairs, that the Iranians had been tracking the plot
for about a month, [less than 1 line not declassified]. Sick had reservations
about the plot, and expressed his concern about the hostages. He felt
that “the ominous part is the drum fire of propaganda lately associating
various plots and conspiracies with the U.S.—and particularly with
the hostages. The campaign appears to be directed—by design or coinci-
dence—towards laying the justification for trials.” (Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 65, Outside
the System File, Iran Non-Meetings Hostage Crisis 4/80–11/80)
In Iran, the government moved on a variety of fronts. Public state-
ments targeted the United States and the hostages. President Abol
Hassan Bani-Sadr publicly announced that Iran had forestalled a coup
and accused the United States, Israel, and Iraq of being in league with
the conspirators. Two days later Khomeini accused the United States
and the Soviet Union of plotting a coup against him in an effort to
crush his Islamic movement. (“17 Iran officers accused of coup tied to
U.S., Russ,” Chicago Tribune, July 12, 1980, page S2) Soon thereafter, a
member of the Revolutionary Council stated that the conspirators had
planned to free the U.S. hostages. (Doyle McManus, “Iran Arrests 100
Officers in Purge of Armed Forces,” Los Angeles Times, July 13, 1980,
page OC1)
More concretely, Iran arrested two former generals, who confessed
to the plot, their direct links to Bakhtiar, and the bombing targets. More
than 500 members of the armed forces were subsequently arrested as
part of the plot, including 20 Air Force pilots. (Iran Sitrep No. 373, July
14; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle
East File, Box 33, Subject File, Iran 7/1/80–7/20/80) Activists unrelated
to the coup were also arrested in a wide crackdown. (Intelligence
Information Cable, [document number not declassified], August 14; Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box
36, Subject File, Iran Cables & Press, 8/80) Five leaders of the plot were
executed by firing squad. (“Iran Executes Five Accused of Plot Against
Regime,” New York Times, July 20, 1980, page 6)
In Paris, Bakhtiar escaped an assassination attempt, apparently
retribution for the intended coup. He told French radio that Iran had
sent professional killers to get him. Newspaper accounts noted that
