1957 1449 842. Letter from Martin to Clough1 London, November 19, 1957 Dear Ralph: I am writing in response to the Department’s telegram 3375 instructing me to investigate instruction in Chinese available at l’Ecole d’Interpretes at Geneva and Chinese tutors at Bern and Zurich, if any. On Thursday afternoon, November 14, Bob Ekvall and I interviewed. Mrs. Paul Chu, Chinese teacher at l’Ecole d’Interpretes, and on Friday morning I talked to Madame Piguet at the school itself, which is part of the University of Geneva. Late Friday afternoon I flew to Zurich hoping to talk to Dr. Peng, the Chinese language teacher there. Though I was disappointed to find that he had left town with his entire family for a few days, I was able to discuss the problem with our Consul General, who had been totally ignorant of what it was all about, and to suggest certain questions be put to Dr. Peng by the Consulate General immedi­ ately upon his return to Zurich. Both Ekvall and I were impressed with Mrs. Chu, the professor at l’Ecole d’Interpretes. Her kuo yu is spoken with a genuine Peiping accent and her English is fluent. Moreover, she claims to have had five years’ experience in teaching Chinese, two at Geneva and three at George Washington University in Washington, D.C., where she received her M.A. Mrs. Chu is very much interested in the problem of interpreting and has a good opinion of her own abilities to teach it, which, I should say on a first impression, is well-founded. She teaches two classes on Saturday morning at l’Ecole d’Interpretes, one in interpreting and one in advanced conversation. These are the only advanced Chinese courses taught at the school. They cost only 12 francs per term. Mrs. Chu would not commit herself to give private tutoring, although Ekvall and I judged that she probably would if presented with the actual opportunity. She felt that her two hours of instruction per week at the University would be sufficient for a good student to maintain his proficiency. While this may be somewhat optimistic, I personally doubt that one hour a day would be necessary in addition to the two hours on Saturday. If Dexter were to enroll in the two classes at the University, two or three hours per week of supplementary tutoring from Mrs. Chu would be more than adequate to meet his needs. Mrs. Chu indicated that she would charge 10 francs per hour for private tutoring. If Mrs. Chu is 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Official Use Only; Official–­Informal. Martin signed the original “Ed.” A copy was sent to Johnson in Prague.
