Human Rights —Country Specific Legislation. This often has more to do with the ideological bent of certain legislators than with concern for world-wide human rights. And it can limit our flexibility to offer gradual inducement to governments which are prepared to undertake gradual reforms. But Administration initiatives to remove the country specific legislation which now exists would be seen as a weakening of our human rights commitment. Our alternatives are to make a push early in the new Administration to remove all country specific legislation, or to leave present legislation in place (absent substantial human rights improvements in the specific countries) but resist new legislation of this type. The latter probably is more feasible on the Hill. —Legal mandate for the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance. A bill to this effect may well be introduced in the next Congress, and might require that security assistance also be considered by the Group. Our options would be to oppose such legislation, on the ground that the Executive Branch should be able to establish— and change—its internal, decision-making procedures; or support it because it is effective and because anything else might signal a weakening of our human rights commitment. This is not an important substantive issue; future Administrations could keep the same machinery but make very different human rights decisions. We should stay neutral. —Present legislation governing bilateral and multilateral aid and security assistance. This has been useful in reinforcing policies this Administration wanted to pursue. It has given us enough flexibility to tailor human rights efforts to be effective in differing situations, and to protect US security and economic interests. It could be even more important in forcing future Administrations at least to consider human rights factors in assistance decisions and to justify their decisions to interested parties on the Hill. We should resist any efforts either to weaken it or to make it more stringent.
