238 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Hodding Carter, Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs Joseph Twinam, notetaker Isa K. Sabbagh, interpreting Prince Fahd opened the meeting by referring to the rigors of present day diplomacy conducted by air travel. The Secretary noted that it must have been easier in the days of ship travel at the time of the Versailles conference.2 He said that except for Wilson’s involvement in Versailles, no American president has been longer involved in a diplomatic conference than was President Carter at Camp David. Fahd said that as difficult as Camp David must have been for those inside the camp, it was even harder on those outsiders like himself, since the insiders at least knew what was happening, while he could only guess. Fahd said that whatever the results, there was no denying that Camp David represents a good step forward which opens certain paths. The Secretary emphatically agreed and referred to the Congressional reception of the President’s report,3 which was unlike anything seen in the halls of Congress in decades. There was a spirit of joy and hope on both sides of the aisle, without regard to party affiliation. Fahd said he appreciated that a stalemate of many years was broken. He wished that all of the participants would heed Carter’s advice to refrain from making rash statements after the agreements had been reached. He continued that Saudi Arabia was greatly pleased by the Secretary’s visit, since it regards the United States as its greatest friend and always finds it useful to exchange views. The Secretary expressed appreciation at having been received on such short notice and asked if he could brief Fahd on the agreements. The Secretary said the President considered the results of Camp David so important that the President wanted him to come immediately to the area to brief Fahd and others and answer any questions. He appreciated Fahd’s suggestion that he go to Damascus. Fahd said he considered the Damascus visit a wise thing to do. King Khalid had sent a message to Assad urging calm and restraint. In the message the King sought to emphasize that President Carter from the beginning of the Administration had seriously and with much effort focused on the Middle East problem. The Saudis had advised Assad to bear with us and to give us a chance to move toward a common goal. 2 Reference is to the Paris Peace Conference, an international meeting convened in January 1919 at Versailles, just outside of Paris. The purpose of the meeting was to establish the terms of the peace after World War I. 3 See footnote 14, Document 64.
