138 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV both competition and cooperation, with the attendant risk of conflict as well as the opportunity for stabilizing US-Soviet relations. In that competition, military aspects aside, the United States continues to enjoy a number of critical advantages: it has a more creative technological and economic system, its political structure can adapt more easily to popular demands and relies on freely given popular support, and it is supported internationally by allies and friends who genuinely share similar aspirations. In contrast, though successfully acquiring military power matching that of the United States, the Soviet Union continues to face major internal economic and national difficulties, and externally it has few genuinely committed allies while lately suffering setbacks in its relations with China, parts of Africa, and India. In this situation I direct that US national strategy will be to take advantage of our relative advantages in economic strength, technological superiority and popular political support to: —Counterbalance, together with our allies and friends, by a combination of military forces, political efforts, and economic programs, Soviet military power and adverse influence in key areas, particularly Europe, the Middle East, and East Asia. —Compete politically with the Soviet Union by pursuing the basic American commitment to human rights and national independence. —Seek Soviet cooperation in resolving regional conflicts and reducing areas of tension that could lead to confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union. —Advance American security interests through negotiations with the Soviet Union of adequately verifiable arms control and disarmament agreements that enhance stability and curb arms competition. —Seek to involve the Soviet Union constructively in global activities, such as economic and social developments and peaceful non-­ strategic trade. To fulfill this national strategy, the United States will maintain an overall balance of military power between the United States and its allies on the one hand and the Soviet Union and its allies on the other at least as favorable as that that now exists. In this connection, the United States will fulfill its commitment to its NATO allies to raise the level of defense spending by approximately three percent per year in real terms along with our allies. To carry out US national strategy, I am also providing the following initial guidance regarding US military strategy, programs and policies. Strategic Force Objectives The purpose of US strategic forces is to deter a nuclear attack on the United States, upon our forces, our allies and others whose security is important to the United States and, if deterrence fails, to inflict
