723.2515/1638a: Telegram
[Document 231]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)
WASHINGTON, October 10, 1925—6 p.m.
61. You will please call immediately upon the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Chief of State and read to them the following statement:
“The Secretary of State of the United States of America has received reports
concerning conditions in the provinces of Tacna and Arica which have
described the obstacles that exist under present condition[s] to a free and fair
plebiscite, in view of the course of conduct of the local Chilean authorities.
It appears to be maintained that the Treaty of Ancon and the Award provide
that the territory of Tacna and Arica shall be left in the possession and under
the administrative authority of Chile pending a plebiscitary vote to the
contrary and this being the case the Peruvians could not be considered on the
same plebiscitary status as the Chileans.
Mr. Kellogg desires to point out that while Chile is entitled to the possession
of the territory in dispute pending the holding of a plebiscite, and while she
thus retains possession her administrative authority continues, the right of
Chile to continue her administrative authority pending the holding of a
plebiscite is no clearer than her duty with respect to the holding of the
plebiscite itself. Under the Treaty of Ancon which, as the Arbitrator held, was
still in effect, Chile no less than Peru was bound by the provisions for the
plebiscite. This provision manifestly implied a fair opportunity for a
plebiscite through the absence of coercion or intimidation which would
frustrate the purpose of a plebiscite. The fact that Chile has the right to
maintain administrative authority pending a plebiscite gives her no color or
[of] right to permit coercion or intimidation so as to destroy a fair opportunity
for a plebiscite, but on the contrary places upon her the responsibility of
exercising her administrative authority so as to provide such an opportunity
and to protect those who are entitled to vote from intimidation, fraud and
oppression. Indeed, Chile’s right to retain the possession of the territory in
dispute is bottomed upon her agreement for the plebiscite which necessarily
implies the use of her authority properly to safeguard it. This duty of Chile is
fundamental and underlies the Award and all proceedings under the Award
for the holding of the plebiscite.
