LXXXVI Summaries of Compilations Venezuela U.S. Relations With Venezuela Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents in the text. The overthrow of Venezuelan dictator Marcos Pérez Jiménez on January 23, 1958, ushered in a more hopeful period in Venezuelan politics. The United States, although it had maintained friendly relations with Venezuela during the Pérez period, swiftly recognized the new interim government on the grounds that it was in full control of the governmental machinery, enjoyed wide popular as well as military support, and had pledged to hold free elections as soon as possible. (VE–1) At the same time, the United States admitted Pérez in accord with its customary practice of receiving exiled Latin American leaders “in the absence of extraordinary circumstances,” just as Romulo Betancourt, a Pérez opponent and leader of the Acción Democrática party, had been admitted when Pérez took power. (VE–2) In elections held in December 1958, Betancourt won a near majority of the vote and took office as President of Venezuela in February 1959. The United States fundamentally approved of the Betancourt government. Support deepened as Betancourt gradually emerged as a leader of the anti-Communist left in Latin America, and thus potentially a solid counterweight to the steady leftward march of the Castro government, which took power less than 2 months before Betancourt’s inauguration in Venezuela. Nonetheless, there were sharp conflicts between the two nations over several issues, chief among them petroleum and the status of former President Pérez. One of the last acts of the interim government was to raise taxes on petroleum. This act had worldwide implications because it effectively exceeded the 50–50 split in revenues between a host country and international oil companies which had become the norm since the late 1940s. While the United States vigorously protested, neither the interim government nor Betancourt rescinded the action. (VE–16 through 19) In March 1959, President Eisenhower, by an Executive order, made mandatory a previously voluntary oil import control program. This action was the result of lowered worldwide demand for oil and was an attempt to protect the interests of U.S. domestic producers (VE–21) Although Venezuela did not like the action, it did not formally protest. (VE–22) Venezuelan patience was further strained when the United States, through a technicality, exempted Canada from the operation of the quotas. (VE–22, 26, 28) It was the U.S. view that this loophole had little actual deleterious effect on Venezuela, since increased shipment
