the Chinese draft and reconcile the differences between the Delegates
concerning the reference to the $90,000,000, but it developed that no
agreement could be reached and the sub-committee adjourned (see page 34
of Minutes of February 24, 1926, for Japanese draft resolution on
effectuating the Washington Treaty).
 
Technical Committee to Draw up a List of Luxuries, First Meeting,
February 25, 1926.
Pursuant to the desire of the subcommittee appointed by Committee II to
draft a resolution to levy the Washington surtaxes, the Committee of
Technical Advisers met on February 25, 1926, to draw up a list of luxuries
for submission to the sub-committee above mentioned. The Chinese
Technical Advisers submitted two tables, one giving the estimated revenues
to be derived from surtaxes shown in Yin 67 and the other the estimated
revenues on the basis of certain percentages (see pages 2 and 3 of Minutes
of February 25, 1926). Mr. Stewart of the British Technical staff inquired
what amount it would be expected the Washington surtaxes would produce.
He surmised, by a method of calculation based on luxuries listed in “A”,
“B” and “C”, that the amount would approximate $3,200,000. Mr. Perkins
read pertinent portions of the Washington Treaty and said that the matter of
arriving at what constituted a luxury rested entirely in the discretion of the
Conference. He suggested that the lists of “A”, “B” and “C” grade articles
should be taken as a tentative basis of discussion, with the understanding
that any Delegation could make a reservation, for good and substantial
reasons, on any particular item which they did not believe to be properly
placed. Mr. Perkins made it plain that the lists were purely tentative and
were not intended to have any bearing on or any connection with the
interim rates of surtaxes which were to be incorporated in the proposed new
treaty. The chairman remarked that according to Mr. Perkins’ suggestion,
“A”, “B” and “C” grades would yield $9,063,000, which answered Mr.
Stewart’s inquiry, and that grades “D”, “E”, “F” and “G” would yield
$23,456,000, making a total of $32,519,000 which could reasonably be
expected, if the figures submitted by the Chinese were correct. Mr.
Hornbeck suggested that the purpose of the meeting was to discuss the
