Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
567
Dr. DeBakey said that he had operated in 30 different countries in very
unusual circumstances, but that was the worst situation he had ever
encountered. Some or all of this was conveyed to the Shah by DeBakey,
and he quickly hardened against having the operation in Panama. This
probably stimulated the latest initiative to go to Egypt for the operation.
Meeting with Dr. DeBakey: In talking with Dr. DeBakey, we laid out
for him all of the concerns which we see. We told him that we shared
his interest in seeing that the Shah received good medical treatment,
and we had the additional responsibility of the lives of 53 Americans
being held in Iran. We tried to probe as to what new conditions—
improvements—would be required before he would be satisfied to
conduct the operation in Panama.
He talked very frankly and insisted that his comments be treated in total
confidence. I assured him they would be treated in confidence.
He said that the Shah is a very sick man and that his condition is
fragile. He said that his principal concern about Panama was not a
concern based on medical facilities, but on the larger questions of
authority and attitude. He said that the operation itself was not difficult
or particularly risky, but that complications often arose in the post-
operative period that could be serious and fatal. He said that someone
had to be in charge, and that he could not tolerate a situation in the
operating room or during the post-operative period when a decision he
had taken was undermined or reversed by well-meaning Panamanian
doctors. He said that he could operate in a tent with less risk than in
a situation where his authority was not clear and a general atmosphere
of hostility existed which might prejudice the care given his patient.
We asked if assurances were given by the Panamanians as to his
ultimate authority, would he be willing to do the operation in Panama.
He said that he would do the operation in Panama if he had to, but,
based on his experience there and the hostility directed toward him
by the medical staff, he would not believe or accept assurances if given
by the Panamanians.
He said that he thought the brief delay in the operation would
create a situation in Panama which would permit him to conduct the
operation there, but that his professional medical advice to the Shah
would have to be that he would be better off to go to Egypt or the
United States for the operation. We pressed him as to the degree of risk.
He said that the risk of death to the Shah in ideal medical circum-
stances was in the range of 5 percent. He said that if the operation was
conducted in the Panamanian hospital under the present circumstances,
the risk would increase to the range of 10 to 15 percent. We asked if
there were steps we could take to diminish that risk, and he said that
all we could do was to obtain assurances from the Panamanians that
he could trust.
