Dominican Republic 475 informed me that action requested per said memorandum was not in actual accord with that which had been contemplated by GODR, that inactivity was preferable to termination, and that Generalisimo expressed wish to discuss matter with me prior to any definite decision by either signatory. Further, if this be the case, and in view Ambassador De Moya’s statement concerning necessity hemispheric solidarity, the Department with same spirit cooperation considers it appropriate to ascertain Generalisimo views prior to implementing request. After offering a number of thin excuses for not having had discussion with me prior to time Foreign Minister delivered memorandum, Generalisimo stated Herrera Baez mission was not to ask termination of MAP agreement as such but rather his commission was to work out best possible solution of MAP agreement difficulties together with related matters, and if that effect non-­productive then to suggest termination as last alternative. Therefore for purpose re-­establishment his position, Generalisimo requested convey to Secretary Dulles complete assurances of GODR desire for cooperation and sincere friendship, stating both of which will continue as long as he has voice in GODR. He added that long ago he had cast his country’s lot with the policies of the U.S. and that he would not change that relationship. He stated that in view this fact and to prevent further misinterpretation he desired to meet with me in next few days to discuss his government concepts and policies in regard to military assistance program. He further stated that he would ask the President, Vice President,2 Foreign Minister and if possible Manuel De Moya to attend said meeting. He noted that the Foreign Minister was expected back from Mexico shortly and that he would forthwith wire Ambassador De Moya in Paris. He hoped further delay these few days would not complicate matters. I explained time primary importance to U.S. and meeting must be expedited. Atmosphere of meeting extremely friendly. Generalisimo expressed appreciation for U.S. cordiality evidenced during Secretary- Foreign Minister meeting and for the Secretary’s observations made at that time. Comment: Conversation indicated change of policy as reported to me by Ambassador De Moya at meeting November 24. As yet unable to ascertain extent this change. However in conjunction therewith it noteworthy that Trujillo, Jr. was not included among those persons suggested for aforementioned meeting. Also of interest is that Gereralisimo made great point of informing me Arturo Espaillat had been removed from all active military connections while engaged commercial activities. The “observation” made during meeting with Ambassador De Moya November 17 concerning Richardson and Espaillat apparently effected 2 Joaquín Balaguer.
