Dominican Republic 467 6. Atomic Energy As indicated in our A–57 of November 5, 195711 (attached) (TAB C) we are prepared to cooperate with the Dominican Republic in a program for developing nuclear “know-­how” and experience through research and training, and we are ready to assist the Dominican Government in implementing the existing bilateral agreement on atomic research. We feel that Dominican interest in a power reactor should be discouraged for the present pending training of technicians and further planning. 7. Military Assistance Under the Military Assistance Agreement of March 1953 the Dominican Republic agreed to maintain one fighter squadron of aircraft and 10 naval vessels for hemispheric defense purposes.12 Under the grant military aid program the United States undertook to supply maintenance and operational support, training and training ammunition and materiel to modernize the MDAP naval units for more effective anti-­submarine warfare. Four jet trainer aircraft were furnished. In December 1956 a Naval Mission Agreement13 was signed but in April 1957 the Embassy and the Chief of the Naval Mission14 recommended that no further materiel under the MDAP be allocated to the Dominican Navy and that our naval programs in the Dominican Republic confine itself strictly to training activities. The reasons for these recommendations were the inability of the Dominican Navy to maintain ships and materiel in a seaworthy condition, graft, and failure to utilize trained personnel effectively. Since August 1957 these deficiencies are being corrected by the Dominicans and our Naval Mission believes that an effective program can be carried on. If Trujillo’s attitude on the first three points above is satisfactory, Ambassador Farland may inform him that we stand ready to resume normal cooperation in the Naval program in the Dominican Republic, and to release materiel under the MAAG Program for agreed force goals. Requests for export licenses for materiel to replace old or worn-­ out equipment would be considered promptly. Recommendation: It is recommended that you sign the attached telegram author­ izing Ambassador Farland to discuss Dominican-U.S. relations with 11 Not found. 12 For text of the agreement, signed at Washington on March 6, and entered into force on June 10, 1953, see 4 UST 184. 13 For text of the agreement, signed at Ciudad Trujillo on December 7, 1956, and entered into force on the same day, see 7 UST (pt. 3) 3238. 14 Commander Thomas E. Keyes.
