Bolivia  203
could easily be straightened out; Dr. Paz said that he would seek to 
intervene in the situation.
Prospects for Understanding Among Opposition Parties and the MNR
The Ambassador referred to proposals which had been made by 
Fernando DIEZ DE MEDINA, until recently Ambassador to Rome and 
the Vatican, that the opposition groups and the MNR mutually agree to 
a sort of political truce in which they would eschew violence and carry 
on their activities by purely legal and constitutional means. Dr.  Paz 
[text not declassified] was willing, in his first message to the nation, to 
express the new administration’s desire for domestic peace and recon-
ciliation. The opposition parties would then be at liberty to make sim-
ilar declarations.
Cochabamba Valley Civil War
The conversation turned to the continued fighting between Roja’s4 
and Veizaga5 forces in the Cochabamba Valley. It was pointed out that 
large number of campesinos who were engaged in this activity were 
neglecting their farms and sooner or later would be confronted with 
famine conditions. [text not declassified]
Dr. Paz’s visit to Argentina
The Ambassador wished Dr. Paz every success on his visit to 
Buenos Aires, especially hoping that Dr. Paz would return with a sub-
stantial quantity of free dollars as a result of his negotiations regarding 
the Bolivian-Argentine Bilateral Agreement. Dr. Paz said that he had 
been preparing for this part of his trip to Argentina by consulting with 
Mr. Clark of the International Monetary Fund, and he expected that he 
would be able to convince the Argentine Government to release per-
haps as much as $3,000,000 in free dollars out of the Convenio account. 
The Ambassador pointed it was also essential to terminate the Bilateral 
Agreement and Dr. Paz replied this was one of his two prime objec-
tives in making his trip. (As long as the Agreement is in force, the dol-
lars YPFB sells to the Central Bank are blocked dollars. The bolivianos 
which are put into circulation as a result of these sales are eventually 
returned to the Bank for the purchase of free dollars which places a 
strong inflationary pressure on the boliviano.)
For the Ambassador:
William L. S. Williams
Counselor of Embassy
4 Reference is to the forces of Jose Rojas Guevara, leftist leader.
5 Reference is to the forces of Miguel Veizaga, rightist leader.
