1955 189 4. Satisfactory definition of maximum time period for release of Americans considered essential. 5. If you consider it would be useful, you may state you have been instructed to request immediate, circumstantial and authentic report on health and welfare each detained American civilian. Then you should point out cumulative deleterious effects of prolonged imprisonment of sort to which Wang’s Government has subjected US citizens grow rap­ idly more pronounced after several years have elapsed. Letters from numerous relatives indicate increasing anxiety on this score. In this context you may suggest next meeting be fixed for date on which this report will be ready or in any event not before next week. Dulles 148. Letter 10 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 10 Washington, August 29, 1955 Dear Alex: There have not been many developments here since my last letter of August 26. Phleger, Sebald and I met briefly with the Secretary this morning and are to meet again late this afternoon on your instructions for the Wednesday meeting. This is an unusually busy week, what with Shigemitsu here and other matters also demanding time. It is unfortunate that our 648 did not reach you before your Sunday night dinner. Through some inadvertence the priority label was omit­ ted from the telegram but it was sent early Saturday afternoon and you still should have had it before your Sunday evening engagement. The feeling here is that we should get back to the language of July 25 identic announcements which was “repatriation of civilians who desire to return”. We do not see that there would be any connotation of involuntary repatriation or any other undesirable connotation in the use of the word “repatriation” since it is used in the context “those who desire to return”. There is concern felt here in the obvious attempt of the Chinese Communists to enlarge the repatriation concept. Clearly they wish to assert a large measure of interest in and a right to claim the allegiance of all Chinese in this country. They believe that even a limited degree of 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official– ­Informal.
