164 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII in Afghanistan could not, in their present formation, “conduct any significant unilateral operations” because they were lightly equipped and spread thin among all components of the Afghan military. Soviet military intervention would require an influx of troops from inside Soviet territory, with the closest units located in the Turkestan Military District, which housed 45,000 troops with an additional 50,000 reserves who could be called up within a week to get the District to wartime strength. Another six divisions were located in the Central Asian Military District but, the memorandum prognosticated, the Soviet leadership would probably be reluctant to redeploy those troops “for fear of weakening their position opposite China.” A faster influx of troops could be accomplished with the Soviet military’s airborne divisions. Airlift of “just one complete airborne division and its support units would, however, severely tax the capacity of the Soviet military transport fleet,” the memorandum noted, and it was unlikely any airlift of troops would be executed without “an eventual linkup of ground forces.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support Services, Job 81T00031R: Production Case Files, Box 1, Soviet Military Forces in and Near Afghanistan) In a memorandum written three days later, August 10, Director of the Strategic Warning Staff Douglas MacEachin provided the National Intelligence Officer for Warning with three courses of action which the Soviets would likely choose regarding Afghanistan: “a. Continue the present course of providing material support, advisors and technicians, but refrain from committing Soviet combat units (possibly at the same time continuing to seek a political solution). “b. Commit a limited number of Soviet combat forces, sufficient to insure at least the security of Kabul and its immediate area, and perhaps a few other key centers. “c. Commit large combat forces for the purpose of inflicting major military defeats on the insurgent forces and recapturing much of the territory now in rebel hands.” Speaking on behalf of “most other community analysts,” MacEachin asserted that the third option was the least desirable for the Soviets, given the military and political challenges it would create. Instead, MacEachin predicted with “strong likelihood” that the Soviets would undertake option b, “and probably in the near future.” Without a limited intervention, MacEachin reasoned, the “USSR faces the likelihood of being forced to evacuate its mission from Afghanistan,” a development the Soviets would view as worse than any costs associated with limited military intervention. MacEachin saw the beginnings of a trap: “once having undertaken the increase in their military ante, however, the Soviets are likely to find themselves being drawn into the larger operation despite whatever resolve they might have to avoid it.” Although MacEachin specified that the intelligence community had
