enterprises to bring Chileans, particularly Chilean workmen, into Tacna and Arica. The
principal enterprise of this character undertaken by Chile as disclosed by the record
was the construction of the Arica-La Paz railway undertaken in accordance with the
provisions of the Chilean- Bolivian Treaty of 1904.36 The record indicates that this
railway resulted in the introduction into the provinces of Tacna and Arica of a number
of Chilean laborers. To what extent these laborers remained in the provinces after the
completion of the road in 1913 does not affirmatively appear, but there were such
obvious economic reasons for the Arica-La Paz railway that it could not reasonably be
inferred that the importation of Chilean labor in connection with this project was
anything more than an incident to an enterprise which Chile was entitled to undertake.
Undoubtedly successful concessions meant industrial development, development meant
population, and increase of the population of the provinces in these circumstances
naturally meant a greater proportion of persons of Chilean nationality, but Peru cannot
object to the legitimate and normal development of the provinces during the period in
which they remain under Chilean laws and authority, ‘there is nothing in the treaty
requiring stagnation.
The question of colonization is intimately related to the matter of concessions. Indeed
so far as the record shows it is chiefly if not entirely in connection with the
construction of public works such as the Arica-La Paz railway that Chile has achieved
any measure of practical success in “colonizing” Tacna and Arica. The question of
colonization was discussed between the two countries in 1900 principally upon the
basis of Chile’s right to alienate public lands in connection with colonization schemes,
and the evidence indicates that more or less ambitious plans for colonization were from
time to time under consideration and that the colonization laws of Chile were extended
to Tacna and Arica in 1909. There is, however, no adequate proof that any of these
colonization plans were carried out and Chile denies that the colonization law was ever
actually put into operation or that any land was purchased as therein provided or that
there was any substitution under these laws of Peruvian farmers by Chilean farmers.
This denial is not met by any adequate affirmative evidence. In view of this state of the
record it becomes unnecessary to consider to what extent Chile could have carried out a
systematic policy of expropriation and colonization of the lands in Tacna and Arica
before it would have amounted to such a depopulation of the provinces and substitution
of Chilean for Peruvian inhabitants as to frustrate the purpose of Article 3 of the Treaty
of Ancon. It is sufficient to say that the evidence fails to establish any such colonization
on the part of Chile as would form any basis for a conclusion that Peru had been
discharged from her plebiscitary obligation.
By various arrangements with Bolivia, Chile has conceded to Bolivia commercial and
customs privileges in the ports of Tacna and Arica which have given rise to diplomatic
protests on the part of Peru. Chile expressly concedes that “should Tacna and Arica as a
consequence of the plebiscite be returned to the sovereignty of Peru, the latter would
take this territory free from any incumbrances resulting from such a trade agreement.”
