92
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
the future, predictions about loss of confidence, might come true. We
need here a frank discussion of the challenges and how to meet them
effectively working with one another.
Also we need to be sure that our decisions are carried out by our
bureaucrats. We should not just discuss things, but do something about
them. For instance, we should try to have a Tokyo Round of trade nego-
tiations as successful as the Kennedy Round. We should try to meet our
energy problems, cooperatively deal with developing countries and ef-
fectively deal with the problems of nuclear fuel. We have combined
strength and we should use it. We should follow up promptly at staff
level to achieve results. And we should be certain to set our goals fairly
high. If we set goals too low, they will represent the maximum we will
be able to achieve.
On trade, we should say that we would like to do as well as in the
Kennedy Round. Unless we set high expectations, others will lower
their expectations.
We should also consider how to absorb the new leaders of the eco-
nomic world. Saudi Arabia comes to mind. Saudi Arabia wants to par-
ticipate with us in the Horn of Africa, to help the developing countries
and to establish fuel reserves so we won’t be hurt so much by any em-
bargoes. Their strength and financial influence need to be recognized.
We should give them the influence that they deserve along with re-
questing their financial contributions.
In addition, we should strengthen the IMF and the World Bank.
Together they are very effective and provide useful guidance. We wel-
come the efforts by the IMF to ensure financial accountability on profli-
gate nations. For this reason, we need to strengthen the IMF. Here
again Saudi Arabia can be helpful. We should also carry out our com-
mitments at Puerto Rico on strengthening the IMF. We are ready to par-
ticipate in the Witteveen plan.
I welcome this opportunity to meet with you, and to have your ad-
vice and counsel. I am here to learn and I think I can learn a great deal
from you. If I ever make a decision which is contrary to your important
interests, I hope you will let me know. On two or three occasions, we
were too insensitive to your needs, and it has taken me a while to un-
derstand this—for instance, on the nuclear fuel issue.
Callaghan: I agree we should try to do just as well on trade as in
the Kennedy Round, but we need to reconcile this on one hand and our
concerns about such problems as those in the shipbuilding and steel
sectors on the other. We need to give guidance to our people on such
issues in the communique.
MacDonald: On the issue of confidence, I speak as a lawyer sur-
rounded by economists. But I must say I am not sure that professional
economists today know what is going on. The pattern of events that
