March–August 1953 703 284. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency [text not declassified]1 Washington, August 19, 1953. DIR 16330. 1. New State instruction follows. (These instructions should be carried out by Ambassador Baghdad in event Shah leaves Rome for Baghdad.) A. Discreet contact should be established with of the or designate. B. Shah should be urged strongly to make or reiterate public statements thanking people for spontaneous uprising in his support and calling on people Iran to continue this support, and also announcing his intention returning Iran soonest. C. Shah should be prepared return Iran soonest. We advised by Teheran extremely large pro-Shah crowds awaiting give him triumphant reception.2 (FYI we feel it extremely important for Shah to return immediately since issue is still in doubt and his presence just might make all the difference.) 2. In event Shah still hesitant return, opinion below may be cited as comment in diplomatic circles Washington: i.e. to be used preferentially (?); A. That what did was entirely compatible (?) and legal with Iranian law and moreover in keeping with Iranian practice and tradition. B. Had Shah remained in place and not run away—and backed up Zahedi with his own presence and his affirmation of sincerity—the change of government would have been effective in the first instant. The failure is in very large part attributed to the fact that Shah departed suddenly leaving behind only pieces of paper which are not too meaningful or powerful if Iran is best (?) let alone when they are the subject of compromise (?) as to their validity. 3. VOA beginning about 10:00 a.m. today received authorization to play as straight news President’s statements made to Rome in Persian to Teheran. Has been doing so, [less than 1 line not declassified] now 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency. Secret. [text not declassified] Transcribed specifically for the Foreign Relations series from microfilm in the Central Intelligence Agency that no longer exists. See “Sources” chapter. The transcript of this telegram lists the date as “18 or 19 AUG 1953.” All blank underscores that indicate omissions and question marks are in the transcribed text. 2 Apparent reference to telegram TEHE 740 from Tehran, August 19, which reads: “Imperative that Shah of Iran be prepared for immediate triumphant return. Million enthusiastic subjects jamming city.” (Ibid.)
