3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1979 613 borders of the Soviet Union. Aircraft carriers with nuclear weapons and nuclear submarines were cruising the seas near Soviet territory and calling at ports of other countries located near Soviet territory. He asked who in these circumstances has cause for concern. Brezhnev said in conclusion that these were the considerations he had wanted to express on some international problems. The President thanked Brezhnev for his remarks. He had listened with great attention and trusted that Brezhnev, too, had listened with equal attention and interest to our concerns. Obviously, there were differences of opinion on a number of issues, but the President believes this only emphasized the importance of continued consultations in the hope of understanding each other’s attitudes. Despite regional differences, which caused real concerns, the meeting in Vienna and the signing of the SALT II Treaty constituted an important step toward peace and could serve as a foundation on which further progress in our relations can be based. The President promised to hand over to Brezhnev after the meeting a private note, discussed this morning, outlining some ideas which could be pursued in future negotiations. He hoped that we could continue our efforts and that future success in SALT could be realized more rapidly than in the past. 205. Joint Declaration Between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics1 Vienna, June 17, 1979 JOINT DECLARATION ON THE FURTHER DEVELOPMENT AND REGULARIZATION OF CONSULTATIONS BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS The United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, expressing their recognition of the importance of promoting greater stability, mutual confidence, and friendly relations between the two countries, 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 22, President, US–USSR Summit in Vienna, 9/16–18/79: Cables and Memos, 5/21/79 [I]. Secret.
