National Security Policy  1169
(2) Procurement Equipment Missiles Army (PEMA).
(a) Total assets available for initial issue and war reserves represent 
a little less than two-­thirds of the objectives authorized by the FY 61/62 
guidance. Since sufficient assets are not available, the provision of ade­
quate support for a limited war would necessitate the withdrawal of 
equipment required to meet initial equipment requirements for the bal­
ance of the forces authorized by the guidance.
(b) Assuming a six months limited war, up to 24 months would 
be required after the initiation of procurement to reconstitute that por­
tion of the inventory which would be consumed during the six months 
period.
(3) Minor secondary items and repair parts.
(a) Mobilization reserve assets and planned acquisition through 
Fiscal Year 1962 will meet approximately 60 per cent of the requirement.
(b) If mobilization reserves were depleted by a limited war of six 
months duration, the time required to replace stocks after the initiation 
of procurement would vary from 6 to 15 months depending on the item.
b. Navy. Navy Mobilization Reserve Stocks (MRS) are stored in 
CONUS and in reasonably protected sites overseas in locations so as 
best to support the forces in being and the forces to be mobilized. MRS 
is maintained, rotated, and modernized to the extent practicable under 
current financial limitations. The time required to reconstitute the var­
ious categories of materiel included in the MRS will vary from three 
months for certain standard consumables up to 36 months for major 
electronic equipment.
c. Air Force
(1) The War Readiness Materiel (WRM) requirements for limited 
war are based on plans approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Air Force 
supporting plans call for prepositioning such materiel at or near the 
point of planned usage. Based on the approved strategic concepts 
reflected in the War Objectives and Basic National Security Policies 
present stocks are deemed adequate to permit immediate reaction to 
anticipated (current plans) limited war situations. However, should 
these concepts change, Air Force WRM requirements would reflect this 
change. The lack of Base Rights agreements in certain areas of Southeast 
Asia and the Middle East preclude full implementation of the preposi­
tioning policy. In such case, the required materiel is prepositioned at 
the nearest United States controlled base. The lack of Base Rights thus 
causes not only a mal-­location of materiel, but also places an additive 
requirement on transportation resources.
(2) Those WRM assets consumed during war operations will be 
replaced from materiel in transit; in depots stocks; from stocks in long-­
supply; diversions from activities with lower priority missions (except 
that the General War posture will not be degraded); and by expedited 
deliveries from production and repair facilities.
