202 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 63. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Dubs) to the Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian)1 Washington, June 23, 1977 SUBJECT PRM on Human Rights: Comments/Suggestions NEA’s comments and/or recommended changes to specific items in the first draft PRM2 are contained in the attachment to this memorandum.3 The first draft of PRM 28 on Human Rights is a good beginning. It does not, however, present any options, or choices, or suggested courses of action for Presidential decision. For example, the PRM could pose the option of using or not using economic—as distinguished from military and supporting—assistance as a lever to promote human rights. This would provide an opportunity to alert the President to some of the negative consequences which could flow from the denial of economic assistance that is destined for the poor and hungry. Under Section I, the legal basis for U.S. involvement in attempts to improve the human rights condition of mankind is not spelled out. L should be asked to prepare a short brief on this subject. In identifying U.S. objectives in the area of human rights, the statement to the effect that all governments manifest an interest in the growth of human rights is not completely true. Many states are primarily interested in economic and social rights and give personal, civil and political liberties a low priority. Section I, page 5, talks about changing other societies. We do not believe that this should be an objective of U.S. foreign policy. While we are dedicated to improving the human rights condition in various so- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 23, Human Rights—PRM I. Confidential. Drafted by Holly on June 24. 2 Christopher sent the draft study prepared in response to PRM 28 to interagency participants under cover of a June 14 memorandum, commenting that he hoped the addressees would consider it “a chopping block and a vehicle for discussion.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Withdrawn Material, RC # 1126, Box 12 of 13) Dubs is apparently referring to that study. 3 Attached but not printed is the undated paper entitled “Suggested Changes to First Draft PRM.”
