822
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
arrested at the whim of a police officer or Government functionary or in
the hope that they might pay a ransom for their release, the guilty are
all too often securing release or immunity from arrest by bribery or by
influence. In some cases politicians apparently seek to prepare for the
eventuality of a Communist regime in Iran by protecting from impris-
onment Communist party functionaries. These men obviously fail to
realize that, without exception, politicians who followed their example
in countries now behind the Iron Curtain have been liquidated along
with the rest by the Communist regime.
At this point Baqai said that he could if necessary cite numerous
examples to support his allegations. He mentioned the case of Ali
Ashgar Hekmat, Minister in the Zahedi Government Cabinet, who has
a long record of service to the British cause and who in recent years has
become increasingly involved in Iran’s Soviet cultural activities.
Hekmat’s brother, a professor at Tehran University and an active
Tudeh party member, is and will remain immune from arrest because
of his brother’s position. There have been, in fact, only three important
party functionaries arrested since the inauguration of the Zahedi re-
gime and all three of them were released within 48 hours of their
arrest.4
At this point Ambassador Henderson asked Dr. Baqai if his dissat-
isfaction with the Zahedi Government resulted from fundamental dis-
agreement on policy grounds or merely from disappointment in
Zahedi’s implementation of his policies. He went on to point out that in
order to correct abuses and errors which Baqai had detailed, the Gov-
ernment would need an honest and efficient police force, which it did
not at present have and which would be difficult and time-consuming
to develop. The Ambassador asked Baqai just what he would do to im-
prove the situation and wondered whether he felt that the Zahedi Gov-
ernment was willfully mishandling its anti-Communist campaign or
merely falling into error through ineptitude and inexperience.
Baqai affirmed his support of Zahedi’s announced policies but
stated that what really counted was the way these policies were being
carried out and that it was in this connection that he differed with Gen-
eral Zahedi. He conceded that Zahedi’s personal aims were undoubt-
edly commendable and that he was attempting to pursue an effective
anti-Communist campaign, but contended that such attempts were
4 According to Baqai the three men in question were Engineer Ansari, a former
functionary in the Ministry of Finance and a candidate member of the Central Committee
of the Party; Davoud Noruzi, major Communist writer, and one Hormoz, a lawyer. An-
sari secured his release through the influence of a relative of his, whose name and gov-
ernmental position Baqai had forgotten for the moment but could find out if necessary;
the other two, he thought, had probably bribed some officials to obtain their freedom.
[Footnote is in the original.]
