Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
519
To do this would probably result in our being on friendly terms only
with Israel and Egypt, with the rest of the Middle East open for a return
of Soviet influence. Saudi Arabia might not hold out against an Arab
consensus at odds with Egypt and the U.S. A friendless Sadat regime
would become more dependent than ever on us, and render precarious
the stability of the bilateral treaty. Polarization between Egypt/Israel
and the rest of the Arabs might also lead our European allies into in-
creasingly pro-Arab positions. Moreover, we could be forced to con-
sider allying ourselves with the Saudis to a degree we have not con-
templated before in order to preserve as much as possible of our
bilateral relationship. This itself could cause severe political problems
domestically.
Thus, I believe that we should continue to press forward for the
West Bank/Gaza agreement.
B. Management of East-West Relations: Now that the historic normal-
ization with China has occurred, we need to reinforce a position of
careful balance between Moscow and Peking, while improving rela-
tions with both.10 A “tilt” in either direction could dramatically increase
world tensions and impair our ability to control the distance that it is in
our interest to maintain between Peking and Moscow. Furthermore, re-
cent opinion polls show that our public overwhelmingly wants a bal-
anced approach.
On dealing with Moscow, I think that we are following an ap-
proach that has earned the respect of the Soviets and the American
people. The lowering of voices on both sides in recent months has reas-
sured our friends and allies that the Administration is effectively man-
aging this key international relationship.
Preparations for the Madrid CSCE Conference will require atten-
tion and allied coordination.11
We must continue to press the Soviets for responsible behavior in
other regions; their actions in the Third World affect our interests, and
will become a major debating point for opponents of SALT. But, as I
noted above, we should continue to emphasize Western strengths more
than Soviet advances in our public statements.12
The one change I would advocate is a more forthcoming attitude in
approving U.S. sales to the USSR of non-strategic items.13 This will not
10 See Documents 104 and 105. In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, the
President wrote: “The most important.”
11 The Madrid CSCE Review Conference was scheduled to take place in November
1980.
12 The President wrote “True” in the left-hand margin next to this paragraph and
drew two arrows from it to the two sentences in the paragraph.
13 The President wrote “I agree” in the left-hand margin next to this sentence.
