September 18–December 16, 1978 543 155. Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department of State and the White House1 Cairo, December 10, 1978, 2135Z Secto 14022. White House for Dr. Brzezinski. State for Christopher only. Subject: My Meeting With President Sadat 12/10/78. 1. I had a very good 1½ hour meeting alone with President Sadat this afternoon. We have come close to reaching agreement with him on the major outstanding issues, although he wants a bit more time to consult with his advisors and to reflect further. They, of course, may unwind some of what we agreed on this evening. Nonetheless, based on our first discussion, I believe that Sadat will accept the treaty text as it is, with interpretive notes on Articles 4 and 6, and that he will accept a revised side letter along the lines that we discussed in Washington on Friday. 2. We began our talk with a broad discussion of regional problems and of the need for us to have a common strategy in the area. I also gave President Sadat your letter,2 which he read with interest and which he agreed with virtually in its entirety. Our strategic overview discussion laid a good basis of common understanding, and I think it is fair to say that we see problems in Iran, the Arabian Peninsula, Sudan, Turkey, and elsewhere in very similar terms. 3. Turning to specifics, I emphasized the need to find a satisfactory solution for the West Bank/Gaza linkage question in the side letter. I indicated that we could also discuss additional steps that would reinforce whatever is in the letter. I gave Sadat a copy of a revised side letter,3 and his only immediate concern was the reference to including Palestinians in the Egyptian delegation. He said that he would not want to promise more than he could deliver, and that we might try to revise that language. He also wants some reference to Egypt’s special responsibility to Gaza. He was pleased that our reference to a target date for elections by the end of the year included the phrase “at least in Gaza.” 4. Sadat returned to his own idea that the interim withdrawal should be coterminous with the establishment of the self-governing authority. I told him this was not possible in our judgment, but that we 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840153–1507. Secret; Cherokee; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Vance arrived in Cairo on December 10. 2 See Document 154. 3 Not found.
