Costa Rica  397
constitute an important potential source of revenue. Three banana com-
panies are or will be trading in Costa Rica: United Fruit, Standard, and a 
local company (possibly Bananaria). Only United Fruit, however, does 
not pay tax on its total income, he stated. Moreover, its income alone is 
not susceptible of determination by Costa Rica. Prices for the export of 
meat, which is being promoted, are set by a production council. Coffee 
contracts and the prices are registered with the government. Sugar has 
a world price and profits of Costa Rican companies can be based upon 
that world price. The same is true of cocoa. Only in the case of bananas 
has it not been possible to obtain an “independent” determination of 
profits. Rather than act arbitrarily, the President would prefer to come 
to some amicable agreement in the matter.
Mr. Smith indicated briefly how the fifty-­fifty arrangement came 
into being and the fact that there is no independent banana price makes 
it necessary to resort to a formula. The formula, he emphasized, was 
utilized not only in the United Fruit case but in other situations—­where 
an America company sells to its distributing subsidiary abroad and no 
independent price exists. The formula used for imports is also used for 
exports.
After some discussion, Mr. Smith indicated that the Treasury 
would be very glad to give its attention to this problem promptly.
In passing, the President expressed an interest in having an 
American tax expert go to Costa Rica for a month or two to assist in 
improving their tax system. However, no comment on this request was 
made by Treasury.
Mr. Smith suggested that Costa Rica may want to give consider-
ation to the possibility of reaching an agreement on a tax convention 
between our two countries. The Costa Ricans expressed an interest and 
requested copies of recent tax treaties. Two sets of copies of the U.S. 
convention with Honduras, Japan and Germany2 are being forwarded 
to President Echandi.
Present for Treasury were: Mr. Dan Throop Smith; Mr. David 
Lindsay, Assistant to the Secretary; Mr. Nathan Gordon, Chief, 
International Tax Staff.
2 For text of the Tax Convention with Honduras, signed at Washington, June 25, 
1956, see 8 UST 219; with Japan, signed at Washington, April 16, 1954, see 6 UST 113 and 
149; and with Germany, signed at Washington, July 22, 1954, see 5 UST (pt. 3) 2768.
