Negotiating Channels 485 relations, but very, very difficult to re-establish them. He mentioned Cuba as an example. He said that within 6–9 months after the hostages are released, he would hope that a small group of U.S. diplomats could return to Iran. I mentioned here that it was going to be a very difficult decision for us to send people back to Iran given the present crisis. He said that he understood, but that our political presence was needed to counter Soviet activities. He said that he was anxious to use the excuse of a small U.S. diplomatic presence to reduce the Soviet embassy to a comparable size. He talked about our future relationship almost exclusively in the context of the U.S. counterbalancing Soviet presence in Iran. At some point, I gave him (on a plain white sheet of paper) our most recent summary of Soviet buildup on the NW Iranian border.5 He loved it. He said, “I will wave this paper at the next meeting of the Council and tell everyone to get off their asses and prepare for attempted Soviet domination of Iran.” I made most/all of the points in the paper prepared for me by Hal.6 I will report orally on them. To summarize, Mr. S.’s attitude in talking with me about future U.S.-Iranian relations seemed to be that now they have proven the strength of the Revolution to the United States, they are willing and anxious to teach the Soviet Union a lesson. He said that the Soviet Ambassador complained to him recently about his anti-Soviet statements and that he told him, “Don’t complain to me while you have stolen Afghanistan and are assembling troops on our own borders. You will not have to fight us on the borders, but in every house and in every street in Iran, and we will prevail.” After our meeting, I commented to one of our French friends that while very pleased with the meeting, I was not certain that I had moved the process on time for release of the hostages forward at all. He said, “You are wrong. If he considered it a good meeting it will help you more than you will ever know.” He offered two interesting observations. 5 Not further identified. 6 Saunders’s paper stressed the U.S. interest in the independence and integrity of Iran from Soviet control, separatism, or U.S. dominance; stated that the United States would “respect a genuinely non-aligned Iran” and wanted good relations with Iran; concurred in the establishment of the Commission of Inquiry; supported any Iranian legal action in U.S. courts; supported lifting of the Iranian asset freeze once the hostages were released; promised to work with Iran to resolve regional strategic problems; and requested that all 53 hostages leave at the same time. Saunders also requested that the scenario be further refined. (“Points to Cover,” February 25; Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 1)
