3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 293 VOA should be more carefully thought through with the aim of sustaining themes and pressures over time and generating complementary initiatives in various parts of the world. There is also a covert dimension which could be more systematically developed. We need to lift restrictions on CIA’s worldwide exploitation of this issue. In the Horn area itself, and particularly in Ethiopia, we need to counter the systematic distortion and disinformation efforts the Soviets are maintaining against us. They are well on their way to presenting the Somali invasion of Ethiopia as a U.S.-inspired action sustained by inflow of arms from reactionary Muslim countries who are acting as surrogates for the United States. When the Soviets lie, they lie big and they repeat their lies over and over again. We cannot assume that truth and virtue will prevail because of their own intrinsic weight. Truth needs help. 87. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, March 6, 1978 SUBJECT South African Nuclear Developments, Horn of Africa SALT, Other Arms Control Matters PARTICIPANTS US USSR The Secretary Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin Marshall D. Shulman SUMMARY: In a personal message from Brezhnev to President Carter, the Soviets voice concern about evidence of further South African steps toward developing and testing nuclear weapons. The Soviets are agreeable to consulting with us in New York on forthcoming US Special Session on Disarmament issues. They also propose resuming consultations on conventional arms transfers in Moscow in later March or early April. Dobrynin said the Somalis had approached the USSR for assistance in bringing about a mediation effort in the Horn. He asked whether Warnke was returning to SALT with new in- 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 3, CV–Dobrynin, 3/6/78. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Shulman; approved by Anderson on March 16. The meeting took place at the Department of State.
