Afghanistan 889 In the resolution, as you know, the Assembly expressed its hope that you would appoint a special representative to seek a political solution on the basis of the resolution and in accordance with its call for the withdrawal of foreign troops. Ambassador McHenry has already expressed our strong views to you in this regard, but I want you to know that this is a matter of personal concern to me. In light of the Soviet attitude I recognize that it will not be easy to move rapidly toward a political solution based on the withdrawal of Soviet troops. But I trust you will agree that the appointment of your special representative should be expedited because of the overwhelming vote by the international community. The 111 member states who supported the resolution were well aware of the Soviet Union’s negative attitude. Nevertheless, we expressed support for your appointment of a special representative to promote a solution based on the principles of the Charter which the Soviet Union has so flagrantly violated in Afghanistan. I have asked Ambassador McHenry to deliver this letter urgently to you as a private expression of my views.4 Sincerely, Jimmy Carter End text. Muskie 4 In a memorandum to Carter, December 18, Muskie reported he “had an unexpectedly comprehensive discussion” with Waldheim regarding Afghanistan and the appointment of a special representative. Muskie noted that Waldheim was “receptive.” (Ibid) An article in the National Intelligence Daily, January 8, reported that [text not declassified] the DRA was willing to meet with Pakistan and a UN Special Representative despite Pakistan’s ongoing refusal to recognize the Afghan Government. The report further noted that the Pakistanis “view the UN talks in the past as a means of reducing Soviet pressure temporarily.” Even so, the report concluded, such talks would give the DRA “a lift.” (Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—December 1980, NIDs)
