16  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
be clearest if the JCS issued the orders of the President and Secretary 
of Defense, using the respective service chiefs for direct action. He said 
that he realized that the process actually works this way now but is 
fuzzed up because we assert that we do not do it.
On the invitation of Secretary McElroy, the President then com­
mented on the foregoing discussions. He said we cannot laugh off 
the present criticism. He said it won’t do simply to justify everything 
now being done. Public opinion, he said, is a strong force and must be 
respected.
He said he thought the people present had been talking about 
details before discussing basic concepts. He agreed that things are 
going rather well now, said he had no criticism of JCS now, nor did 
he see any present trouble in getting overall strategic plans and con­
cepts. But, he said, don’t forget the things that happen afterwards—­the 
administrative and operational as opposed to the strategic projects that 
have to be applied in the Atlantic or Pacific. He said, to be sure, the JCS 
can have 872 agreements and only 3 disagreements; but then he wants 
to know about the 3 disagreements, for these might well be the only 
really fundamental matters.
He then said that Congress is of course very important in these 
connections, and he remarked that the services now have some 130 
liaison officers assigned to Congressional work. The trouble is, how­
ever, whatever differing views service leaders may have get worse as 
the individual service officers put out their own personal propaganda. 
He said the same thing applies to public relations and commented that 
Secretary Wilson once told him that each service has a public relations 
office larger than the Secretary of Defense’s. The President suggested 
the need of better organization of such matters.
He then urged that the JCS integrate the staff, with the JCS func­
tioning corporately as a single Chief of Staff. He thought the JCS system 
as it now exists is too complicated to work in wartime, especially in 
relation to new weapons. He said that the executive agency process is 
“crazy.” He said that the JCS staff should be the G–2/G–3 staff. For an 
emergency, he said, the organization must be gotten so simple and clear 
that the job will be done free of delaying obstructions.
The President said it must be realized that there have been frictions 
and differences and some duplication of effort. We have got to work at 
this, he said, not merely by clearing command channels, but also by set­
ting up under the JCS a really effective, integrated staff, with the whole 
business directly under the Secretary of Defense.
The President said, as regards having the Joint Chiefs always 
with the Chairman and as regards continuing interference from the 
Congress, that this practice of the Congress to demand appearances of 
the top men has grown markedly over the years. He said little can be
