National Security PolicyвҖғ 407
doubtful value against direct attack with nuclear weapons. Protection of 
other supplies depends almost wholly on dispersal. The NavyвҖҷs mobile 
logistic support forces represent one type of dispersal. The Army gains 
protection by dispersing its reserve stocks into numerous small genВӯ
eral depots, instead of concentrating them in a few large specialized 
depots. The growth of the Soviet tactical missile capability, which is 
forecast in current National Intelligence Estimates, makes it unlikely 
that substantial protection could be provided against direct attack. It 
now appears vital that greater emphasis be placed on the protection 
of critical supplies and facilities in the United States. I will discuss this 
problem further in connection with the problem of incorporating attack 
damage assumptions into our planning for general war.
Our industrial base to support the plan is generally adequate. 
This base consists of our current producers, which are a combination 
of private enterprise and the active portion of our DOD owned indusВӯ
trial facilities. This chart shows the progress being made in readjustВӯ
ing our packaged plants to the changes in strategic concepts. Packaged 
plants are, for the most part, groups of machine tools and production 
equipment held at a manufacturing facility or in storage to produce 
specific military end items for mobilization. As a result of our continuВӯ
ing review, considerable progress has been made in making these tools 
available for general re-Вӯdistribution and utilization or disposal. Since 
April of this year, we have cancelled 210 such packages or 35% of the 
total that had been established. 105 or 17% have been re-Вӯapproved 
while the remainder amounting to 294 or 48% are under review.
CONCLUSION
The status against the NSC objectives may be summarized as folВӯ
lowsвҖ”necessarily these represent overall situations and do not reflect 
the Service variations associated with each of the objectives.
Readiness against the first objective exists in terms of quantities but 
not in terms of modernized materiel.
Readiness against the second objective exists in part but deficienВӯ
cies in quantities as well as quality preclude a status equal to the high 
standards contained in this objective.
Readiness against the third objective is extremely limited.
Readiness against the fourth objective exists in terms of industrial 
capacity to meet the rate of combat consumption, provided there is no 
damage to our production resources.
Pre M-Day positioning of selected supplies within the continenВӯ
tal United States is reasonable for limited war but relocation may be 
required under attack damage assumptions.
Pre M-Day positioning of selected supplies, reasonably protected, 
outside the United States has been accomplished in part.
