846
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
designed to put us in a competitive position for the political and civil
war likely to develop in Iran. Turner’s plans seem designed to replicate
a traditional in-country capability, not a multi-tiered effort ranging
from key access at the top to low-level cadre penetration into mass
organizations and other social, political, and military institutions.” As
a last development, Brzezinski asked Odom to “join the Aaron group
and to follow the preparation of the CIA plan for general purpose
resource development.” (Memorandum from Odom to Brzezinski, July
3; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office Files,
Box 87, For President or Brzezinski Only File, Iran Sensitive 5/80–
10/80) No other account of this meeting has been found.
As a result and at Brzezinski’s request, the Aaron group planned
to meet on July 11. In preparation for the meeting, Gary Sick of the
National Security Council Staff wrote the President’s Deputy Assistant
for National Security Affairs David Aaron that “the purpose of the
meeting is to look ahead at our plans and prospects for developing
covert action and other intelligence capabilities and resources in Iran.
From Odom’s memo, the objective of the meeting is to explore how
we can broaden and deepen our penetration of Iran in preparation for
an anticipated collapse into political and civil war.” Sick suggested
that Aaron structure the meeting “as a review of CIA planning to date
and pressing for development of a paper which identifies the targets we
wish to go after and how we can create and manage the resources necessary.”
(Memorandum from Sick to Aaron, July 11; ibid.)
Both Odom and Carlucci wrote about the July 11 meeting. See
Documents 314 and 315.
312.
Message From the Department of State to the Swiss
Ambassador to Iran (Lang)1
Washington, July 5, 1980
Please convey the following information to Foreign Minister Ghot-
bzadeh in response to his request for information about the health of
the former Shah.2
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 42, Subject File, Iran Papers 5/80–7/80. Secret.
2 See Document 306.
