Human Rights
495
sistance (chaired by the Deputy Secretary of State) recommends, and
the OPIC Board of Directors agrees, that OPIC should not provide the
proposed support because the host government is engaged in extensive
and extremely serious violations of human rights. OPIC will include in
its Annual Report to Congress appropriate information on projects for
which OPIC assistance is refused on account of human rights consider-
ations or provided despite such considerations, with appropriate gen-
eral explanations.
2. In order to give the Interagency Group an opportunity to make
its recommendation, OPIC will submit to HA [the Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs] a summary of each project which
OPIC proposes to assist. If HA has reservations about a project, it will
refer it to the Interagency Group. In addition to human rights condi-
tions in the country involved, there are a variety of important relevant
factors to be considered in determining what recommendation to make
concerning OPIC support. They include the relationship between the
project and the government of the host country. (This relationship
might be gauged by such factors as host government involvement as a
lender or equity holder; fiscal impact of the project; size or political
symbolism of the project.)
152.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, July 5, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights and OPIC
The package at Tab A2 from Christopher arrived this morning. It
says virtually nothing. Nothing is said about when the needy people
exemption might be considered applicable and by what standard the
“benefit” would be judged. Nothing is said about what information
would be requested from OPIC in order to judge a particular project,
especially as regards the social behavior of the company involved. It
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 94, Human Rights: 1978. Confidential. Sent for action.
2 Not attached; printed as Document 151.
