German Democratic Republic East-West relations. I told Honecker that good US–GDR relations are an essential ingredient in this effort. 9. I informed Honecker that I had given my views on ways to move our bilateral relations forward in an earlier conversation with Foreign Minister Fischer. However, in view of their importance, I felt it necessary to repeat them in part. 10. Humanitarian cases. I expressed appreciation for the progress in resolving humanitarian cases involving American citizens and their relatives in the GDR.7 I told Honecker this progress had been noted with favor in the Congress and among the American public; it had created a better atmosphere for the future development of our relations. I stressed the importance American people attach to ethnic and family ties and expressed the view that emergency visitation cases to the US involving GDR citizens should be processed quickly. This would be helpful in maintaining the favorable impression already created and support further development of our relations. Honecker indicated he understood the importance the US attached to this matter. The Foreign Minister’s views on the handling of cases of this kind had his total support. The GDR was prepared to cooperate. Honecker added that he would like to see more Americans visit the GDR; “we need more American tourists.” 11. Claims. I told Honecker about my conversation with the Foreign Minister on claims settlement and my proposal that officials meet to discuss claims procedures in our respective countries. The central purpose of this proposal would be to work out principles and procedures which would facilitate future negotiations. Honecker said he agreed with this proposal. 12. I also raised the Jewish claims issue with Honecker. I told him that talks with the Conference on Jewish Material Claims should continue with a view to finding a solution. Such talks would find a favorable echo in the Congress and the public. Honecker said the GDR had not broken off the talks. Perhaps the earlier GDR offer to the conference had been misunderstood. He noted that talks had been conducted with the Committee on Anti-Fascist Resistance Fighters and suggested that they should continue. He then launched into a long historical review of his persecution by the Nazis, noted that he had witnessed the persecution of Jews, and asserted there was no discrimi- 7 In a meeting with Habib on April 26, Sieber delivered a message from Fischer to Vance stating that “all requests made to the GDR authorities by official representatives of the U.S. for authorization of marriages between GDR citizens and U.S. citizens, as well as for emigration (uebersiedlung) have been carefully examined. All these requests have been approved.” (Telegram 94855 to East Berlin, April 27; National Archives, RG
