Covert and Overt Operations 284. Memorandum of Conversation1 Vienna, May 16, 1980 SUBJECT Meeting Between Secretary of State Muskie and Foreign Minister Gromyko PARTICIPANTS Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie William D. Krimer, Interpreter USSR: Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko Viktor Sukhodrev, Interpreter Foreign Minister Gromyko opened the conversation by suggesting that he and Secretary Muskie conduct their talks in compact form since they did not have much time at their disposal. It was his understanding that there was no formal agenda for this meeting; thus they would be free to choose whatever topics they wanted to discuss. [Omitted here is material on topics unrelated to Iran.] Iran Turning to the question of Iran, Gromyko said that some political leaders had frequently asked him why the Soviet Union had not publicly advocated release of the American hostages, saying that this would ease tensions throughout the world. Gromyko would tell the Secretary that the Soviets had made very clear statements to the effect that the holding of U.S. hostages by Iran violates international law and all relevant international conventions. Moreover, the Soviet Union had undertaken a private démarche with the Iranian leadership through restricted channels, calling for the release of the American hostages. At the time of this démarche Washington had been informed to that effect; that was several months ago.2 But, instead of hearing thanks for its initiative, the Soviet leadership had heard nothing but an avalanche of unfriendly statements against the Soviet Union. True, there was a minor assistant who had expressed appreciation, in passing as it were, but the Soviet leadership had heard nothing from the President of the United States or from the Secretary of State. Let no one throw stones 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 5. Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Krimer. The meeting took place at the Hofburg Palace. At the top of the page, Carter wrote: “Susan—Pers file. C.” For the full text of this memorandum of conversation, see Foreign
