framing of the Convention. The reasons for this are obvious. The
Department cannot undertake to state at this time whether a Convention
along the lines now being considered by the T. M. C. would be likely to
receive the requisite approval of the Senate or whether legislation to put
such a Convention into effect could be obtained. Such being the case the
Department does not desire that the impression should be created as a result
of your participation in the discussions at Geneva that a convention of the
character proposed would necessarily be presented to the Senate by this
Government or legislation to give it effect would be requested. Whether this
action will be taken will depend in large measure upon the character which
the Convention assumes as finally drafted.
After you have made this position clear to the Commission it is felt that it
would be entirely appropriate, if inquiry is made of you as to the attitude of
this Government, to point out to the T. M. C. the features of the Convention
as indicated which might occasion difficulty in this country and thus render
less probable the cooperation of the United States in this matter, a
cooperation which this Government would be glad to be in a position to
extend for the control of the improper traffic in arms in case a practical
basis for such cooperation were presented; such a basis for example as is
indicated in sub-headings (a), (b) and (c) under point 2 in the Department’s
telegram of March 7.
In indicating informally the Department’s position with respect to certain
points of the Convention which may come under discussion, it is not
desired that you should press your views upon the Commission further than
to make clear the position of this ‘Government.
It is the Department’s understanding that at its July meeting the T. M. C. of
the League of Nations will devote its attention to the draft convention
which was considered at Paris by the sub-committee and of which the
revised text was submitted with the Legation’s despatch No. 1504 of May
12, 1924. In the instructions which follow the Department will therefore
take this draft as a basis and submit certain comments which may be helpful
to you during the discussion of the draft convention.
PREAMBLE
