Chapter 7, January–May 1991  995
Obukhov: There should be some reciprocation on this; this was 
what was explained in the Shevardnadze letter. On the B–1 and B–2, we 
accept the US position as stated here in Washington and this is part of a 
comprehensive package.
Baker: Well, this is really Houston plus. It gets us back to what we 
agreed in Houston and we’ve thrown in some goodies as well.
Nazarkin: But we accepted your position on the PPCM. On the 
SS–N–18, we understand Houston as representing an agreement to our 
proposal that the SS–N–18 has been redesigned and redesignated to 
have three as opposed to seven warheads on the condition that we fully 
explained in the Shevardnadze letter and that was the letter that was 
requested by you. Two weeks later we increased the issue of a quota on 
inspections as we discussed in Geneva. These are the feelings that the 
Soviets hide. In Houston we thought there were not going to be three 
exceptions for downloading, but there were going to be two types. And 
the numbers are higher as far as the total number of 1,250. That’s a 
compromise figure. And the five warheads for each missile. That’s also 
a compromise figure. Or at least it is a figure that takes into account the 
exchange of views. So, we accept your proposal on how to count on 
downloading and also to do it on the basis of base-­by-­case, and ocean-­
by-­ocean. In this area, we invite the US to return to Houston.
Baker: Let me read you what I wrote in Houston, these are my 
notes.3 Changing the designation of SS–N–18 from seven to three RVs 
would raise a real political problem for us. And we need to know what 
specific assurances you might be able to offer and what form those 
might take.
Obukhov: When we came back from Moscow, we incorporated this 
and we acted on them. We believed that if you wanted explanations, 
and we could provide them, we’d have an agreement.
Burt: Now I know that you believe this, but in Geneva I told 
Nazarkin that we have a problem on downloading.
Baker: Maybe you felt this way, but my notes are exactly as I’ve just 
read them. And if you look at my notes, I’m saying this will create a 
real political problem for us. I’ve been asking what specific assurances 
you could offer to a allay, our concern and what form might those take.
Obukhov: Well, why do you need the answers if you weren’t going 
to accept?
Baker: Because what I was saying is that we were prepared to con-
sider it, but before we could consider it we needed to know what assur-
ances you were prepared to provide and what form it would take. I said 
3 Not found.
