Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 leaders—such as King Hussein [of Jordan] during his visit to Washington—have made clear their commitment to a “just, a lasting peace, one which would enable all the people in [the Middle East] to divert their energies and resources to build and attain a brighter future. . . .”9 So we believe that we have made some progress in getting Arab leaders to recognize Israel’s right to exist and to recognize—however reluctantly—that this commitment is essential to a genuine peace; that peace must be structured in such a way that it can survive even if some leaders were to nurture aims to destroy Israel. Still, we have a long way to go. The Arabs have been insistent that Israel withdraw from the territories it occupied in the 1967 war. We have made clear our view that Israel should not be asked to withdraw unless it can secure, in return, real peace from its neighbors. Borders and Security Arrangements The question of withdrawal is, in essence, the question of borders. For peace to be enduring, borders must be inviolable. Nations must feel secure behind their borders. Borders must be recognized by all. A crucial dilemma has been how to provide borders that are both secure and acceptable to all. It is understandable that Israel, having fought a war in every decade since its birth, wants borders that can be defended as easily as possible. But no borders will be secure if neighboring countries do not accept them. The problem is that borders that might afford Israel the maximum security in military terms would not be accepted as legitimate by Israel’s neighbors. Borders that Israel’s neighbors would recognize, Israel has not been willing to accept as forming an adequate line of defense. For this reason, the President has tried to separate the two issues. On the one hand, there must be recognized borders. But, in addition, there could be separate lines of defense or other measures that could enhance Israel’s security. The arrangements in the Sinai and in the Golan Heights provide models of how Israel’s security might be enhanced until confidence in a lasting peace can be fully developed. We would urge all the parties to think realistically about security arrangements to reduce the fear of surprise attack, to make acts of aggression difficult if not impossible, and to limit the military forces that would confront one another in sensitive areas. This approach recognizes the fact that there is a profound asymmetry in what the two sides in the Middle East are seeking. On the one hand, a principal Arab concern is to regain lost territory. On the other, 9 For the full text of an exchange of toasts between President Carter and King Hus-
