International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 747 We have set in train a number of actions which will assist LDCs in their adjustment process, including adaptations in the international financial institutions (IMF and World Bank). These measures are, however, only a partial response to the problem. Historically, the economic growth of the industrial countries has been far more important as an engine of growth for the LDCs than the contributions of aid or lending by international financial institutions. We should keep these international considerations in mind as we approach the possibility of a tax reduction and the President’s overall budget proposals for January. 250. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, September 25, 1980 SUBJECT Friday Breakfast 1. Bill Miller called up in considerable agitation about the question of the President’s attendance at the annual IMF/IBRD meeting September 30. The schedulers say that the President will be in town that day, but he will be busy catching up and so would not have time to speak to the Bank/Fund meeting.2 Bill believes that the President’s failure to open this meeting, as he and other Presidents have done in the past, would: a) have highly adverse consequences for our relations with developing countries, particularly in view of our recent negative position in the UN debates on North/South negotiations. It would be seen by them 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 26, Friday Breakfast: 3/78–12/80. No classification marking. Sent for action. Brzezinski wrote at the top of the page: “done—OK. ZB.” An unknown person wrote below Brzezinski’s note: “H.O. reports that Miller has raised this with the P. who seemed receptive but Miller still wants the issue raised at b’fast.” 2 In a September 19 memorandum to Carter, Owen suggested some themes for a speech by Carter at the annual joint meeting of the IMF and World Bank in Washington. (Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 206, [9/22/80—Not Submitted—DF]) Phil Wise recommended not forwarding the memorandum, writing on a White House memorandum requesting his comments: “The P has no time to prepare for such a speech nor does he gain politically from it.” (Ibid.)
