330
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
118.
Memorandum Prepared by Max Thornburg1
August 22, 1952.
What would we have to do?
Make up our own minds, promptly, concerning three things:
(1) Our own readiness to back the Shah in establishing a “respon-
sible” government, by which we would mean, among other things, one
loyal to the Shah, dedicated to necessary reforms within the country,
willing to collaborate with us in such aids as we offer (economic, tech-
nical, military training, etc.), disposed to accept a reasonable settlement
of the oil dispute (when the time comes), and opposed to Communism.
(2) The kind of a proposition we are prepared to make to the
British: i.e. what we have decided to do on our own whether they come
along or not; what we would like to have them do; what position we
would take concerning the oil settlement if the British join us in the pro-
gram—and if they do not.
(3) The kind of a proposition we are prepared to make to the Shah:
i.e. what we think he should do; what kind of support he could expect
from us, and from the British insofar as we act as “guarantors” for
them; the principles upon which the oil dispute must be settled when
the time comes.
Having reached decisions in principle concerning these points in-
sofar as it is possible to do so at this early stage, and assuming that our
decision is to go ahead, the staff selected to detail and carry out the next
phase must include one or two who know the Shah personally and
command his confidence. Presumably the British contact would be be-
tween very high officials. Depending upon the nature of the British par-
ticipation, they might add their own representative to contact the Shah.
From here on, we must work back from what the Shah would have
to do, and what opposition might be expected.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Intelligence, Job
80B01676R, Box 41, Folder 20, Shah of Iran Operations. Confidential. The memorandum
is attached to a letter from Dulles to Bruce, September 3, which is itself attached to a
memorandum from Dulles to Roosevelt, also September 3. In his letter to Bruce, Dulles
commented about Thornburg’s memorandum: “I would point out that the memorandum
of 22 August 1952 and very possibly the section on Iran in his memorandum enclosed
with his letter of 28 August were prepared before he had information regarding the latest
developments resulting from Mossadegh’s attitude to the joint proposals.” In the Dep-
uties’ Meeting held on August 20 at the Central Intelligence Agency and chaired by DCI
Smith, Dulles reported “that (1) Max Thornburg, an expert on Iran, was in the city and he
expected to seem him today; (2) he would furnish a report of his conversation with
Thornburg to the Director; (3) Thornburg had submitted a plan for Iran which has been
sent to NE for study.” (Ibid., Folder 10, Minutes of Deputies’ Meetings)
