Options Identified
213
to call loan B and so on. Declaration of default by the Export-Import
Bank would reinforce this process some, but not add much since most
American loans have already been triggered.
Secretary Brown noted that the trick is to get other countries’ banks
to join in.
The President asked whether it takes action by the heads of state.
Secretary Miller replied that it differed by country. The French
own the banks, so it is a government question, whereas in Germany
the banks are private. However, it requires a head of state decision
since without that kind of political judgment the banks will not do it.
It is not a legal decision, it is policy. It will not be easy to get. He
suggested proceeding in steps. First we should approach the various
advisors through emissaries with written instructions. They should
brief but not pull out all the stops. That would be premature until we
have softened the turf. Treasury and State representatives should go
to the UK and France, another team to Germany and Switzerland this
week. There should be a Presidential message saying they are coming.
Dr. Brzezinski wondered if this message should preview economic
sanctions? We would be using up a lot of ammunition on this initial
step.
Secretary Miller said that the tougher message should be carried
by Vance, who will be going to Europe for the NATO meeting.
Secretary Vance agreed.
The President agreed, noting that Vance should sit down with each
of them for an hour or so. They must know the seriousness of the
situation and the seriousness with which we regard their reluctance
to help. In the letter he should say that Vance was coming later.5
Dr. Brzezinski said Vance should make the point that the only
alternative to multilateral economic actions was unilateral action by
the U.S.
Secretary Vance said the implications of an embargo were very
serious. We must think how it would be received in the Arab world.
The reaction could be violence in spades. It would be viewed as the
Western Christian world ganging up on the Islamic world.
Secretary Miller said there were serious implications about contin-
ued oil delivery.
Mr. Cutler wondered about the legal ability to proclaim an
embargo.
5 The draft letter is in Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office
File, Box 17, SCC Meeting #219 held 12/5/79. The NAC Ministerial meeting was held
in Brussels December 13–14.
