10  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Secretary Brown: I believe our existing process works well. Most of 
the detailed information has to come from Defense. Our Comptroller, 
through me, works with OMB and the NSC staff to produce the analy-
sis. The recommendations you get from your staff may be contrary to 
our recommendations, but the facts are assembled together. As a prac-
tical matter, it qualifies pretty well as zero based budgeting. I believe 
the Defense Department process is clearer and more along the lines you 
indicated than that of the other departments.
President Carter: I want the OMB budget process to be quite incisive 
and intrusive.
Secretary Brown: We have been through the figures with OMB and 
there are a few items still disagreed. At the present time, the fights 
between Defense and OMB have gone on before the President gets into 
it. If you want to enter the process earlier, we could fight better because 
we would have an idea of your views.
Mr. Cutter: There were 45 issues, and OMB, Defense and the Transi-
tion staffs in the two agencies each had a position on each. OMB wrote 
a letter to Defense defending the OMB position.
President Carter: At what point has the President been involved?
Secretary Vance: We would wrestle the issues with OMB. There 
would still be some unagreed issues. Then the President would sit 
down with OMB, Defense and JCS and make his decisions.
Secretary Brown: That should still be the case except that we would 
have an earlier input from the President.
Dr. Brzezinski: Both State and the NSC should have an opportunity 
to review the budget for political implications.
Secretary Brown: With regard to these particular budget amend-
ments, that review will happen after the fact. In the future, it will 
happen in the course of developing the budget. I wanted to delay my 
recommendations to very near the time for decision so as to minimize 
the political flack. However, they began to leak, and we are already get-
ting some flack from the Congress, and we will be hearing from some 
foreign countries. The longer the lapse between recommendations and 
decisions, the worse the effect will be.
President Carter: I want a fairly definitive presentation to me quite 
early. I will set out as much time as we need. I want you to explain to 
me how you arrived at the 45 items. Let’s have a multi-­hour session 
within the next week where I can ask questions. I don’t have an ade-
quate basis on which to reach conclusions. I don’t want to interfere, 
but the final decision is mine. I don’t like to be presented with a final 
product without having a more complete presentation. I may be able to 
help. The more I am involved, the more you will have my imprimatur 
and my support. There might be disagreements, but I don’t look on this
