12  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
(b) the United States would be prepared to consult with the 
Preparatory Group of the International Coffee Convention, signed at 
Rio de Janeiro on January 27, 1958 (not yet in operation)10 or in any other 
forum acceptable to the Latin American and African coffee producers.
II
Financial Assistance
The Latin Americans persistently contend that existing sources of 
financing are inadequate, in the light of their enormous needs of for-
eign capital for development, to attain a satisfactory rate of economic 
development. Many are irritated by our insistence that the major con-
tributions to such development must be made by private enterprise, 
Latin American as well as foreign. Without changing this cornerstone 
of our policy on financial assistance, or the hard criteria of the existing 
banking institutions, there is much which can be done to satisfy the 
legitimate and reasonable aspiration of these countries.
Our loan policy is already undergoing some changes and the rec-
ommendations below, although seemingly novel, will merely maintain 
or somewhat accelerate the existing trend. For example, our present 
policy states that we make grants of soft loans in Latin America only 
when a country finds itself in a temporary emergency which it cannot 
meet with the resources at its command. The establishment of DLF and 
PL 48011 have already rendered part of this rule obsolete. The contin-
uance of grants to Bolivia and Haiti for years have strained the term 
“temporary emergency” and yet nobody would seriously contend that 
we can withdraw grant aid from these two countries. Guatemala may 
also be in this category. In essence the rule said, “Regardless of our 
assistance policies in other areas, in Latin America there is no grant aid 
except in case of temporary emergency.”
Steps have already been taken to bring our NSC policy statement 
into accord with the facts and practice. It is expected that the rule will 
be dropped and decisions made on a case basis as overall U.S. interest 
require. It is not anticipated that any more money will be spent as a 
result of dropping this rule.
Recommendations:
1. Continue the recent and satisfactory acceleration of the Export-
Import Bank activities in Latin America. (It is assumed that the lending 
authority of that Bank will be extended as requested).
10 Reference is to the International Coffee Conference, held at Rio de Janeiro, January 
20–27, 1958; for a report on the conference and the coffee convention, see Department of 
Commerce, Foreign Commerce Weekly, February 24, 1958, p. 3.
11 Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 (Public Law 33–480), 
approved July 10, 1954; for text, see 68 Stat. 454.
