Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
381
numbers of people suffering from Malaria has been reduced by 80–90%
in the past three decades.
• The yields of rice and wheat in Asia are estimated to be substan-
tially higher today because of the introduction of high-yielding vari-
eties. More than a billion dollars worth of grain each year is ascribed to
the new seed.
Beyond these successes, the record reveals countless instances in
which projects funded by foreign assistance have improved the lives of
people in fundamental ways.
• When a village has clean water, its children are no longer made
sick from the water they drink.
• When couples have access to family planning services, there are
fewer mouths to feed.
• When a clinic is constructed, modern medicine enters lives for
the first time.
• And when a job program begins, the unemployed can find work
and have incomes.
Progress has been made. But more has to be done. Over the last 15
months the Carter Administration has made a substantial effort to fur-
ther improve the management and effectiveness of all of our programs.
Let me report to you on some of the steps we have already taken or
will soon implement to achieve this objective.
One of the key problems with foreign assistance over the years has
been a lack of adequate coordination between our bilateral programs
and our activities in the international financial institutions. Responsi-
bility for these various programs is spread throughout several Cabinet
Departments and agencies.
Shortly before his death, Senator Hubert Humphrey introduced
legislation which called for a sweeping reorganization of the gov-
ernment’s foreign aid programs designed to meet these defects in coor-
dination, The Carter Administration announced its support of the basic
purposes of this bill. Although the Congress will probably not consider
this legislation in the current session, the Administration is moving to
put into place a new interagency coordinating mechanism which we
believe will go a long way toward having the executive branch better
coordinate its diverse development efforts.2
2 Humphrey’s International Development Cooperation bill proposed the establish-
ment of a single foreign aid agency charged with administering bilateral and multilateral
aid programs. Following Humphrey’s death on January 13, Case and Sparkman intro-
duced the bill in Congress. Although Humphrey’s bill was not enacted into law, the Pres-
ident subsequently issued Executive Order 12163 on September 29, 1979, establishing the
International Development Cooperation Agency (IDCA). The IDCA began operations on
October 1, 1979. See Graham Hovey, “A Humphrey Legacy: Bill to Streamline Foreign
Aid,” The New York Times, January 26, 1978, p. A–3; Congress and the Nation, vol. V,
1977–1980, pp. 74–75; and Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 1792–1800.
