854  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
We recognize fully that Villeda is weak and vacillating but we are doing 
everything in our power to induce him to correct his errors, particularly 
his indifference to anti-Somoza revolutionary plots in Honduras.
2. Villeda is the darling of the liberal group which included Muñós 
Marin of Puerto Rico; Figueres; Betancourt, and possibly Castro. Any 
attempt to overthrow his Government will incur their active enmity. He 
is also popular in the United States.
3. I do not think Nicaragua can depend too much on any 
Government that would succeed Villeda Morales, be it run by Carias, 
the Army, either Gálves, Williams, or anybody else. The overthrow 
of Villeda would immediately or eventually precipitate a civil war in 
Honduras with help to the Liberal Party from the same outside groups 
that are anti-Somoza in sentiment.
The above assumptions would lead one to believe that we consider 
the Somozas already dedicated to the overthrow of Villeda. Perhaps 
they are innocent of such intentions but while Colonel Velásquez is in 
Nicaragua they are suspect. We have a recent report that the clandes-
tine radio station which attacks Villeda daily is on Nicaraguan soil. In 
any event, there are many who want to point the finger of suspicion at 
the Somozas.
In the light of a changing balance of power in the Caribbean basin, 
I think that the Somozas should give some serious thought to a policy of 
using Villeda as a possible “shield” against outside interference, rather 
than as a person to be eliminated before the heat really is put on by their 
enemies. I admit that this may be distasteful to the Somozas, who feel 
strongly that Villeda did not clamp down on Nicaraguan exile activity 
last year until he was pressured into it. However, the Somozas must be 
aware that we kept constant pressure on Villeda through Ambassador 
Newbegin in Tegucigalpa to take some action against men like Pedro 
Vivas, Colonel Gómez Flores, and others. It may also be argued that 
the Nicaraguan Government might be thoroughly double-­crossed by 
Villeda if it attempted to work out an agreement whereby both coun-
tries would actively discourage revolutionary activities. However, it is 
in our interests to maintain Central America in the relatively peaceful 
state it now enjoys and we would be exerting our influence in keeping 
both sides honest should an agreement be reached.
Let me say now that if the Somozas are caught in the act of trying 
to depose Villeda we would consider they committed a most unwise 
and foolhardy act and it would influence our attitude toward their 
Government. Moreover, if Nicaragua were haled before the OAS again 
on charges of this kind, we would probably have to join in the censure 
that most certainly would result if it were found guilty.
I will greatly appreciate your comments in an early reply, taking 
into account the new situation created by the overthrow of Batista and
