Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
229
more our own lives are shaped by events in other cities, decisions in
other States, tensions in other parts of the world.
And as Americans we cannot overlook the way that our fate is
bound to that of other nations. This interdependence stretches from the
health of our economy, through war and peace, to the security of our
own energy supplies. It’s a new world in which we cannot afford to be
narrow in our vision, limited in our foresight, or selfish in our purpose.
When I took office almost exactly 6 months ago, our Nation was
faced with a series of problems around the world—in southern Africa,
the Middle East, in our relationships with our NATO allies, and
on such tough questions as nuclear proliferation, negotiations with
our former adversaries, a Panama Canal treaty, human rights, world
poverty.
We have openly and publicly addressed these and other many dif-
ficult and controversial issues—some of which had been either skirted
or postponed in the past.
As I pointed out in a recent press conference, a period of debate,
disagreement, probing was inevitable.2 Our goal has not been to reach
easy or transient agreements, but to find solutions that are meaningful,
balanced, and lasting.
Now, a President has a responsibility to present to the people of
this Nation reports and summations of complex and important matters.
I feel more secure as President making decisions if I know that either
the most difficult, the most complex questions that face me have been
understood and debated by you and understood and debated by the
Congress.
In the past I think our Nation’s leaders have been guilty of making
decisions in secret. And even when the decision turns out to be the
right one, it makes the President, the Secretary of State speak with a
weak voice when they speak alone.
Today, I want to discuss a vitally important aspect of our foreign
relations, the one that may most directly shape the chances for peace
for us and for our children. I would like to spell out my view of what
we have done and where we are going in our relations with the Soviet
Union and to reaffirm the basic principles of our national policy.
I don’t have any apology for talking about foreign affairs at a
southern legislative conference, because foreign affairs and those diffi-
cult decisions ought never to be made with a concept that we can
abandon common sense and the sound judgment and the constructive
influence of the American people.
2 Reference is to the President’s July 12 news conference. For text, see ibid., pp.
1231–1239.
