National Security Policy  1193
stockpiling for the initial post-­attack period, and limited to measures 
involving least disruption to the economy, least cost to the Government, 
and with maximum private participation, as provided in present policy. 
(CALL ON: OCDM Director, to speak to the Majority view.)
Par. 24, p. 17: Reflects the Minority view of Treasury and Budget 
that Federal advice and guidance to industry on recovery from attack 
should be limited to the initial post-­attack period.
Miscellaneous Issues
5. At other points in the paper appear other split views which the 
Council may wish to consider:
Par. 12–­b, p. 9–10: Here the JCS differed with the Majority on the 
question of whether U.S. efforts to develop an anti-­ICBM capability 
should proceed to a completed system, or whether in the course of that 
development there should be provision for some operational capability 
without waiting for the complete system. A comparative study of U.S. 
and Soviet programs to develop anti-­ballistic missile capabilities was 
reported to the President in October by the Comparative Evaluation 
Group—with no recommendation for efforts to demonstrate a kill capa­
bility prior to completion of the current NIKE ZEUS program, although 
the psychological advantage of an early demonstration was recognized. 
(CALL ON: JCS for comment on the language proposed for Par. 12–­b).
Par. 19–­a. p. 15: Here, Defense-­JCS propose deletion of the final 
clause which would require that the Secretary of Defense consult with 
the Director of OCDM before locating new fixed retaliatory bases and 
major administrative headquarters. (CALL ON: Defense and OCDM)
Par. 19–­b. p. 15: There is agreement on the requirement for fallout 
shelter in the construction of new Federal civilian buildings of suit­
able size. However, as to existing Federal buildings, the majority favor 
incorporation of fallout shelter in all buildings capable of such incor­
poration, whereas Treasury-­Budget feel that fallout shelter should be 
incorporated into only those existing buildings which may be selected 
on a basis of relative criticality. (CALL ON: Treasury and Budget).
282.	 Briefing Note for the December 20 NSC Meeting1
Washington, December 19, 1960
The first part of the [illegible in the original] item is a report by 
NASA on its outer space programs.
At the meeting on November 7, 1960, the Council heard a presen­
tation by [illegible in the original] on the outer space programs being 
1 Source: NASA space programs. Confidential. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Whitman 
File, NSC Records.
