National Security Policy  711
The President then asked if the FBI engaged in such searches, and 
Mr. Scribner replied in the negative. Mr. Scribner added, however, that 
apart form the boarding and searching, other services engaged in vari­
ous kinds of personnel processing. Mr. Scribner cited the Immigration 
Service as an example.
The President thought it best to leave the policy as it was for the 
moment, except to take a liberalized outlook as to the kind of goods 
which might be carried in Polish vessels. He thought also that if there 
was a great increase in the number of such vessels, occasioning prob­
lems for the Treasury Department, the Treasury Department could 
come back and report that fact to the Council.
Secretary Herter inquired whether any internal security prob­
lems had been encountered with respect to the several ships which 
have been permitted entry thus far, and Mr. Hoover responded that in 
the case of the Polish ships the FBI had found six intelligence agents. 
He added that in the case of the British, they had reported the discov­
ery of forty such agents.
The Attorney General observed that there was another aspect of 
the problem which had not as yet been discussed, and he referred spe­
cifically to the matter of trying to keep track of the crews of these ves­
sels once the ships had docked at our ports. The President asked if such 
crews were permitted to go ashore, and the Attorney General replied in 
the affirmative, noting that it was most difficult, in fact impossible, to 
surveill all the members of such crews. He noted that other correlative 
problems arose, such as the question of ascertaining whether defectees 
were bona fide in character. He said the last mentioned problem some­
times required drawn-­out processes in our courts to determine whether 
they would be sent back to their country of origin. The Attorney General 
said that he agreed with the suggestion that the present program be 
continued with a view to re-­examining it in the fall.
The President again referred to U.S. attempts to try to open up 
certain areas with the Poles in an endeavor to drive a wedge between 
them and the Soviets. He said underlying such efforts was the desire 
to get some of these countries to appreciate that we have not aban­
doned them. He noted that these efforts sometimes caused differences 
between the Soviets and the satellite countries involved, and that we 
ought to continue to try to exploit such differences. The President did 
not see, however, why it was necessary to alter the policy under discus­
sion in order to accomplish this purpose.
Secretary Herter referred to our continuing efforts to keep the 
Poles from complete submission to the Soviets, and he indicated that 
a number of these efforts were involved in the proposal made to the 
Council by the Department of State.
The President inquired whether there would be any advantage to 
telling the Poles that we would permit a specific number of additional
