Panama  933
PM–31.	
Letter from the Deputy Under Secretary of State for 
Political Affairs (Merchant) to the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs 
(Knight)1

Washington, January 22, 1960.
Dear Bob:
I have received your letter of January 14, I–216/60,2 by which the 
Department of Defense positions on the issues of (1) the display of the 
Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone, and (2) resale of luxury items, and 
third country imports into the Canal Zone, were transmitted to this 
Department.
My colleagues and I have carefully reviewed the Defense posi-
tions as well as the two memoranda supporting them. As I stated at the 
January 7 meeting at my office, during which the issue of third coun-
try purchases was last discussed by representatives of State, Defense 
and the Panama Canal Company, I find that our differing positions are 
apparently irreconcilable and I have approved a recommendation that 
the Secretary of State forward a Memorandum for the President recom-
mending that Caribbean Command be directed to revise its policies on 
third country imports for resale to conform with those already put into 
effect by the Panama Canal Company.
On the Panamanian flag issue, I have recommended that further 
action be suspended for the time being in view of certain developments 
which are now taking place. We will not fail to take the views of the 
Department of Defense into consideration when a recommendation is 
being formulated. As of the present time, however, no final position has 
been taken at the higher levels of this Department.
I am enclosing a copy of the Department’s Memorandum for the 
President on the unresolved third country import issues.3 It has been 
approved by the Secretary and will be transmitted to the White House 
shortly.
Sincerely yours,
Livingston T. Merchant
Livingston T. Merchant
Under Secretary for Political Affairs
1. Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.19/1–1460. Confidential. Drafted 
by Sharp on January 20.
2 See Document PM–29.
3 For the Secretary of State’s Memorandum to the President, see Document PM–30.
