World Hunger and Food Policy
669
• New genetic strains and other manipulations of breeding and
farming practices to enhance resistance to pests, weather aberrations,
and chemical variations in soils
• Increasing biological nitrogen fixation associated with legum-
inous plants and devising similar biological nitrogen fixation for cereal
grains, to reduce dependence on chemical fertilizer
• Land management, e.g., use of ruminant livestock as foragers on
uncultivable range land and on crop residues to capture one of the
world’s largest wastes in food production
• Soil management practices to permit production on acidic trop-
ical soils
• Reduction in post-harvest losses, which reach 50% in some coun-
tries due to lack of food preservation, storage, or protection from pests
and rodents
The Chinese have used some of these and other methods to
progress from famine to self-sufficiency in food production in 25 years.
This kind of research and technology transfer could form the basis
of a new thrust in our aid to developing countries.4
Do you wish a group from the NAS to present their findings to you
prior to briefing Congress?
I will arrange for briefing EOP staff and Cabinet officers.5
4 In a June 15 memorandum to Bourne, Brzezinski, Eizenstat, and Chip Carter,
Press explained how transferring technological “know-how” to the developing world fit
into the President’s larger human needs strategy. Press suggested that universities, gov-
ernment agencies, and, to a lesser extent, U.S. industry collaborate in this effort. (Carter
Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 324, World Hunger
[2])
5 According to a June 9 memorandum from Press to Mondale, Bourne, Brzezinski,
Chip Carter, Eizenstat, Lance, and Warren, Press arranged for a briefing on June 20 in the
New Executive Office Building. (Ibid.) In a separate June 9 memorandum to Mondale,
Press drew the Vice President’s attention to the NAS report, extended an invitation to the
briefing, and commented that he would work with Mondale or his staff if the Vice Presi-
dent desired additional information about world hunger. (Minnesota Historical Society,
Mondale Papers, Vice Presidential Papers, Central Files, AG 8, World Food Problem) In
the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s June 20 evening report to Brzezinski, Tuchman indicated
that she had attended the briefing, which lasted for 2 hours. (Carter Library, National Se-
curity Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36,
Evening Reports: 5–7/77) No record of the briefing was found.
