National Security Policy  35
Enclosure
Report Prepared by the NSC Planning Board
Washington, undated
U.S. OVERSEAS MILITARY BASES
Planning Board Comments and 
Recommendations on the Main Issues of the Nash Report
MAIN THESIS
1. Present and Future Need for the Base System.
Statement of the Issue (Report, pp. 4–5, 7–13): Our base2 system is key 
to our survival as a nation. During the next ten years, despite changes 
in weapons technology, our overseas base system will remain essential 
(a) to maintain and disperse our deterrent to general war; (b) to maintain 
tactical forces to deter and cope with local aggression; and (c) to support 
foreign policy objectives. The general scope and pattern of our base sys­
tem are not likely to diminish in size and complexity during this period, 
and a net increase will probably be required, at least initially, to accom­
modate new weapons, to meet new Soviet offensive techniques, and to 
disperse. Adjustments and shifts in emphasis will occur as we adjust our 
strategic doctrine to new weapons, improvements in the mobility and 
firepower of our tactical forces, and the political or military vulnerability 
of particular overseas areas. The central problem, therefore, is how the 
United States can maintain substantially its present overseas base com­
plex over the next ten years, recognizing that to maintain it calls for a 
positive but flexible approach in our relations with our allies, and in the 
formulation and administration of our own policies.
Planning Board Comment: Substantially our present base system 
will be needed for at least five years, although it is not certain that 
it will be needed for the next ten years. After five years, a number of 
technological and political developments could alter the base system 
or the reasons for its maintenance. Even if such technological devel­
opments should permit some reduction in base requirements related 
to general war, there will probably remain substantially the present 
requirement for bases to maintain tactical forces against local aggres­
sion and to support foreign policy.
2 The word “base” is used in its broadest sense to cover the installations and deploy­
ments of all elements of the U.S. ground, sea and air forces located outside the territory of 
the United States. [Footnote is in the original.]
