Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 275 objective in the defense and space negotiations is to reduce the risk of war by enhancing stability and predictability. The U.S. interest in the Strategic Defense Initiative, which complies fully with the ABM Treaty, is the result of our belief that advances in technology may present new opportunities for risk reduction based on strengthening deterrence through increased reliance on strategic defenses. In the defense and space negotiations, we want to encourage hard thinking about how a balance of offensive and defensive forces could lead to a more stable strategic relationship. We want to encourage serious discussion of how both countries might cooperate in moving toward a more stable balance that relies increasingly on effective strategic defenses, should they prove feasible. Further, we will preserve our options to deploy advanced defenses when they are ready. V Because stabilizing reductions are in the interests of both countries, the United States does not believe that completion of a START agreement should await resolution of defense and space issues. Since the ABM Treaty was signed and ratified in 1972, the magnitude and power of the nuclear threat has grown several fold. That is why we urge that the Soviet Union join with us in working toward the conclusion of a START treaty expeditiously without any preconditions. Furthermore, I must remind you that the United States cannot conclude another strategic arms control agreement without resolution of the Krasnoyarsk radar violation. The United States considers the only appropriate resolution of this issue to be the dismantlement of the radar and the destruction of the transmitter and receiver buildings and their foundations in a manner observable by national technical means. To date, Soviet responses to this problem have been unsatisfactory and have failed to meet U.S. concerns. The United States is willing to consider other Soviet proposals provided our criteria are met. VI Mr. Ambassador, the American delegation has returned to Geneva prepared for constructive, business-­like negotiations so that the sides may make serious progress toward effective treaties. The U.S. side envisions round eleven as an opportunity to reestablish the working relationships of our negotiating groups, and to reaffirm previous positions and to present some new ideas where appropriate, and to hear Soviet ideas. As Secretary of State Baker and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze have agreed, after seeing the lay of the land over the course of the next six weeks, the negotiations will recess to allow both sides sufficient time to analyze in our respective capitals the results of the dialogue during this round.
