National Security Policy 1113 U.S. response. It seems to me that in most of the contemplated circum­ stances, especially with reference to China, the aggressive actions by the Bloc will have been taken in the expectation, and in spite of the fact, that we will react as strongly as is indicated in each of the several examples. 3. In several instances in the scenarios (e.g., page 49, para. 5 a, page 77, para. F) it is stated that the guidance provided U.S. command­ ers is to the effect that “military action should be conventional—until it became clear that over-­all national objectives could not be achieved in this way.” It seems to me that there is the clear implication that the way to get out of a jam is to start throwing nuclear weapons around. This might have been reasonable in 1950, but seems out of date now that the other guys have large numbers too. There seems to be a lingering idea that the use of nuclear weapons is advantageous for our side, an idea not supported by analysis. 4. Particularly as evidenced in the Berlin example, there is an important point that is developed in these studies, but which doesn’t seem to have been quite realized, though it is obvious; that is, that in almost all cases where there is a question of the conflict being expanded, it is the U.S. that must make the decision for a qualitative relaxation of limits, e.g., with respect to Berlin, it is we who must cause the first physical violence (knocking down barriers, detonating mines, etc.), and it would be we who would have to make the decision to introduce nuclear weapons, and eventually we who would have to make the deci­ sion to start an all-­out nuclear exchange. Because we are quantitatively inferior (and in the case of Berlin, particularly, in such a vulnerable position), the Bloc can always increase the scale of fighting gradually and quantitatively, while we must then either back down or make a qualitative decision. I would submit that it is probably easier to make the decision to send in one more division (especially when you know the other guy doesn’t have any more) than it is to make the decision to introduce nuclear weapons or start an all-­out TN exchange (when you know the other guy has like capabilities). 5. In summary, I think we are probably in a lot weaker position than the authors of this paper would like to have us believe. Two detailed comments. a). Apparently the use of improved types of conventional ordnance by the U.S. was not considered in the analysis on the grounds that the secrets here are too precious to risk in a limited war; b). The airlift analysis is worrisome. The CRAF (Civil Reserve Air Fleet) is assumed used though the Korean War was not deemed a suffi­ cient emergency, I believe, to require its use. It is untested. The a/c can­ not carry vehicles, guns, etc., because of openings and floor loadings. Resupply of forces by air is an operation that can consume a lot of air lift. In a place like Iran, it would require at least 30 days and more likely
