Haiti 793 including one or two probable Communists.5 While it is difficult to assess the degree of influence exerted by these men, it is likely that they have considerable control over access to the President and over the information reaching him. However, the Haitian military still have access to Duvalier and influence with him. We believe that as yet the President’s leftist advisors can do little more than intensify his own prejudices, and that Duvalier—­a tough-­minded and suspicious man—­ probably still makes or approves of all major decisions himself. 21. For its part, the Haitian Communist movement, despite a modest revival, remains the smallest in Latin America, and is unlikely to be a decisive factor while Duvalier is in office. The Communist Party and the pro-Communist Popular Socialist Party have been outlawed for years and there is no evidence of an effective underground in Haiti or among Haitian exiles. While Duvalier harps on the potential threat of communism, he probably does not see it as an immediate threat to him. On the contrary, although he acts from time to time against Communist activities, he finds it necessary or useful to employ the administrative talents of individual Communists and has acquiesced in the return of key Communist figures from exile. Nevertheless, the Communists, who are chiefly mulatto intellectuals, are still few in number. Their influence and that of their sympathizers is as yet primarily as individuals in the government bureaucracy—­some in key posts—­and in the press, education, and intellectual circles. Their continued location in their present positions enables them to stimulate anti-American sentiment and to work toward the development of an effective Communist organization. 22. The main threat to continued stability arises from the President’s ill health. Still vigorous in appearance, Duvalier continues to suffer the bad effects of his severe heart attack. Should he die or be seriously incapacitated for a prolonged period, a struggle for power would be certain to ensue. There is no one leader who could command the quick and widespread support necessary for strong government. The military would be likely to seize control of the government, but probably would not be able to stabilize the situation. The result would probably be a period of disorder similar to the nine-­month hiatus preceding the installation of Duvalier, when six provisional governments rose and fell. In such an unstable situation, pro-Castro elements would certainly strive to gain control of Haiti. 5 Paul Blanchet, Minister of Coordination and Information and Secretary-General of the Cabinet; Herve Boyer, Minister of Commerce and one of Haiti’s few competent economists; Gerard Philippeaux, Minister of Finance and Agriculture; Michel Lamartiniere Honorat, Minister of Public Works; Clovis Desinor, director designate of the economic planning board; Jules Blanchet, Chairman of the Haitian budgetary and accounting institution. Honorat was an openly declared member of the Haitian Communist Party in 1946. Jules Blanchet, perhaps the ideological leader of the group, was a founding member of the marxist Popular Socialist Party in 1946.
