793.00/114: Telegram [Document 669] The Secretary of State to the Minister in China (MacMurray) WASHINGTON, August 3, 1925—5 p.m. 181. Your 306 August 1, 9 P.M. Department’s 180 of August 1, 3 P.M. covers conversation which Japanese Ambassador had with me on July 31, evidently in response to his Government’s instructions mentioned in paragraph 2 of your telegram. … In any case, the Japanese Government should have been prepared for this Government’s views as Tokyo’s 118 of July 1, 4 P.M.13 indicates that you expressed the opinion that “the present situation in China makes it necessary for the special economic conference to assume a position a little beyond the scope of the conference in order to reestablish Chinese confidence.” As stated to you in Department’s 170, July 28, 2 P.M. the British Embassy here communicated to the Department the text of a proposed declaration which the British Government desired to use as the basis for an identic expression on the part of the Powers of their attitude toward the Chinese proposals, the opening sentences of which I now quote more fully: “The Washington Customs Treaty provided for the early convocation of a conference at which by the agreement between China and the Nine Powers certain economic measures should be adopted for the benefit of China as a whole. The spirit animating the Powers remains today what it was then. Various subsequent changes in the situation which have delayed the meeting of a conference have not affected the original intentions of the Powers; on the contrary, they have confirmed these intentions whilst the Powers themselves consider that the objects of the Washington Conference are to fulfill an agreement to be reached at the Tariff Conference which will require to be of a more far-reaching and comprehensive nature than was originally contemplated. The Powers further hope that the Tariff Conference will be but the first step in a comprehensive revision of the treaties which they express their willingness to undertake at the earliest opportunity.” British viewpoint was adopted in preparing Department’s draft of proposed reply as this Government was and is ready to extend the scope of the conference beyond that originally intended by the treaty. You should know that British Government submitted its views also to Japanese Government and that Japanese amendment of British proposal omitted all reference to extension of scope of conference. It would therefore seem that Shidehara, finding British Government and this Government ready to extend
