3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 258 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI The Secretary responded that it was important to stop fighting and get a peace settlement. He thought this was a common objective. He said the situation was increasing in importance and in public attention and it would have a bad effect on our bilateral relations. Therefore, he said, there should be a diplomatic initiative by both countries to try to resolve the issues. Dobrynin asked if we had any suggestions. The Secretary replied that we had been working on it and would make specific proposals. He said that we would sit down with the USSR and talk them out when this was done, and he asked Dobrynin to think about what suggestions the Soviet side might also make. The Secretary said, for example, that it might be possible to resolve the problem between Kenya and Somalia, which might lead to a treaty of peace and friendship between the two countries. This would then leave the problem of getting a ceasefire in the Ogaden. Dobrynin said this was the Soviet position, too, to try to get a ceasefire, but it would be possible only if the Somalis would withdraw their troops. He stressed that the Ethiopians would only accept a ceasefire if the Somalis withdrew. The Secretary said that meanwhile there were very heavy Soviet shipments, military advisers, and Cubans already in a military role, and this was having a bad effect and should stop. Dobrynin said that it is not right to assume that the Cubans are doing what the USSR tells them to do. In closing, the Secretary said there was already so much of a military presence in Ethiopia that it was going to sink the place. Dobrynin acknowledged that they had enough, in his personal opinion, and he added some personal remarks to the effect that some American officials seem to be saying that the USSR is starting this conflict, and is responsible for it, but he exempted the Secretary from this charge. Attachment Oral Statement From the U.S. Leadership to the Soviet Leadership3 Washington, January 14, 1978 We appreciate your statement on December 284 of the pledge by Ethiopia not to use Soviet military supplies outside its own territory. 3 No classification marking. 4 Vance and Shulman met with Dobrynin on December 28, 1977. Shulman’s memorandum for the files is in Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 3, CV–Dobrynin, 12/28/77.
