Negotiating Channels 351 Council chamber for his office he engaged in a highly emotional exchange with Amb Naik (Pakistan). Waldheim was still worked up when we began our conversation. Probably only Mrs. Waldheim would believe how emotional and angry he was. 2. Waldheim began with sharp criticism of Naik, Pakistan FM Shahi and all others who offered him advice without knowing what they were talking about and with only the objective of getting a piece of the action. Shahi had misled him, had told him that he would be welcome and received by the Revolutionary Council and Khomeini. Instead of a welcome he had barely managed to escape with his life. 3. Waldheim then went on to describe the harrowing scene at the cemetery. He recalled that for a brief period he [was] left alone in the car with an angry mob outside and made it to the waiting helicopter by directing the non-English speaking driver down a sidewalk and between rows of tombstones. In Waldheim’s view the demonstration was not accidental [and] consisted of hystericals who had been bussed to the cemetery even though his appearance was unexpected (the visit, although previously scheduled, had been publicly cancelled after an assassination plot was discovered.) 4. On his visit to the Revolutionary Council, Waldheim said he was forced to walk 200 yards in darkness through a threatening mob. On his departure the mob knocked Ghotbzadeh to the ground while pushing Waldheim ahead alone. 5. With regard to his discussions, Waldheim said he spent most of his time listening to Iranian charges against the United States. He said he found an unreasoning hatred against the United States and against the United Nations, which the Iranians believe to be under American control. 6. Waldheim said that all of the familiar names were present at the Revolutionary Council meeting. The Council was made up of wellmeaning but naive and powerless men. Only Khomeini exercised power; but Khomeini’s power was certain only if he took no action which might meet with the opposition of the “students” at the Embassy. The “students” were “a state within a state.” Khomeini is a weak fanatic who refuses to do what he can to save his country from an abyss.3 7. Waldheim said that he saw no hope for progress toward release of the hostages and, given the chaos in Iran, was concerned for their safety. In the circumstances, President Carter had an extremely difficult decision to make. Sanctions would have no effect and were even wel- 3 The word “weak” is circled and, in the right margin of the telegram, an unknown hand wrote: “weak? A different assessment from ours.”
