National Security Policy  307
This Authorization still remains in effect.
2. On May 22, 1957, the President approved a new “Authorization 
for the Expenditure of Nuclear Weapons” under certain conditions:
a. This Authorization first stated that, [text not declassified] nuclear 
weapons could be expended for:
(1) Defense of the United States, its territories and possessions:
(a) Against air attack in U.S. territories and coastal air defense 
identification zones (the same provision covered by the original 
Authorization);
(b) Against sea attack in U.S. territories and adjacent international 
waters (new provision);
(c) [text not declassified]
(2) Defense of U.S. forces in foreign territory and in international 
waters against Sino-Soviet Bloc attacking forces (substantially a new 
provision).
b. This Authorization also stated that, in circumstances involv­
ing nuclear attack upon the continental United States [text not declas­
sified] subject in the case of retaliation from friendly foreign territory 
to agreements or understandings with the countries concerned (a new 
provision).
3. The new Authorization was not to come into effect until 
“Implementing Instructions” had been prepared by Defense, con­
curred in by State, and approved by the President.
4. On June 27, 1958, a meeting was held in the President’s office to 
discuss two issues which had developed between State and Defense in 
preparing the “Implementing Instructions”. The first issue, which the 
Secretary of State did not press, was the fact that the retention by the 
President of control over the use of nuclear weapons was of great polit­
ical advantage at the present time. The other issue related to the ques­
tion of whether authority to expend nuclear weapons for defense of U.S. 
forces in foreign territory should be made subject to existing and future 
agreements and understandings with the country or countries involved.
5. As a result of this meeting, the President approved the following 
further action:
a. Defense, with the assistance and concurrence of State, would 
amend the draft instructions presented at the meeting to provide that 
the authority to expend nuclear weapons for defense of U.S. forces in for­
eign territory against Sino-Soviet Bloc attack must not be implemented 
in violation of existing and future agreements or understandings with 
the country or countries concerned. Such amended instructions (to be 
made in only three copies) were to be submitted for the President’s 
approval as a basis for the subsequent preparation and submission for 
Presidential approval of separate implementing instructions to each 
appropriate commander. Each such separate instruction was to contain 
specific guidance regarding applicable agreements or understandings
