Chapter 4, February–April 1990 449 h. Other ALCM Issues. The U.S. position on other ALCM issues remains unchanged. (S) 2. Non-Deployed Ballistic Missiles a. The U.S. should continue to press its current position on measures and constraints related to non-­deployed ballistic missiles, except as modified below. (S) b. The U.S. should propose the establishment of numerical limits on the inventory of non-­deployed mobile ICBMs. The U.S. no longer should seek numerical limits on the inventory of non-­deployed missiles for other types of ICBMs and SLBMs limited under START. For these purposes, a mobile ICBM is a type of ICBM that has been flight-­ tested from a mobile launcher. (S) c. The U.S. should propose limits of 300–500 non-­deployed mobile ICBMs and 1500 warheads that would be attributed to those ICBMs under START RV counting rules. (S) 3. Ban on Data Denial a. The U.S. requires that a START Treaty include an effective ban on the denial of telemetric data during flights of ICBMs and SLBMs limited under START. The provisions to implement such a ban would also apply to Space Launch Vehicles that have been converted from ICBMs or SLBMs limited under START. The U.S. should seek to implement an early agreement on START data denial provisions. In the event that data denial provisions enter into force prior to entry into force of the START Treaty, the START JCIC should serve as the compliance forum for data denial. (S) To achieve these objectives, the U.S. should propose the following measures, based on strict reciprocity. (S) b. The U.S. should propose that the sides undertake a positive obligation to broadcast telemetry from ICBMs and SLBMs limited under START in a receivable form. To that end, the U.S. may offer to: (1) ban low-­power transmission and directional beaming of telemetry signals; (2) exchange data on the frequency and method of modulation used to transmit telemetry; (3) exchange “bit maps” to aid in verifying that the telemetry is not encrypted; (4) subject to conditions to be mutually agreed, exchange tapes of the entire telemetry data stream from a particular flight. (S) c. The U.S. may offer to exchange data on each flight of an ICBM or SLBM limited under START, as follows: (1) acceleration as a function of time, from launch through burn-­up of the post-­boost vehicle; acceleration data on RVs would not be included. (The Arms Control PCC will develop recommendations about the precision of data and time interval between successive data that may be provided.);
