768
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
2. The prospect of a renewal of US discussions with the Soviets on
conventional arms transfer restraint raises once again the problem of
involving the other major suppliers—our principal allies—Britain,
France and Germany. Each of these governments has, to a varying de-
gree, questioned the wisdom of the US approach to its own arms sales,
and has expressed skepticism regarding the prospects for securing
meaningful Soviet cooperation along the lines envisaged by the USG.
None of our allies has been willing to accept the kinds of constraints
which the US has imposed on itself, although the FRG has restrictions
of its own which are in some respects even more far reaching.
3. Clearly no US/Soviet effort at mutual restraint can be long
maintained without cooperation from the other major suppliers.
Western cooperation is, in and of itself, an important objective, in some
instances more important than achieving Soviet restraint. The major
arms sales competition in the third world is not, after all, East-West, but
intra-Western; recipient countries switching much more easily among
Western suppliers than between East and West.
4. Our allies have maintained that they could not be expected to ac-
cept cooperative restraints unless the Soviets could be brought in as
well. One should not conclude from these statements that a US/Soviet
agreement would in fact lead our allies to cooperate. On the contrary, it
may stimulate their suspicions and reinforce their determination not to
accept any external constraints. In the UK, the new government, not
having been party to our earlier consultations on this issue, could react
negatively to any US/Soviet accord it experienced as impacting on the
UK’s freedom of action. It is also instructive to note that as the prospect
for US agreement with the Soviets seemed to come closer, in 1977–
78, the French became progressively less cooperative, eventually veto-
ing further quadripartite consultations,2 and refusing to do more than
listen to US briefings.
5. These considerations lead us to conclude that unless some
greater measure of accord among the Western suppliers is achieved
prior to any US/Soviet agreement, such a super power agreement may
divide US from our allies even further on this issue. We recognize the
difficulty of achieving today an agreement among Western suppliers
which eluded US two years ago. Nevertheless, there are several new
factors which make another effort worthwhile. First, events in Iran
have illustrated the political—and even commercial—folly of unre-
strained competition among arms suppliers (all of whom, incidentally,
2 The Embassy reported in telegram 35883 from Paris, October 31, 1978, that
“France is not ready to participate, at this time, in four-power talks or talks with the So-
viet Union on CAT. The GOF would rather keep the matter as a subject for bilateral dis-
cussion.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780450–0450)
