Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III In Northern Europe the political problems resulting from an unsatisfactory economic situation are further complicated by a lack of popularly perceived national “purpose”. The post-war period has seen vast economic progress, particularly for Europe’s middle classes. But the ethic of “reconstruction” and “economic growth” is no longer seen as a driving force in European societies. Less easily achieved social and distributional demands are now levied on governments. Traditional party politics no longer seem to touch the lives, or inspire, the average man. Governments are neither strong enough to resolve the major problems these nations confront nor small enough to address specific “local” or “special interest” problems. They frequently cannot, simultaneously, meet the competing needs of domestic interest groups while achieving traditional goals of economic growth and price stability. In such circumstances, governments can be out-flanked on the left by parties promoting radical social improvements and those on the right who criticize the high expenditures and government interventionism to support the social and distributional progress which has already taken place. Leaders in the middle are often paralyzed—fearing that reduced unemployment and further social progress, which they need for political credibility, cannot be cured except through additional expenditures which would turn their more conservative allies against them, erode trade positions, or risk inflation. The left promises reduced unemployment and more social benefits, along with more efficient government, but avoids announcing a “price tag” which the more conservative parties can shoot down. Unless the moderate leadership can achieve an economic success, either reducing unemployment or inflation, or hopefully both, voters may come to believe that they have little to lose by turning to a more extreme alternative—which at least holds out the promise of an improvement. Schmidt’s Concerns The continuing political and economic malaise in Europe is of enormous concern to Schmidt in its own right and because it has had a major psychological and economic impact on Germany (eroding the confidence of consumers and investors, and in part contributing to the slowdown in German exports, investment and growth). He will be particularly concerned about the risk of Communists gaining or sharing power in France and Italy, the potential for deterioration in the Mediterranean, and prospects for the longer-term recovery of economies and confidence in Western Europe. He will explore possibilities for bolstering the prospects of Giscard, Andreotti and the democratic forces in the Mediterranean, and perhaps convey ideas discussed at last week’s London meeting of the leaders of the EC Nine.6
