1956  919
Members of the Subcommittee said that their primary concern 
was the increasing tendency toward accommodation with Communist 
China which they had noted both in the US and abroad. They were 
worried that Communist China might be admitted to the UN. They 
regarded the proposed Subcommittee investigation as a useful means 
of reminding the American people of the true nature of the ­Communist 
regime in China. The question was raised as to whether there would 
ever be a time when we would not have some American behind the 
Iron Curtain for whose release we were negotiating. Members of 
the ­Subcommittee emphasized the need for constant repetition of 
­Communist China’s misdeeds since people had a tendency to forget. 
They did, however, express great respect for Mr. Robertson’s views and 
promised to give them most careful consideration. They asked for an 
estimate as to when the Americans might be released and the investiga­
tion carried on without any adverse effects.
Mr. Robertson stated emphatically that he knew of no softening 
towards the Chinese Communists among responsible officials of this 
Government or within Congress. He repeated the statements which 
the President had made to Prime Minister Eden. With respect to the 
question of timing, he said it was impossible to judge how soon the 
­Communists might move on releasing the prisoners.
The members of the Subcommittee expressed their appreciation 
for Mr. Robertson’s presentation. They indicated that they all shared 
his strong opposition toward any softening of our policy towards 
­Communist China. Chairman Dodd said that as soon as Mrs. Church 
and Mr. Jackson returned, in the next day or two, the Subcommittee 
would meet and decide what action to take concerning the investigation.
579.	 Letter 29 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 29
Geneva, April 18, 1956
Dear Walter:
I returned to Geneva yesterday evening and appreciated receiv­
ing your Letters No. 37 and 38 as well as the guidance for tomorrow’s 
meeting. As far as the new draft is concerned I do not say that I was 
disappointed as it is largely what I expected and believe it is entirely 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
