Bulgaria nomic affairs. Tsvetkov will meet briefly with the Deputy Secretary and hold talks with a number of officials in the Department and other executive agencies. (His schedule is at Tab A) Biographic sketches of Tsvetkov and the other Bulgarian participants in the meeting are at Tab B. KEY ISSUES 1. International Issues Essential Factors—Although significant Bulgarian foreign policy decisions are fully coordinated with Moscow, it is our policy and interest to treat Bulgaria as a sovereign state responsible for its own actions. Tsvetkov will be interested in your comments on US-Soviet relations, SALT, and Cyprus, which the Bulgarians regard as essentially an extension of the Balkans. You may wish to ask him about Bulgarian- Soviet relations and the situation in the Balkans including recent Bulgarian approaches to Albania. Bulgaria and the USSR remain the closest of allies, but lately we have received indications that the USSR may have decided to curtail substantially its former ample subsidization of the Bulgarian economy. Bulgaria participated in the first Inter-Balkan Conference in Athens in 1976, but since then has refused, presumably at Soviet behest, to agree to a second multilateral meeting.3 Taking the line that Balkan problems can best be resolved on a bilateral basis, the Bulgarians have recently exchanged high-level visits with Greece, Turkey, and Romania. Bulgarian-Yugoslav relations continue to be strained over the Macedonian issue. Since the PRC stopped economic aid to Albania last July, Bulgarian propaganda has focused selectively on Albanian condemnation of the PRC while ignoring continued Albanian vilification of the USSR. Recently, Bulgaria has indicated to Albania that it would welcome closer relations, but Albania apparently fears that Bulgaria is acting simply as a Soviet stalking horse. Points to be Made —US-Soviet relations—Our relationship is basically competitive, but both sides recognize the need to avoid deterioration and to expand areas of mutually beneficial cooperation.
