Bulgaria
255
nomic affairs. Tsvetkov will meet briefly with the Deputy Secretary
and hold talks with a number of officials in the Department and other
executive agencies. (His schedule is at Tab A) Biographic sketches of
Tsvetkov and the other Bulgarian participants in the meeting are at
Tab B.
KEY ISSUES
1. International Issues
Essential Factors—Although significant Bulgarian foreign policy
decisions are fully coordinated with Moscow, it is our policy and
interest to treat Bulgaria as a sovereign state responsible for its own
actions. Tsvetkov will be interested in your comments on US-Soviet
relations, SALT, and Cyprus, which the Bulgarians regard as essentially
an extension of the Balkans. You may wish to ask him about Bulgarian-
Soviet relations and the situation in the Balkans including recent Bul-
garian approaches to Albania.
Bulgaria and the USSR remain the closest of allies, but lately we
have received indications that the USSR may have decided to curtail
substantially its former ample subsidization of the Bulgarian economy.
Bulgaria participated in the first Inter-Balkan Conference in Athens in
1976, but since then has refused, presumably at Soviet behest, to agree
to a second multilateral meeting.3 Taking the line that Balkan prob-
lems can best be resolved on a bilateral basis, the Bulgarians have re-
cently exchanged high-level visits with Greece, Turkey, and Romania.
Bulgarian-Yugoslav relations continue to be strained over the Macedon-
ian issue. Since the PRC stopped economic aid to Albania last July,
Bulgarian propaganda has focused selectively on Albanian condemna-
tion of the PRC while ignoring continued Albanian vilification of the
USSR. Recently, Bulgaria has indicated to Albania that it would wel-
come closer relations, but Albania apparently fears that Bulgaria is
acting simply as a Soviet stalking horse.
Points to be Made
—US-Soviet relations—Our relationship is basically competitive, but
both sides recognize the need to avoid deterioration and to expand
areas of mutually beneficial cooperation.
3 In telegram 2553 from Sofia, December 23, 1977, Garthoff suggested that, even in
the absence of Soviet opposition to a multilateral Balkan conference, Sofia was not
interested in participating in such a meeting. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770479–0959) The Embassy in Bucharest agreed. Ambassador Aggrey noted
after a discussion with Romanian Deputy Foreign Minister Vasile Glica: The Bulgarians
“have entered specific reservations about multilateral cooperation in CSCE context, and
expressed view that issues and problems between Balkan states should be discussed on
bilateral basis.” (Telegram 9237 from Bucharest, December 28, 1977; National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770483–0926)
