“First. That a statutory tariff on a fair and reasonable basis be
established for general application subject to the provisions of a
special conventional tariff on certain specified articles to be agreed
upon separately between China and each of the powers directly
interested; or
Secondly. That a graduated tariff so devised as to be acceptable to
the powers concerned be established at an average rate of not more
than 12½ per centum ad valorem and generally in a manner
consistent with the provisions of article II of the Washington
Treaty.”
Mr. Hioki also said that: “The inauguration of a regime of tariff autonomy in China
implies the existence of an adequately strong and unified government, and presupposes
a complete removal of all restrictions which might impede the [freedom of] intercourse
of [and] trade between China and other powers.” He expressed the hope that:
“Endowed with remarkable qualities of self-government and supported by the growth
of [nationalism now] so manifestly asserting itself in the country, the Chinese people
will succeed in the accomplishing of reforms toward these ends, as much desirable for
their own welfare as for the common good of all nations.”
In conclusion, Mr. Hioki stated:
“I desire to reaffirm, on behalf of the Japanese delegation, our faith in the
spirit of friendliness which animates this important gathering. We ardently
hope and believe that by frank discussion and neighborly cooperation, by
mutual assistance and concession and by the exercise of due respect for one
another’s rights and interests, the present conference will find equitable
solution for every problem before it to the satisfaction of all and thus
demonstrate its will to live and let live.”
The Belgian delegate, Mr. Le Maire de Warzée Hermaile; the Danish delegate, Mr.
Henrik de Kauffmann; the Italian delegate, Mr. Vittorio Cerruti; the Netherlands
delegate, Mr. W. J. Oudendijk; the Norwegian delegate, Mr. Johan Michelet; the
Portuguese delegate, Mr. Joâo Antonio de Bianchi; the Spanish delegate, Mr. Justo
Garrido y Cisneros; and the Swedish delegate, Mr. Ewerlöf, all made brief addresses
referring to the work which lies before the conference and the sympathetic and hopeful
attitude in which they approached it.
Upon the conclusion of the above-mentioned addresses Mr. Hawkling Yen was chosen
secretary general of the conference by acclamation. A committee on program and
procedure consisting of Mr. C. T. Wang, for the Chinese delegation, and the chairmen
