800
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Recommendations
• Direct that the Food and Agricultural Policy Committee recom-
mend administrative reforms to ensure that P.L. 480 better serve devel-
opment and humanitarian purposes in chronic food-deficit developing
countries. These changes should include accelerating the utilization of
the Food for Development Authority (Title III),32 provide cash and
other incentives to make food aid more developmentally oriented,
make Vitamin A and iron (and technical assistance and technology)
available to countries for fortification purposes, and streamline the ad-
ministrative process.
• Direct the Food and Agricultural Policy Committee to recom-
mend legislative changes to improve the development nature of P.L.
480. Simultaneously, it should also consider separate farm export legis-
lation to ensure that market development for U.S. commodities re-
mains a major objective, with assurances that it will be pursued in ways
which do not undermine the developmental purposes of P.L. 480.
• Direct the Food and Agricultural Policy Committee to study the
following issues and make recommendations to the President by Sep-
tember 1, 1978:
—the costs and benefits of an expanded food aid program in rela-
tion to such considerations as U.S. domestic food prices, the need for
U.S. acreage set-asides, price, support payments to U.S. farmers, and
environmental effects;
—the relative efficiency or complementary nature in the LDCs of
U.S. food aid in relation to capital and technical assistance and their
comparative availability vis-a`-vis food aid; and
—the value and acceptability of various schemes to deal with crop
shortfalls in developing countries through food import bill insurance
and the establishment of buffer stocks.
6. Pursuing Trade and Investment Policies Favorable to LDC Needs
Those aspects of the problem of hunger and malnutrition dis-
cussed in previous sections have led to recommendations for measures
to improve LDCs’ lack of foreign exchange and capital to import suffi-
cient food supplies and agricultural production inputs and technology.
The self-reliance of the LDCs depends in the long run on their ca-
pacity to earn and to attract the necessary capital resources. Interna-
32 The International Development and Food Assistance Act of 1977 (P.L. 95–88) re-
vised the Title III provision of P.L. 480 to emphasize food for development. The amended
Title III permitted the United States to negotiate agreements with recipient countries for a
“specified annual value of agricultural commodities,” deliverable over a 1–5 year period.
Recipient nations agreed to institute a variety of reforms designed to improve agricul-
tural production. Proceeds generated from the sales of agricultural commodities financed
these reform projects and were applied against the nation’s repayment obligation. (De-
partment of State Bulletin, January 1978, pp. 36–37)
