978 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX was a world-wide problem, except for the OPEC countries, and it was getting worse. Summing up, he noted that the exchange had been helpful in enabling the United States to understand Yugoslavia’s economic problems and he promised to do everything he could to help out. (C) President Mijatovic said he would like to use the opportunity on behalf of the presidency and for himself to express his appreciation for President Carter’s understanding of Yugoslav policies, both bilateral and international, and to thank him for his assistance on the Krsko nuclear plant. (C) The President said he understood the plant would be in business by next year. [(U)?] Ambassador Eagleburger replied that if it wasn’t, he would be ridden out of town on a rail. (U) The President jokingly said that he would hold Ambassador Eagleburger personally responsible. (U) President Mijatovic said he would also like to thank the President for his help in taking action against the terrorists, whose activities had been detrimental to the welfare of both the United States and Yugoslavia. He also wanted to thank him for the earthquake assistance, which was very important and which had been greatly appreciated. (C) The President replied that he felt a sense of brotherhood with the Yugoslavs and that we had much in common. The United States wanted to see an economically, politically and militarily strong Yugoslavia and it was in its own interest to help out. Making reference to Mt. St. Helens,2 he said that he understood the tragedy of human event. (C) Continuing, he said that it would be a great pleasure for him to report that he was the first president to visit Yugoslavia after Tito’s death. He would report what a strong government existed here and the continuity that he had found; although, he pointed out, people have little doubt about this. He had mentioned this in his toast, which had been highly publicized around the world, but he promised to confirm it with other leaders. (C) President Mijatovic thanked him for these remarks. (U) The President said that he was grateful that it was a fact. He added that the United States had greatly benefited from Yugoslav help in Iran and within the non-aligned movement. In these trying times Yugoslavia’s allegiance to non-alignment had been a great benefit to the United States and to countries all over the world. (C) 2 On May 18, 1980, a 5.1 Richter scale earthquake collapsed the north face of Mount St. Helens, an active volcano in Washington State. The subsequent eruption killed 57 people and caused widespread destruction over 230 square miles.
