594 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Secretary Brown thought that FMS credits to Egypt were more salable in Congress than arms sales to Saudia Arabia, although the former required US funding and the latter did not. Mr. Christopher felt that until a peace treaty had been signed, we should not plan on large-scale consultations even on a survey team to Egypt. Secretary Brown said we could take the line that we want to do it, but we can wait until after a treaty is signed. Mr. Christopher agreed. Mr. Mcgiffert wondered if that applied to all five items on the list. Mr. Christopher said that there could be talks about what the Egyptians might want from us. The first point was certainly alright. They need to know that it is a good thing to diversify their sources of supply. Secretary Brown said that when we tell countries to go elsewhere for their source of arms, they take it as a lack of interest from us. Mr. Christopher said we should not hold out the hope that we will be the sole source of arms for Egypt and also provide money. Secretary Brown said that may be difficult, since the Egyptians just came out of that kind of relationship. We need to talk to the Saudis about the level of support for Egypt. Admiral Turner said that it will be difficult to turn Sadat away from his concept of being a Middle East policeman, but there are real dangers in our encouraging that role. There is a danger that he will ignore his domestic problems, ignore the military dissatisfaction with such a policy, and that he could end up generating the same kind of problems that we have just seen in Iran. Secretary Brown said perhaps our position should be that he would be in a better position to play that role after a peace treaty was concluded. Mr. Christopher said he hoped we would not divert Sadat from the hard problems of a peace treaty and domestic problems. Mr. McGiffert said he thought it would be bad if Secretary Brown goes to Egypt and offers only a few contingency possibilities. That would have a negative effect. Mr. Christopher said that some APCs could be offered after the treaty is signed with the numbers to be determined later. Mr. McIntyre noted we already provide $750M in SSA to Egypt. Secretary Brown then turned to Israel. He noted that the specific proposals called for security consultations on a regional basis. This would be something new in our security discussions with the Israelis. He would also need to talk about the relocation of the air bases. Our
