Summaries of Compilations  LXXXI
for Paraguay to eliminate the “authoritarian” character of its govern-
ment and stressed that the American press referred to Paraguay as 
a dictatorship. For his part, Sapena again complained of U.S. aid to 
Paraguay’s nemesis, Bolivia, while Paraguay preserved a more staunch 
anti-Communist posture. Rubottom reassured him that military aid to 
Bolivia was minute, that the system of inter-American guarantees made 
unthinkable any aggression by Bolivia, and that economic assistance to 
that country had to be seen in the light of a larger effort to aid the whole 
regional economy and shore up the free world.
A year later, Ploeser, close to the end of his tour, could state that 
the United States had been successful in stabilizing the local economy 
and nurturing Paraguayan friendship for the United States. (PA–8) 
He was also able to say that no endorsement had been made of the 
Stroessner regime, but had to admit that pressures to move the gov-
ernment toward greater political liberalism had not been measurably 
successful. The United States, he reminded the Department, could only 
urge strongly; it could not intervene.
In September 1960, Ploeser’s successor, Henry Stimpson came to 
Washington for talks and met with Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-
American Affairs Thomas C. Mann. (PA–12) Stimpson felt that “the 
troublesome stigma of dictatorship of the Stroessner government not-
withstanding, the United States should pursue a policy of working with 
the [Stroessner] regime.” In addition, the United States should press 
for free elections and a generally more liberal atmosphere in Asuncion. 
Leftist infiltration would have to be prevented, he said, but once that 
threat was curbed, the U.S. Government should urge Paraguay to 
reduce its armed forces and use the manpower thus liberated for proj-
ects such as road building and maintenance. The Paraguayan economy 
by and large was in dismal shape, said Stimpson, and Mann agreed that 
the United States would have to continue to help.
