insisted particularly on his Government’s view that the levy of the
surtaxes the Washington Customs Treaty has in view was to be
only upon conditions which were to be determined by the Special
Conference and therefore that to accede to those surtaxes or
similar ones would be impossible except upon the fulfillment of
such conditions.
4. The contemplated action of the Canton Nationalists, the British
Chargé d’Affaires pointed out, and Aglen and I agreed, would
create a situation in which there would actually be levies of the
Washington surtaxes in every port controlled by Nationalists and
inevitably elsewhere in China within a short time, without the
remotest possibility that the Chinese could be brought by the
other signatories even to discuss any of the considerations or the
conditions the treaty contemplated. Realizing we are not prepared
to insist that our treaty rights be respected, the Nationalists have
maneuvered us around to where talk about the Washington treaty
obligations being mutual is academic. We have a choice only of
allowing the Nationalists to destroy the Customs organization and
the treaty system of trade, or of giving the benefits of the
Washington surtaxes to the Chinese without conditions.
5. I suggested that the best exit from the dilemma was the third
alternative I mentioned in paragraph 4 of my telegram cited
above. I urged that it differed intrinsically very little from the
British proposal, and that we should consent to the surtaxes,
explaining as well as we could that after all these surtaxes were
an equivalent of the Washington surtaxes. Our taking the position
of carrying out our Washington obligations is vastly different
from yielding to a violation of our treaty rights and afterward
referring to the treaty by way of excusing our weakness. This
suggestion was very earnestly supported by Aglen, who agreed it
would make an appeal to the Chinese as being a course of action
which was much more worthy of the powers and consonant with
their dignity. The British Chargé, O’Malley, said he himself was
able to see little practical difference between this method and the
other but that he would be ready on the strength of the opinions of
