1020 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 400. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, January 28, 1977, 11:30 a.m. SUBJECT U.S.-Brazilian Consultations PARTICIPANTS Brazil Joao Baptista Pinheiro, Brazilian Ambassador United States The Secretary Warren M. Christopher, Deputy Secretary Terence A. Todman, Assistant Secretary, ARA Robert W. Zimmermann, ARA/ECA (Notetaker) Following initial amenities, the Secretary said that yesterday Ambassador Crimmins delivered a message2 from him to the Brazilian Foreign Minister and he wanted to take this early opportunity to cover the ground with Ambassador Pinheiro. It was his strong conviction, the Secretary said, that great emphasis must be placed on strengthening bilateral relations between the United States and Brazil. Deputy Secretary Christopher will do so as well and, with Assistant Secretary Todman, we will be very well assisted in dealing with issues that arise. The Secretary stated his firm belief that the two nations must consult across the whole range of common problems. He then told Pinheiro that he had suggested to Silveira that we might start the consultative process with some of the subgroups already in being. He noted that Silveira had been told that the U.S. is prepared to send a representative to Brazil to exchange perspectives on the nuclear issue and that the Deputy Secretary would be following this matter himself. In his conversations with Schmidt in Bonn, the Secretary continued, Vice President Mondale had conveyed President Carter’s deep concern with the problem of proliferation.3 In this connection the U.S. will be prepared to discuss with Brazil the whole range of possibilities for meeting Brazilian energy needs including a guarantee of fuel for 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 10, EXDIS Memcons, 1977. Confidential; Exdis. Drafted by Robert Zimmerman (ARA/ECA); cleared by Bray and Terence A. Todman, (ARA); and approved by William Twaddell on February 4. The meeting took place in the Secretary’s Office. 2 See Document 398. 3 See footnote 3, Document 398.
