1110  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
265.	 Letter From Smith to Irwin1
Washington, September 28, 1960
Dear Jack:
I thought your presentation to the Armed Forces Policy Council on 
Tuesday morning was of great interest and importance.
Having thought a good deal about this subject for some years, I 
would like to pass on a few personal observations in the hope that they 
may find reflection in any final version of your statement before the NSC.
I recall the conversation that Secretary McElroy, Secretary Herter, 
you and I had in Geneva in 1959 about the limited war study which 
was the predecessor of the present one. That study concluded gener­
ally that US limited war capabilities were adequate. I stressed that this 
conclusion was based on the very optimistic assumption that the US 
could employ nuclear weapons while the enemy would only use con­
ventional weapons. This assumption is not supported by the pertinent 
national intelligence estimate.
Secretary McElroy then suggested that our limited war capabili­
ties be restudied to determine their adequacy for use against an enemy 
using nuclear weapons. The present study, I believe, had its origin in 
those Geneva conversations.
However, it seems to me that this study still leaves largely unex­
plored the question of whether our limited war forces would be ade­
quate to fight an enemy who also used nuclear weapons.
In the Off Shore islands case, there is some discussion about the 
possibility of ChiCom use of nuclear air to air weapons, but no con­
clusions are drawn as to the result of such use on ChiNat/US ability to 
control the air over Formosa Strait.
I think it would be a service to direct the Council’s attention to a 
place in the report where the question of the possible military conse­
quences of two-way use of nuclear weapons is considered. On pages 
121 and 122, after pointing out that there might be some margin, of 
advantage to the UN forces from an initial exchange, the following lan­
guage appears:
“In the event the communists expanded the nuclear exchange 
to include all of South Korea, the extreme vulnerability of the U.N. 
LOC would become a major consideration. A relatively few weapons 
1 Source: Questions some of the assumptions about non-­use of nuclear weapons 
by Communist forces made in the limited war study. Secret; Personal. 3 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up, Limited War.
