140  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
General Purpose Forces
The conventional forces take on increasing relevance to the defense 
of US security interests under conditions of strategic nuclear equiva-
lence. Planning for US general purpose forces will focus on dealing 
with the Soviet threat to Europe but will also provide capabilities for 
use in the defense of major US and allied interests outside of Europe. 
US planning for NATO and for global contingencies must take into 
account the heightened significance of conventional capability in the 
setting of strategic nuclear equivalence.
NATO
The US reaffirms NATO strategy as expressed in MC–14/3.3 Deter-
rence and defense in the NATO areas will continue to rely on a combi-
nation of conventional, theater nuclear, and strategic nuclear forces. To 
this end it is necessary in the light of advances in the military posture 
of the Warsaw Pact to emphasize the strengthening of NATO’s conven-
tional forces for deterrence and defense.
Consonant with present NATO strategy, including forward 
defense, the US is committed to having the capability, in conjunction 
with its allies, to stop a Warsaw Pact attack with minimum loss of ter-
ritory and ultimately to restore prewar boundaries. To this end priority 
should be given to initial combat capabilities.
In this connection, the United States together with its allies shall 
maintain capabilities adequate to protect the lines of communication 
and access to raw materials that are vital to the economies of the United 
States and its allies in the event of a NATO Warsaw Pact war.
Global Contingencies
In addition, the United States will maintain a deployment force of 
light divisions with strategic mobility independent of overseas bases 
and logistical support, which includes moderate naval and tactical air 
forces, and limited land combat forces. These forces will be designed for 
use against both local forces and forces projected by the USSR based on 
analyses of requirements in the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, or Korea, 
taking into account the contribution of our friends and allies in these 
regions. US planning should provide that these requirements may be 
met by a combination of the light deployment forces, supplemented by 
forces in the United States, primarily oriented toward NATO defense. 
The 2nd Division will be oriented toward deployment in Asia but avail-
able for global contingencies as described above.
3 See footnote 4, Document 29.
