Yugoslavia 911 4. We have sent to the White House statements to be made and actions to be taken immediately following Tito’s death, including a possible message from the President to Brezhnev. We are seeking the urgent views of Embassies Moscow and Belgrade on this latter issue and will send you a separate memo on the considerations involved as soon as possible.2 One of our recommendations is for a Presidential statement, to be issued upon Tito’s death, which reaffirms in clear terms our support for the independence, sovereignty, and unity of Yugoslavia. 5. In the absence of a threat of Soviet intervention, we should quietly encourage the post-Tito succession process to produce a new unifying authority, while working with the Yugoslavs to support their independence. We assume that if any crisis or Soviet threat develops, the Yugoslavs will take the lead in telling us what they need and want, and that we should not press U.S. assistance or guarantees beyond what the Yugoslavs feel is useful. At a mini-SCC meeting today chaired by Aaron there was strong interagency endorsement for the general policy line set forth in this memorandum. A number of specific tasks were assigned to ensure that we are well prepared. We will keep you closely informed as this work proceeds. 2 In telegram 13982 to Moscow and Belgrade, January 18, the Department requested Embassy views on whether a letter from Carter to Brezhnev following Tito’s death would be useful. The letter would stress the importance the U.S. Government attached to Yugoslav non-alignment, independence, and territorial integrity, and stress U.S. Government expectations of Soviet actions. The draft language reads in part: “You should understand that any effort to exploit President Tito’s death to weaken Yugoslavia’s internal cohesion or undermine Yugoslavia’s traditionally independent foreign policy would be regarded by the United States as an unfriendly act, toward which we would feel compelled to respond accordingly.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870123–0524) In telegram 1002 from Moscow, January 19, the Embassy cautioned against sending a letter before any Soviet threat to Yugoslavia. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–0685) From Belgrade, Eagleburger welcomed the idea of a letter sent immediately following Tito’s death, but suggested clarification of what constituted troublesome Soviet moves toward Yugoslavia. (Telegram 429 from Belgrade, January 20; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870123–0521)
