1956  1117
to participation by Indian Embassy in determining whether and 
which of these prisoners desire return his country. Thus results agreed 
announcement from standpoint his country been very substantial.
25. Regretted results from standpoint my country had been very 
meager. When began discussions here I hoped we be able equalize situ­
ation nationals our respective countries by his country taking action to 
permit all those Americans who desire return to do so. Our discussions 
in regard Americans revolved primarily around those imprisoned his 
country. Wang and his government well aware our strong interest in 
this group Americans. In fact at time we issued our agreed announce­
ment these were only Americans we knew of who desired to return and 
being prevented do so. Two of us had long discussion on the subject 
when these persons would be able leave return US. He would recall 
I was very insistent on some statement time so no misunderstand­
ing between us. He refused agree any statement of time. He told me 
however their cases would be handled very quickly. In effect said they 
would be handled much more quickly than in past and ­issuance of 
announcement would greatly expedite their release. Although I  was 
dissatisfied with lack explicitness his statements in order not prolong 
discussions, get ahead. I finally agreed to his suggestion use word 
“expeditiously” this connection. I told him my country would interpret 
that word mean exactly what it said. Neither my country nor anyone 
else could by any stretch imagination consider these people were being 
permitted return expeditiously. In fact difficult for me see there had 
been any substantial improvement in situation that existed even before 
our agreed announcement. In spite use word “expeditious” in agreed 
announcement his assurances that release Americans would be mark­
edly expedited in comparison with situation before issuance announce­
ment, I could see little or no change in situation.
26. I did not desire get into complicated question numbers, pro­
portion or that type of thing with him, I simply wanted to point out 
that at 6th meeting August 13 he made statement 38 Americans left 
China during year since June 1954 as result review their cases. Of 
those who remained prison, after ten of whose release he informed me 
­September 10, only 8 Americans have been released permitted return 
to US in approximately 11 months since we issued that announcement. 
I not only considered this performance grossly at variance specific 
terms our agreed announcement but also considered results our agreed 
announcement to have been very much one-­sided. I had often as ear­
nestly as could spoken to him of relationship this whole question to 
improvement our relations. I come here most earnestly seeking that 
improvement and I still sought it. I again appealed to him to impress 
upon his authorities tremendous importance with which we view this 
question.
