Arms Control and Disarmament  1607
the radius of the hole; the dependence on ω insures small amplitude 
for low frequency.
We have compared the result (1) with the empirical result from the 
Rainier experiment. It can be shown again from elastic theory that
E
c
r D
2
( )
ν
=
κπδ
ω.
(2)
where D is the total displacement of the rock measured at a distance r 
from the explosion. It has been assumed that ω is less than the critical 
frequency of the wave generated by the explosion, which in the case 
of Rainier was about ω x = 25 sec−1. In the Rainier experiment, D was 
observed to be 15 cm. at r = 110 m. Using this information and the 
theoretical equation (1) and assuming the medium in which the hole 
is made to be hard rock of δ  = 2, c = 5 km/sec, we find that the signal 
(1) is about 700 times smaller than the signal (2).
3. Detectability. In the Geneva net of stations one has to rely on 
receiving signals at distances more than 2000 km. At such distances 
only frequencies of less than 1 cps can be easily received. If we apply 
the theoretical factor of 700 and if we assume that the Geneva net can 
detect explosions of 5 kt and above, then explosions in a cavity could 
be concealed up to yields of 3.5 megatons. There are other limitations 
which make it very difficult to use this method of concealment for such 
large explosions, particularly the size and cost of the required hole 
which will be discussed below.
If there were a net of auxiliary stations of spacing 170 km, it is 
expected such a net could detect first motion from 1 kt explosions. 
Moreover, such a group of stations respond to high frequencies of the 
order of 10 cps. In this case, the frequency is higher than the critical 
frequency of an unconcealed 1 kt explosion. Generally in Rainier sur­
roundings the critical frequency is about
ωx= 5 W–1/3 cps
(3)
where W is in kilotons. If ν > νx, the concealment factor is reduced to
700
x
ν
ν

(4)
and therefore at 1 kt to 350. In this case an explosion of 350 kt can be 
made to look like 1 kt and will therefore be just detectable.
4. Limitations of the Method.
a. Radiation wave. It seems important to avoid an appreciable mate­
rial shock wave in the cavity, and thus to use gas at reduced density as 
described above.
b. Temperature at wall. In a cavity designed to have 50 atmospheres 
static pressure and air at 1/100 normal density, the temperature will
