When a destructive and bloody revolution lately broke out in Nicaragua, at
the earnest and repeated entreaties of its Government I dispatched our
Marine forces there to protect the lives and interests of our citizens. To
compose the contending parties, I sent there Col. Henry L. Stimson, former
Secretary of War and now Governor General of the Philippine Islands, who
secured an agreement that warfare should cease, a national election should
be held and peace should be restored. Both parties conscientiously carried
out this agreement, with the exception of a few bandits who later mostly
surrendered or left the country. President Diaz appointed Brig. Gen. Frank
R. McCoy, United States Army, president of the election board, which
included also one member of each political party.
A free and fair election has been held and has worked out so successfully
that both parties have joined in requesting like cooperation from this
country at the election four years hence, to which I have refrained from
making any commitments, although our country must be gratified at such
an exhibition of success and appreciation. Nicaragua is regaining its
prosperity and has taken a long step in the direction of peaceful self-
government.
TACNA-ARICA
The long-standing differences between Chile and Peru have been
sufficiently composed so that diplomatic relations have been resumed by
the exchange of ambassadors. Negotiations are hopefully proceeding as this
is written for the final adjustment of the differences over their disputed
territory.
MEXICO
Our relations with Mexico are on a more satisfactory basis than at any time
since their revolution. Many misunderstandings have been resolved and the
most frank and friendly negotiations promise a final adjustment of all
unsettled questions. It is exceedingly gratifying that Ambassador Morrow
has been able to bring our two neighboring countries, which have so many
interests in common, to a position of confidence in each other and of
respect for mutual sovereign rights.
