638 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I standing middle-grade officers is another way.58 At the same time, the senior officers who are being encouraged to leave the Service should be treated with greater consideration, and your willingness to hold a reception for them next month is a step in that direction.59 Finally, schedule permitting, we recommend finding some opportunities in coming months for you to appear occasionally before groups of FSO’s (e.g., the Open Forum). Such appearances would not only give the career professionals a better sense of the man whom they work for, it would also be an expression of interest on your part in a dialogue with a broader spectrum of career officers.60 F. Multilateral Diplomacy: A recent Chicago CFR poll shows a significant decline among elite groups for the UN. More broadly, a growing mood of nationalism undermines popular support for multilateral diplomacy and multilateral assistance. On the other hand, we are doing more of our diplomatic and economic business through multilateral groups and organizations. More thought needs to be devoted to revitalizing multilateral organizations.61 Sometimes, multilateral diplomacy works best outside the framework of established international organizations. For you to review the international structures available to us, and recommend how the U.S. can use them best, could be a valuable service to this and succeeding Administrations. 58 Vance underlined this sentence. He placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to it and wrote “yes.” A stretch assignment allows a Foreign Service officer at a lower grade to be paneled into a higher grade position without requiring a promotion to the higher grade. 59 Vance underlined most of this sentence. He placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to it and wrote “yes.” 60 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, Vance wrote “There aren’t that many hours in the day unfortunately.” 61 Vance underlined this sentence. In the left-hand margin next to it, he wrote “S/P to look at this—perhaps with outside consultants.”
