468  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
decade. Soviet exports to this area have increased significantly, but the 
return flow of goods has grown slightly if at all. The current pattern 
of exchange requires the USSR to increase its shipments of grain and 
scarce industrial materials such as steel, coal, iron ore, and nonferrous 
metals, while simultaneously importing less Polish coal and Rumanian 
oil. While these shifts are less of a difficulty to the USSR than are its 
domestic economic problems, they do serve to aggravate the solution 
of these larger difficulties.
71. Trade outside the Bloc remains concentrated in the developed 
nations of Western Europe, which continue to account for about four-­
fifths of Soviet trade with the Free World. But Soviet trade with the 
underdeveloped countries, though small, is rising; in 1956 it grew by 
35 percent to a total of nearly $400 million. This trade is still roughly 
in balance, and drawings on nonmilitary credits extended by the USSR 
have amounted to slightly over $100 million since the inception of this 
program. Thus the credit program, of which the USSR has provided 
about $900 million out of the Bloc total of $1.5 billion, is as yet a negli­
gible drain on the Soviet economy. Even when the utilization of these 
credits increases, the net drain to the domestic economy will be small. 
The slowdown during 1957 in extension of new Soviet credits is due to 
the exhaustion of the most ready opportunities during the preceding 
two years rather than to limitations upon Soviet economic capabilities. 
The USSR will continue to press its foreign credits wherever it sees 
potential political gains, and considerations of economic impact on the 
USSR will remain relatively unimportant unless the magnitude of the 
program increases drastically.
71a. Civil Air. The USSR is in the first stages of a determined and 
vigorous program to enter international air routes and is embarking on 
an ambitious program to produce a modern civil air fleet. In entering 
international air routes the USSR is probably motivated more by polit­
ical than by commercial considerations. The USSR apparently has now 
realized the significance of civil aviation capabilities as an element of 
national power and prestige and is developing a growing capability in 
this field.
III. TRENDS IN SOVIET SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY6
72. The closely-­controlled Soviet scientific effort has focussed pre­
ponderantly on the building of a strong industrial base and the devel­
opment of modern weapons. The USSR has placed great emphasis on 
science and technology and has concentrated manpower and facilities 
in an effort to achieve the high priority goals which it has established 
6 For details on Soviet scientific strengths, developments, and policy, see NIE 11–6–56, 
“Capabilities and Trends of Soviet Science and Technology,” 9 October 1956. [Footnote is 
in the original.]
