120 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI discussions of strategic stability shall begin not later than three years before the end of the specified period, after which, in the event the sides have not agreed otherwise, each side would be free to decide its own course of action.” (S) The U.S. made clear at the time its view that this right included the right to deploy strategic defenses without further reference to the ABM Treaty, and that the Defense & Space Treaty must reflect this. (S) Gorbachev said that while he did not like the idea of a right to deploy, he “could accept it” if there were a specified non-­withdrawal period, and in this context, after the specified period, “each side would be free to choose its own course of action.” This formulation was embodied in the Washington Summit Joint Statement and the U.S. draft Defense & Space Treaty. (S) The Soviets refused, however, to acknowledge that the Washington Summit Joint Statement language provided this right, arguing that a side would have to withdraw from the ABM Treaty at that time in order to deploy defenses. The Soviets continue to assert that at the end of the non-­withdrawal period, a side merely recovers its Article XV withdrawal rights under the ABM Treaty. Thus, the Soviets believe that the Defense & Space agreement should terminate at the end of the non-­ withdrawal period. (S) U.S. Position. The U.S. seeks agreement to a Defense & Space Treaty of unlimited duration which would have the sides retain certain ABM Treaty constraints after the non-­withdrawal period “until a Party chooses a different course of action.” The U.S. draft treaty text also provides (as a condition for agreeing to a non-­withdrawal period) that “if, after the specified period, either Party decides to deploy strategic ballistic missile defenses that are prohibited by the ABM Treaty, then that Party shall give six months written notice to the other Party of its intention to deploy such defenses. In this event, this notice requirement shall supersede the notice provision of Article XV of the ABM Treaty. Following the six month notification period, all remaining ABM Treaty provisions shall be considered terminated unless the Parties agree otherwise.” This position is embodied in Article III, paragraph 2. of the U.S. draft treaty text. (S) Soviet Position. The Soviets seek a Defense & Space agreement of a duration limited to that of the non-­withdrawal period, after which, unless agreed otherwise, the sides would return to the ABM Treaty regime and recover their Article XV withdrawal rights. That is, the Soviets would make the “right to deploy without further reference to the ABM Treaty” one of the subjects for negotiations prior to the end of the non-­withdrawal period. If the sides fail to reach agreement on this, or other issues, the sides would return to the ABM Treaty after the non-­ withdrawal period.
