1350 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX equipment to Egypt and Jordan. On the other hand, in its consideration of sales to Israel, the U.S. did not ask whether this or that sale would make Israel too strong vis-a-vis its neighbors. The U.S. recognized that Israel must be able to defend itself against all its neighbors. (S) Turning to the overall strategic situation, the Secretary noted that the collapse of Iran as a bulwark against Soviet expansion had adversely affected the strategic balance in the area. During the past ten years the U.S., Europe and Japan had become still more dependent on oil from that region. The importance of the Gulf as a Soviet objective had therefore increased. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was a striking reminder of Soviet willingness to use force to obtain its objectives. These considerations taken together had caused the U.S. to begin planning, programming, creating new forces and redeploying existing forces. A new military headquarters had been created for planning and to carry out potential military operations in the area. In only six months, equipment had been prepositioned on ships in the area to support a full Marine Amphibious Brigade. Two carrier task forces were being maintained in the area—the most powerful naval force ever in the Indian Ocean. In the negotiation of access agreements with countries in the area, the U.S. had been very careful to keep its visible presence low. This was a drawback, but it was also a condition of access to those countries. A high level of U.S. visibility would risk destabilizing them and easily offset the military advantages of more permanent bases. This was true even in Egypt, though less so. The U.S. had to be very cautious politically. (S) The Secretary said the U.S. saw real value in continuing its strategic dialogue with Israel even though the previous secret channel could not be used any more. Both General Jones and Ambassador Komer would be ready to continue the strategic dialogue during their visits. (S) Foreign Minister Shamir noted that when Israel heard of U.S. plans to develop Ras Banas3 it wondered why the U.S. was not equally planning to utilize the good airbases in Sinai and also the base at Sharm al-Shaykh. Since Sharm al-Shaykh, under the peace accords, would have a multi-national force to protect free passage in the Strait of Tiran, it could easily assume greater responsibility for defense of the Red Sea. There would be no political difficulties. (S) The Secretary replied that the Sinai facilities would not belong to either Israel or the U.S. Moreover, the geographic considerations of a possible Soviet attack in Iran would not suggest the use of Israeli bases. Dr. Brown said that the U.S. had not looked into the nature of the multilateral force under the peace accords. There would be differing views 3 See Document 395.
