1977  183
The first is a Targeting Study which will analyze (1) the relation-
ships between targeting (i.e., employment policy as distinct from per-
ceived force characteristics) and deterrence; (2) plausible alternative 
approaches and criteria for targeting; and (3) the effects and limita-
tions imposed by force capabilities and target characteristics. We are 
currently drafting a preliminary Concept Paper outlining the scope of 
issues to be addressed, and will pass you a copy.
The second is an ICBM Modernization Study which will seek to 
answer three critical questions: (1) what is the contribution of the ICBM 
to our strategic force posture in terms of deterrence, hedging, and war­
fighting; (2) what are the costs and effectiveness of alternatives for 
maintaining an ICBM force that will survive to be used; and (3) what 
are the potential uses of hard target damage capability and how does 
having this capability affect deterrence, crisis stability, and warfight-
ing? We plan to complete this study by mid-January.
The third is a Secure Reserve Force Target Acquisition Study. With 
the Intelligence Community staff, we will begin with a review of the 
current capabilities of the SRF for target acquisition under different 
employment strategies. Then, once we have concluded the Targeting 
Study, we will assess the means to insure that the target acquisition 
capability will be available for any potential changes in US nuclear 
employment policy for the strategic reserve force.
The fourth is a Sustainability Study. We have completed a TOR3 
for the study and are about to begin Phase 1: the accumulation of data 
to establish baseline estimates of (1) Soviet and Warsaw Pact, and North 
Korea sustaining capability; (2) US sustaining capability worldwide; (3) 
Allied sustaining capability; (4) interchangeability and availability of 
US/NATO and US/South Korean stocks; and (5) US/NATO/and other 
Allies capacity for industrial and manpower mobilization. This will be 
a massive task. We will try to complete it by 1 June 1978.
The fifth study is of Naval Strategic Planning. A special task force 
under the direction of the Secretary of the Navy has been working for 
over two months. They have defined the “Policy Tasks” of the Navy 
and will be looking at alternative force postures by region, the Pacific, 
Mediterranean, Atlantic, etc. The study should be completed by March 
1978.
While the studies are just underway, I think we have spent the past 
weeks usefully defining the issues each study will address. The critical 
questions which these studies raise will have my highest priority over 
the next year.
Harold Brown
3 The Terms of Reference were not found.
