368
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
101.
Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National
Security Council Staff to President Carter1
Washington, October 22, 1978
SUBJECT
Today’s Talks with the Egyptian Delegation
We met with the Egyptian Delegation this afternoon for four hours
to discuss Annex 3 which deals with normalization of relations.
Boutros Ghali had received reports from his Ambassadors in the Arab
world which caused him considerable concern over mounting Arab op-
position to the prospective Egyptian-Israeli Treaty. He was also embar-
rassed by reports out of Israel that the treaty is virtually in final form.
Boutros made one suggestion that he thought might help Egypt in
the Arab world. At the time of the signing of the treaty, Sadat would
write a letter to both you and Prime Minister Begin spelling out his
views on a comprehensive settlement and on the West Bank and Gaza
issues. The language of the letter would be taken from the Camp David
framework agreements. Boutros asked whether you could reply to
Sadat in a letter which would reaffirm our willingness to be a full
partner in future negotiations and to work for a comprehensive settle-
ment. Roy and I told him that we would like to see his draft language of
their letter, and that we would seek to get your general reaction to this
procedure.
In the talks, we reached full agreement with the Egyptian delega-
tion on a revised text2 of Annex 3. We will show this to the Israelis on
Wednesday when they return,3 and we anticipate that they will find the
draft acceptable, perhaps with a few minor problems. We do not see
any major difficulties, however.
Tomorrow4 the military delegations will seek to reach final agree-
ment on the text of Annex 1. This will put us in a position by
Wednesday when the Israelis return to accelerate the pace of the nego-
tiations, with the objective of reaching full agreement by the end of the
week.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 55, Middle East: Peace Talks Between Egypt and Israel, 10/19–31/78. Secret.
Printed from an uninitialed copy. A handwritten notation at the top of the memorandum
reads “DACOM’d to CD 10/23.” According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter spent
October 23 at Camp David. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
2 A copy of the revised text has not been found.
3 Dayan and Weizman returned to Israel for consultations on October 21. They were
scheduled to return to Washington on October 25.
4 October 23.
