878
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
we will be able to provide under the $1.5 billion, three-year package.
For my part, I recognize that Egypt has legitimate defense needs
greater than those we have been able to meet within this particular
package. As announced following my meeting with Vice President Mo-
barak, I believe that our two governments should now work closely
and intensively to plan our longer-term military supply relationship
beyond the three years envisaged in the equipment package associated
with the signing of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty. In that way,
Egypt could satisfy a greater proportion of its military equipment
needs over the next several years. Implicit in any longer-term relation-
ship would be a U.S. assurance that necessary spare parts and follow-
on support would continue to be offered. In this connection, I also want
you to be assured that Maverick missiles will be included with the arms
for the Phantom aircraft we will be delivering to Egypt.
I have therefore directed4 Secretaries Brown and Vance to begin
this planning immediately in cooperation with Egypt.
To undertake a major, long-term military supply relationship will
require the fullest possible support of the American public and the
Congress. Congressional support for the current $1.5 billion package is
an essential first step, but we will have to be careful about overempha-
sizing the military side of our relationship. Your warmest supporters in
the public and the Congress hope that Egypt will assign highest pri-
ority to economic development rather than to military programs. They
are concerned that the major portion of our peace package has been for
military equipment. People in the United States understand that Egypt
has important defense needs and are willing to help, but they hope that
this can be accomplished in a manner which will enhance rather than
compete with our shared goal of accelerated economic development in
Egypt. I am prepared to work with you closely, Mr. President, as our
two countries develop together the most effective response to Egyptian
needs. I am sure that this can be done while taking into account the po-
litical and financial constraints within which I must function.
I will be sending you a further message5 following the Tokyo Sum-
mit,6 where I will be pressing for sympathetic consideration of Egypt’s
economic programs. As you are also aware, Ambassador Strauss will
be bringing with him a small group of business and labor executives to
work further with your colleagues in developing areas of additional
economic cooperation.
4 See Document 262.
5 See Document 275.
6 See footnote 8, Document 259.
