326
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
117.
Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans (Wisner)
to Director of Central Intelligence Smith1
Washington, August 20, 1952.
SUBJECT
Plan for Arming Iranian Tribal Groups
1. Pursuant to your instructions of two weeks ago,2 the attached
plan for arming Iranian tribal groups has been developed by the Near
East Division with the assistance of other appropriate elements of the
Agency. This is an emergency plan which is for implementation only in
case of the collapse or Communist take-over of the Iranian central gov-
ernment. However, in order to be in a position to carry the plan into
effect certain additional physical preparations, over and above those al-
ready taken, will be necessary. Because of the critical situation pres-
ently prevailing in Iran we are continuing with these preparations, in-
cluding procurement of weapons and ammunition and the forward
stockpiling of additional quantities thereof, but I should nevertheless
appreciate receiving your guidance as to whether you desire to have
this plan submitted to either the Project Review Committee or the Psy-
chological Strategy Board. Certain basic features of the plan have al-
ready been extensively coordinated with the Departments of State and
Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, but in view of the size and amount
of effort and facilities involved in this program, it has occurred to me
that you may wish to have a further review of the plan by one or both of
the bodies indicated.
2. You will recall that, at the suggestion of the State Department
and with the concurrence of the Department of Defense and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, we approached the British Service with a proposal that a
joint plan should be developed. The only reply which we have received
as yet is to the effect that the Foreign Office considers that it is “prema-
ture” for the British Service to engage in any joint planning effort with
us.3 We are still uncertain as to the underlying significance of this
position of the British Foreign Office, but the fact remains that we are
presently unable to coordinate our planning with any plans which
the British Service may have in being or in contemplation for this
eventuality.
Frank G. Wisner
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO Files, Job 79–01228A, Box 11 Folder 14,
Iran 1951–1953. Secret; Security Information. Noted by the DCI on August 27.
2 See footnote 2, Document 109.
3 See Document 110.
