National Security Policy  1165
Because the ICBM offers the Soviets the best prospects of being able 
to achieve destruction of a substantial portion of U.S. nuclear retalia­
tory capability prior to launch, future development of Soviet interconti­
nental attack capabilities will be primarily a function of production and 
development of ICBMs. However, for some years to come, long-­range 
striking capabilities of the USSR will include both manned bombers 
and ballistic missiles. The Soviets probably will consider that ballistic 
missiles can best be employed to neutralize U.S. based retaliatory and 
other capabilities in an initial blow, relying upon bombers for follow-­up 
attacks. Soviet employment of long-­range striking capabilities would 
continue to face great difficulties of timing and distribution of attack 
against widely deployed, mobile and ready Western strengths.
It is estimated that the USSR now has a limited capability to 
launch ballistic missiles from about 12 long range, conventionally-­
powered submarines, 4 of which probably can accommodate 2 ballistic 
missiles each. A new class of submarine has been in production since 
1958. About 9 of these are now considered operational. Although only 
fragmentary information is available on this class, it is believed to be 
designed to accommodate about 6 ballistic missiles. It is believed that 
these submarines would be capable of a 350 n.m. missile range with a 
CEP of one to 2 n.m., launching from surface or sail awash condition.
Clandestine attack on the United States by sabotage, biological 
warfare, and placement of nuclear weapons, could occur against spe­
cifically selected targets.
Biological and Chemical Weapons Programs—Comparative Evaluation. 
Communist China has an extremely limited CW capability and no BW 
capability. The capabilities of other Bloc countries (not including the 
USSR) are little better. However, the over-­all USSR CW/BW capabili­
ties may be superior to those of the United States and its allies but there 
is no firm intelligence information to support a precise comparison. 
The USSR may have more different types of CW agents, greater quanti­
ties of each agent and also more delivery means. USSR BW capabilities 
are not known, but it is certain that their efforts in this field have been 
most extensive and it is known that they have a very comprehensive 
R&D CW program.
U.S. BW and CW Programs. Increased funding provided in FY 1960 
and projected for incremental increase during next 5 years should do 
much to reduce present USSR relative advantage. The possibility of 
qualitative improvement through research and development of both 
agents and munitions appears to be great. A comprehensive report on 
current status of Department of Defense biological and chemical weap­
ons research and development programs is included in Section VI, 
Military Research & Development Program.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the report, sections IV–IX.]
