Romania
591
Begin meeting last winter. Although the recent Israeli action in Lebanon
was an embarrassing setback for Ceausescu’s efforts, he is apparently
continuing his conciliatory attempts in the Middle East. Ceausescu has
hinted that he will deliver a North Korean message to President Carter
and he has expressed an interest—apparently without the express
encouragement of either side—to improve relations between Washing-
ton and Peking. In sum, he relishes a role as mediator which, he believes,
gives him prestige as an international statesman.
15. As far as we are aware, Ceausescu is unconcerned that he might,
for whatever reason, leave the political scene and there is no clearcut
candidate to succeed him. [5 lines not declassified]
195.
Editorial Note
On April 5, 1978, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs
George Vest, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and
Humanitarian Affairs Patricia Derian, and Director of Policy Planning
Anthony Lake forwarded an action memorandum to Deputy Secretary
of State Warren Christopher requesting decisions on a number of
human rights issues prior to the arrival of Romanian President Nicolae
Ceausescu. Sent through Counselor of the Department of State Matthew
Nimetz, the memorandum asked, among other issues, for a decision
on how to raise the sensitive case of Constantin Rauta’s request for
family reunification with Ceausescu’s party. (See Document 196.)
Constantin Rauta was part of the advance party preparing for
Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu’s visit to Washington in
December 1973, when he defected to the United States. Rauta, a diplo-
matic courier at the time he defected, requested that the United States
facilitate his attempt to trade his classified pouch for permission for
his wife and young child to immigrate to the United States. U.S. officials
persuaded Rauta that such an attempt was impractical and that the
pouch should be returned to the Romanian Government. Ceausescu
considered Rauta’s defection a personal affront, and the Romanian
Government refused to allow Rauta’s family to emigrate.
The focus placed on human rights by the Carter administration
offered Rauta new traction. In telegram 196804 to Bucharest, August 18,
1977, the Department informed the Embassy of the increasing interest
in the Rauta case of Representatives Charles Vanik, Joshua Eilberg, Bill
Frenzel, as well as Senators Abraham Ribicoff, Henry Jackson, Paul
Sarbanes, Jacob Javits, and Edward Kennedy. (National Archives, RG
