254
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—We are not seeking a confrontation, nor will we turn this Confer-
ence into a polemical debate.
—What we want is constructive outcome that will show progress
in all areas; we will make some new proposals and are prepared to con-
sider Soviet ideas.
—But the Conference will have to undertake a full and frank re-
view of performance of all participants, including performance in
human rights (Principle VII). If the original agreement is to have any
meaning, then each participant must be willing to submit their record
to a frank scrutiny.10 We are ready to accept criticism, and in turn, we
have to make our own concerns known.
Our overall goal in CSCE is to set a higher standard of conduct for
all nations to observe—and to underline the proposition that obliga-
tions, once freely undertaken, must be fully respected.
5. Trade
We recognize that over the longer term US-Soviet relations will
have to have a greater economic dimension.
—At present the Congress would not be ready to consider changes
in the law.11 Later, after Soviet-American relations have developed
more positively, you are prepared to take up the issues of MFN and
credits. Frankly, this depends on Soviet policy in critical areas—the
Middle East and arms control—and also on the question of emigration.
—We will not impose conditions, but merely face the realities of
the mood in this country.
6. In Summary:
We seem to be approaching a crossroads; we hope that the Soviets
are willing to take the more constructive path. The message Gromyko
should carry back is that the US wants a cooperative relationship, but it
depends on whether there is reciprocity and restraint. We want a com-
prehensive and reciprocal detente—and are prepared to work for it
with the Soviets.12 This is the message, in addition to personal greet-
ings, that Gromyko ought to convey to Brezhnev.
10 The President underlined “each participant” and “submit their record to a frank
scrutiny.”
11 Reference is presumably to the Jackson-Vanik Amendment to the 1974 Trade Act
(P.L. 93–618; 88 Stat. 1978), introduced in 1973, which President Ford signed into law on
January 3, 1975. The amendment denied most-favored-nation trade status to nations with
non-market economies that restricted emigration. The President could, however, grant
yearly waivers to the ban.
12 The President underlined the words “comprehensive” and “reciprocal detente.”
