790 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI perts in Washington. He said we would be happy to welcome such a visit and to begin talking in a confidential way about this very complex problem. The Prime Minister said that he hoped the Vice President understood the sensitivity of Japanese feelings about nuclear matters. The Japanese cities had been destroyed by nuclear weapons, and Japan was fully in accord with US concerns over proliferation dangers. The question of peaceful use was quite different. Japan was by tradition and by basic governmental and Diet policy firmly opposed to any military use, production or possession of nuclear weapons. However, its total lack of energy resources made it essential to consider the development of nuclear power for peaceful purposes. He said the Japanese would welcome the opportunity to send a group to discuss the subject in Washington. The Vice President said that we would be happy to work out arrangements on his return to Washington. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.] 321. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France1 Washington, February 3, 1977, 0147Z 24240. Subject: Letter to Foreign Minister. Ref: Paris 3187.2 1. Please deliver the following letter from Secretary Vance to de Guiringaud. 2. Begin text: Dear Mr. Foreign Minister: I am sure you are aware of the high importance we attach to the avoidance of nuclear proliferation. I wish to confirm personally to you that I share my predecessor’s 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850056–1667. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by John Kalicki (S/P); cleared by James Lowenstein (EUR), Terence Todman (ARA), Alfred Atherton (NEA), Gelb (PM), Denis Lamb (D), Tarnoff (S), Lake (S/P), Donald Tice (P), Leo Reddy (S/S), and Edward McGaffigan (T); and approved by Christopher (D). 2 Telegram 3187 from Paris, February 11, reported that Pakistani Charge´ Iqbal Riza had said that regarding nuclear proliferation, “the principal problem arose because it was difficult, because of nationalistic sensitivities, for Bhutto to indicate any change in the GOP position on the contract for the French nuclear processing plant before the elections.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770036–0102) The Pakistani elections were scheduled for March 7.
