790
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
perts in Washington. He said we would be happy to welcome such a
visit and to begin talking in a confidential way about this very complex
problem.
The Prime Minister said that he hoped the Vice President under-
stood the sensitivity of Japanese feelings about nuclear matters. The
Japanese cities had been destroyed by nuclear weapons, and Japan was
fully in accord with US concerns over proliferation dangers. The ques-
tion of peaceful use was quite different. Japan was by tradition and by
basic governmental and Diet policy firmly opposed to any military use,
production or possession of nuclear weapons. However, its total lack of
energy resources made it essential to consider the development of nu-
clear power for peaceful purposes. He said the Japanese would wel-
come the opportunity to send a group to discuss the subject in
Washington.
The Vice President said that we would be happy to work out ar-
rangements on his return to Washington.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
321.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
France1
Washington, February 3, 1977, 0147Z
24240. Subject: Letter to Foreign Minister. Ref: Paris 3187.2
1. Please deliver the following letter from Secretary Vance to de
Guiringaud.
2. Begin text: Dear Mr. Foreign Minister: I am sure you are aware of
the high importance we attach to the avoidance of nuclear prolifera-
tion. I wish to confirm personally to you that I share my predecessor’s
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850056–1667. Se-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by John Kalicki (S/P); cleared by James Lowenstein
(EUR), Terence Todman (ARA), Alfred Atherton (NEA), Gelb (PM), Denis Lamb (D), Tar-
noff (S), Lake (S/P), Donald Tice (P), Leo Reddy (S/S), and Edward McGaffigan (T); and
approved by Christopher (D).
2 Telegram 3187 from Paris, February 11, reported that Pakistani Charge´ Iqbal Riza
had said that regarding nuclear proliferation, “the principal problem arose because it was
difficult, because of nationalistic sensitivities, for Bhutto to indicate any change in the
GOP position on the contract for the French nuclear processing plant before the elec-
tions.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770036–0102) The Paki-
stani elections were scheduled for March 7.
