470 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement DR–3. Memorandum of the Substance of Discussion at a Department of State-Joint Chiefs of staff Meeting1  Washington, June 27, 1958. [Here follows the record of discussion of agenda items concerning “U.S. Military Representation in the Middle East,”, “Lebanon,” and “Poland.” 3. Dominican Republic General White2 said he thought we should try to hold the line in the Dominican Republic in the face of the Generalissimo’s current unhappiness. General White noted that part of the proposed note to be given the Dominicans seemed to take a very strong position as far as our facilities down there are concerned. Mr. Stewart said that this section is being deleted from the note. Ambassador Farland described the current situation in the Dominican Republic. Trujillo’s unhappiness is more deeply rooted than simply the trouble involving Ramfis. Trujillo privately has indicated his desire to cooperate fully on all military matters with the United States but feels that we are not reciprocating his desire for cooperation. Recently military cooperation had been improving. If we could provide some naval assistance, like an old mine sweeper, it would be very helpful. Ambassador Farland said he thought the note prepared for him to give the Foreign Minister represents the minimum that we should do and that in his verbal discussions he will seek to placate the Dominicans and encourage mutual cooperation. Ambassador Farland said that the Generalissimo feels that the action of the United States Army authorities in not giving Ramfis a diploma is largely political. The Dominicans note that other foreign students at Leavenworth have received diplomas even though they were absent for lengthy periods. The Ambassador said he had tried, to explain the standards of Leavenworth to the Generalissimo. General Taylor3 said that the critical thing at Leavenworth for all students is to pass the examinations. [text not declassified] 1 Source: Department of State, State-JCS Meetings, Lot 61 D 417. Secret. Information on the source text indicates that this meeting took place at the Pentagon, and that the memorandum was not cleared with the Department of Defense. The Department of Defense was represented by 21 officers, including the Joint Chiefs, the Department of State by 9 officers, the Central Intelligence by 1, and the National Security Council by 1. Robert D. Murphy, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, headed the Department of State contingent, which also included Ambassador Farland. 2 Thomas D. White, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force. 3 Maxwell D. Taylor, Chief of Staff, U.S. Army.
