722
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
visits disgruntled politicians who will criticize new government’s pol-
icies. I hoped he would neither by word or gesture indicate to any of
them lack of full confidence in his Prime Minister. All country, in-
cluding Zahedi, must be given to feel latter has Shah’s complete sup-
port. Zahedi might be kind of man who could move with decision if he
sure Shah back of him but who would become ineffectual if he not sure
Shah’s support. Even if Zahedi should do certain things which Shah
considered to be unwise, Shah should not be unduly critical. No two
persons do things in exactly same way. Zahedi must not feel he must
consult Shah re every detail. Shah agreed, said he would try to build up
Zahedi. During course of day he had given him active army status, pro-
moted him to Lt. Gen. and given him highest Iranian decoration.
Zahedi had conducted himself during this crisis with courage and
wisdom. As result his estimate Zahedi had risen. Nevertheless it must
be clear to Zahedi and every one that no person or organization can
come between Shah and Army. Energetic steps must be taken to
strengthen solidarity Army and to display favoritism at this time
would give rise to rifts. Only officers of highest character and proven
loyalty and ability should hold high positions. Certain additional US
military aid essential. He would discuss this another occasion.
3. Shah continued by stating internal programs should be formu-
lated rapidly which would appeal to youth of country. Communism
must be combatted (A) by mercilessly weeding out Communist leaders
who had buried themselves in number of united front organizations
(B) by instituting programs which would undercut Communist propa-
ganda. Iran must move in direction socialism; more equitable distribu-
tion of wealth of country. I said it seemed to me slogan should be
“Greater production accompanied by more equitable distribution.”
Emphasis should be on greater production and equitable distribution
should take second place. If slogan “More equitable distribution” given
too much emphasis, certain groups might obtain impression quickest
and easiest way improve their lots would be to take property from
other persons rather than to work hard in order increase wealth. Em-
phasis on more equitable distribution rather than greater production
would give rise to class warfare which could paralyze country and play
into hands Communists. Shah again agreed but said effective measures
must be taken without loss of time convince poor and needy Govern-
ment looking after their interests. He hoped re-launch his campaign for
distribution of crownlands on wide scale. He was wondering if Bank
for Reconstruction which he had organized might not have been at-
tempting to obtain loan immediately from EXIM Bank in order start
building workers houses in Tehran and other large urban centers. If
they could begin at once building cheap but healthy living quarters—
say for 10,000 homeless families in Tehran, and a thousand or more in
each of the other large Iranian cities—effect would be most salutary.
