North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
995
2. You direct that U.S. representatives at informal international
meetings in the meantime indicate that we will consult intensively with
the Congress about the unresolved issues and will frame our positions
on these issues in light of the results of that consultation and of on-
going international discussions.
3. You direct that the results of Congressional consultations be re-
ported to you and that the PRC be asked promptly to give you agreed
or divergent recommendations as to U.S. policy, in light of these
results.
Attachment
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter4
Washington, August 18, 1978
SUBJECT
Common Fund
I believe it is politically important in the North/South context to
move the Common Fund negotiations toward a timely, successful con-
clusion. The developing countries see the Fund as the touchstone of in-
dustrial countries’ attitudes toward their aspirations and our support
for it as an important indication of our commitment to a constructive
North/South dialogue. The Bonn Summit and statements by you, Mike
and me during the ASEAN Ministerial meeting5 have increased expec-
tations that the U.S. will take the initiative at expected negotiations on
the Fund this November.
I believe that we should make a vigorous effort to move forward.
Our taking a major step towards the LDCs—with a view to breaking
the impasse in the next round of negotiations—would be a positive po-
litical gesture. It would strengthen the climate in the UN, UNCTAD
4 Secret. Cooper sent a draft of this memorandum to Vance for his signature under
cover of an August 15 memorandum. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat
Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper,
1977–1980, Lot 81D134, Box 3, Common Fund—1978)
5 The Ministerial meeting between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and
the United States took place in Washington August 2–4. For Vance’s statement at the
opening session, the transcript of a post-meeting news conference, and a joint statement
issued at the end of the meeting, see the Department of State Bulletin, September 1978, pp.
19–25. For a statement issued by the White House on Carter’s participation in the
meeting, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II,
pp. 1378–1379.
