Options Identified
287
107.
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
Washington, December 19, 1979, 8–9:40 a.m.
SUBJECT
Iran
PARTICIPANTS
The President
JCS
General Jones
State
Secretary Vance
The White House
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Defense
Hamilton Jordan
Secretary Brown
Jody Powell
CIA
Admiral Turner
MINUTES
Secretary Vance reported on discussions with Secretary General
Waldheim and the new Iranian delegate Mansour Farhang.
The notion is being floated that there will be no trial, but that the
hostages will have to appear before a “grand jury.” Thought is also
being given to a six-person UN delegation going to Tehran. Waldheim
is not prepared to send the group unless the hostages would be
released.2 Waldheim would also like more time than Thursday for the
U.S. to move on sanctions.3 We expect at present the U.S., U.K., France,
Norway, Portugal, Belgium, and Gabon to support us.
The UN ambassadors would prefer for Salim to go to Tehran. The
President said that we would probably get nine votes in that case and
we must not let a Soviet veto stand in the way. Sanctions must be
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 98, Meetings File, 12/19/79 NSC and SCC (Cancelled) re Iran. Top Secret; Sensitive.
The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House. At the top of the page,
Carter wrote: “ok as amended. J.”
2 According to telegram 6237 from USUN, December 19, Farhang also told Waldheim
the grand jury would replace a trial and asked that he have a few days to get a response
from the Iranian Government on the idea of a UN delegation. McHenry noted his own
opposition to a UN delegation. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom,
Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Iran
NODIS Cables Dec 1979)
3 Thursday, December 20. According to telegram 6236 from USUN, December 19,
Waldheim was “taken aback” at the U.S. decision to proceed with securing Security
Council agreement to sanctions against Iran. He wanted to give Iran time to respond,
and stated that “if Washington wants to take the responsibility for proceeding without
waiting, he would have to decline continuing his own efforts.” McHenry told Waldheim
that he was unimpressed with Farhang’s position. (Ibid.)
