1362  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
difficult to phrase an answer to this question without appearing either 
to offer an argument for recognition or, on the other hand, to discount 
the validity of the argument that we cannot offer protection as one 
of the reasons behind our policy. Another question which appeared to 
be somewhat loaded was the question of whether you at Geneva still 
felt that removing the travel ban would have an unfavorable effect on 
the prospects for release of the prisoners or whether you had come 
to believe, in the light of the propaganda advantage that Peiping had 
already gained from exploiting the issue, that the ban no longer had 
any value in your negotiations. Our answer to this one was in effect 
that your position at Geneva had always been along the lines of the 
Department’s press release of August 7, that you felt the travel of cer­
tain reporters in defiance of the ban had weakened your position vis-­
a-­vis the ban, and that you had stressed that the Communists would 
probably not release the Americans in exchange for a removal of the 
ban. The Department agreed with this analysis, and in any case did 
not intend to bargain for the release of Americans. (I am enclosing a 
copy of the FE portion of our reply).
2. The Worthy Case: William Worthy was given a hearing on April 29 
in order to inform him officially of the tentative denial of his request for a 
new passport. The Department, at this stage, kept the focus on the issues 
as defined in the passport regulations. The next step will presumably be a 
hearing before the Board of Passport Appeals.
3. Cases of Downey, Fecteau and Redmond: We have already sent to 
Geneva a memorandum of conversation with Mrs. Downey, the mother 
of John Downey, in which Mr. Robertson discussed with her various 
possibilities growing out of a contact she had with Dag Hammarskjold. 
You will see that there is a possibility she might come to Geneva at the 
time of your next meeting for an interview with Wang. The Department 
did not attempt to discourage her from making the trip, although we, 
of course, could not give her any assurance that the interview would be 
granted, or that it would have any effect on the release of her son. We 
are attempting to find out more about Dag Hammarskjold’s reported 
willingness to take up again the cases of Downey and Fecteau, on 
the grounds of their being civilians under the authority of the UNC 
in Korea, and therefore entitled to repatriation under the Armistice 
Agreement. You will recall that at the time of Hammarskjold’s visit to 
Peiping in January 1955, although he went there primarily on behalf of 
the 11 airmen, we left the door open to the inclusion of the two civil­
ians in the category of personnel who should be released under the 
Armistice Agreement. Also, in Wang’s list of Americans in China which 
he gave you at the start of the talks, Downey and Fecteau are placed in 
a separate category from the other civilian prisoners. Of course, in any­
thing that we might do or ask the Secretory General to do, we would
