650 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Today the oil problem and fear of inflation may lead to slower rates of growth in some countries. As a result we could find countries with high rates of unemployment in difficult positions. It is important to fight inflation but we should lay down a coordinated policy, as noted by Giscard. We should not have a deflationary policy, but a coordinated system directed to the struggle against unemployment, and this should be set out with more emphasis in the Communique. If we do not it will have political repercussions on public opinion in different countries. We should not extinguish the hopes of the Bonn Summit. JENKINS: The oil price increase had two countervailing effects. It increased the cost/pull impact on inflation, and it led to a decline in demand. These are difficult to reconcile. We need to come up with a balance between the two to avoid both inflationary and deflationary effects. We might for instance consider separate price indices, with one in which the effect of energy price increases are not included. We could isolate energy costs in dealing with wage indexation in certain countries. CARTER: As a result of Bonn I directed oil price decontrol. It started on the first of June.11 Domestic oil prices as a result have been increased more rapidly than in other countries because of the price increase in our oil, and OPEC increases. I agree that statistics would look better if we took Roy Jenkins’ idea, but our people won’t permit our trying to prevent energy costs from being incorporated in wage demands. We have focussed on energy with some degree of success. We have made much progress in 2½ years. Before 1973 for every 1% increase in GNP we had a 1.05 increase in energy use. Since 1973 that figure has been .37%. We have had a less than 50% increase in oil use as compared to GNP. We also need to get at the roots of inflation. We have deregulated the airline industry12 and we are moving on transportation. We have modified our tax structure to encourage new investment and improve depreciation allowances. I am concerned about productivity improvement. More effort here is needed. As a result of the MTN we reduced protection at home and have encouraged increased R&D in the government and have called for private industry to do the same. Close cooperation among us is important. The issue is how to deal with energy. Premature media exposure of our views might reduce our 11 For Carter’s June 1 statement on the decontrol of domestic oil prices, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book I, pp. 981–982. 12 Carter signed the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978 into law on October 24, 1978. For his signing remarks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, pp. 1837–1839.
