March 27–December 31, 1979 1017 —land and water (including settlements); —the source of authority for the Self-Governing Authority; and —both internal and external security. (C) The issue of supervision of elections was more or less resolved in London—but that was child’s play compared to the other issues. (C) In terms of your role, there are a number of steps, which you undoubtedly have already thought about: —talking with Evron, Ghorbal, the other Arab Ambassadors, selected regional UN Ambassadors, and Waldheim; —visiting Egypt and Israel soon, and establishing contact with Sadat, Khalil, Begin, Burg (and other Israeli leaders); attending an early meeting of the Talks; —meeting with American Jewish leaders, the Hamilton Subcommittee, and the Stone Subcommittee; —working towards meetings with non-PLO Palestinians; —meeting with Habib on Lebanon. Because of the interplay of issues in the Middle East, there are other issues where your involvement will be important, so that everything stays on track, including: —Lebanon. The “initiative” is being pursued in terms both of Lebanon itself, and of preventing a recurrence of violence from damaging the Autonomy Talks. (Sadat has not let the talks be affected by past Lebanese incidents, but might not be able to sustain that position). Our position rules out any dealing with the PLO (there was some opinion in the Administration to use the Lebanon initiative to resolve the larger problem of talking with the PLO). The initiative is low-key, and depends on Lebanese leadership and effectiveness with the Arabs. Yet its course will have an impact on your work; —Settlements. How we play this issue in our ongoing diplomacy is important, in addition to any effort we consider to try getting a “good-will” freeze on settlements. It is important that you be in the loop on USG approaches to Israel and public statements on this subject (as on others, such as any resumption of strikes in Lebanon); —Aid. As noted above, you are the key person to work with Cy and Zbig in helping the President relate levels of aid to Egypt and Israel to the peace process; —Arms sales. These are important with regard to Jordan and Saudi Arabia, both politically and concerning the stance these countries take towards Camp David; —UN Resolutions. As noted above, we may have to face one or more new resolutions on the PLO. (Khalil has played around with an Egyptian initiative, which Bob has tried to turn off);
