798  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Existing and future U.S. heavy bombers may be equipped for no 
more than 20 long-­range nuclear ALCMs; existing and future Soviet 
heavy bombers may be equipped for no more than 12 long-­range 
nuclear ALCMs;
Long-­range ALCMs will be considered those with a range in excess 
of 600 kilometers. Future long-­range non-­nuclear ALCMs will not be 
considered nuclear if they are distinguishable from long-­range nuclear 
ALCMs. There will be no restrictions on deploying such ALCMs on 
aircraft not limited by the treaty.
Reductions will be carried out in three phases over a period of 
seven years. Specific. Equal interim levels for agreed categories of 
strategic offensive arms will be achieved by the end of each phase 
of reductions;
The numerical limitations provided for by the treaty will be 
achieved and complied with through conversion or elimination in 
accordance with agreed procedures.
Sea-­launched cruise missiles (SLCMs) will not be constrained in 
the START treaty. Each side will provide the other with a unilateral 
declaration of its policy concerning nuclear SLCMs and, annually for 
the duration of the treaty, with unilateral declarations regarding its 
planned deployments of nuclear long-­range SLCMs, i.e., those with a 
range in excess of 600 kilometers. Those declarations will be politically 
binding. In the annual declarations the maximum number of deployed 
nuclear SLCMs for each of the following five treaty years will be speci-
fied, provided that the number declared will not exceed 880. In the dec-
larations of policy it will be specified that the United States of America 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics will not produce or deploy 
nuclear sea-­launched cruise missiles with multiple independently tar-
getable warheads. The sides reaffirmed their 1987 Washington summit 
joint statement to continue to seek “mutually acceptable and effective 
methods of verification”.
Except as specifically prohibited, modernization and replacement 
of strategic offensive arms may be carried out.
The START treaty will include specific prohibitions on certain cat-
egories of strategic offensive arms, basing modes and activities. The 
following are among the bans under the START treaty:
— New types of heavy ICBMs;
— Heavy SLBMs and launchers of heavy SLBMs;
— Mobile launchers of heavy ICBMs;
— New types of ICBMs and SLBMs with more than 10 reentry 
vehicles;
— Flight testing and deployment of existing types of ICBMs 
or SLBMs with a number of reentry vehicles greater than the
