United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  39
However, the overwhelming majority of the Latin Americans are 
thinking of a development institution engaging also in soft loans, includ-
ing loans for social overhead projects. They are thinking of U.S. help in 
economic development financing through loans of a combined magni-
tude not realizable by a bank to which Latin America could contribute 
even half of the capital. They are thinking in terms of $300 to $400 million 
annually for the next ten years, in addition to maintenance of the current 
leading activities of the IBRD and the Eximbank. Obviously we will be 
unable to meet that kind of request but we shall have to deal with the 
problem of profound disillusionment unless we can devise some means 
of meeting this aspiration for a soft loan institution.
Messrs. Dillon, Mann and I have discussed that probably the 
most feasible approach might be to establish an institution with two 
departments, one to operate along sound banking lines and to make 
only hard loans, and (2) a completely separate department that would 
make soft loans and that would be authorized to borrow from the U.S. 
Development Loan Fund, say, at the rate of $100 million per year. The 
latter department would be able to lend funds for certain important 
overhead projects, like schools, and hospitals, and could also lend 
money for the local currency costs of projects for which the hard loan 
department would lend to cover import requirements.
The Department has prepared a position paper which will be made 
available to the other members of the NAC at its meeting on Tuesday 
when this subject will be discussed. Attached is a copy.
Recommendation:
That you authorize Mr. Dillon support an institution which would 
make hard loans but with a department which could also handle soft 
loans and would be authorized to borrow from the DLF, at the NAC 
meeting on Tuesday, November 25;
That yon also take an early occasion to inform the President of 
your views that this kind of institution is absolutely necessary to meet 
both the urgent economic problems in Latin America and the political 
problems created by their increased expectations of U.S. assistance.
[Attachment]
Paper Prepared in the Department of State2
Washington, November 24, 1958.
In order to permit the institution to make some loans of con-
vertible currencies repayable in local currencies to assist in financing 
2 No classification marking.
