778  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
495.	 Letter 22 from Johnson to McConaughy1
No. 22
Geneva, February 19, 1956
Dear Walter:
A very cold Sunday afternoon and a chance to write you as it was 
not practical for me to go back to Prague this week. With the plane 
schedules and all it would have meant I would only have had Monday 
there. I hope I can get back onto the Thursday meeting schedule which 
works out best for me. However, I must confess I do not have much 
stomach for flying the kind of weather we have been having here. Last 
week I went up in the teeth of what can only be described as a real 
howling blizzard and it took us three hours for the Zurich-­Prague leg 
which is normally about 1¾  hours flying time. There is no GCA at 
the Prague airport, and while I have lots of faith in Swissair I just do 
not enjoy this roaming around in a snowstorm feeling for the airport 
between the hills.
As you can see, I am writing this myself, so please excuse the ­typing. 
We have heard nothing concerning Miss Howard’s arrival except for 
the Department’s message to Canberra, but I very much hope that she 
will show up next week. Fortunately both Dave and John type so that 
between them they managed to turn out yesterday’s meeting.
Thanks very much for your helpful and I fear all too generous 
letter of Feburary 13. Frankly, I am finding it increasingly difficult to 
think up any new approaches, and I find it constitutionally repellent 
to just say the same old things. Tactically I also think it is not good. As 
you have also noted the less that is done the longer the meeting, and 
these straight five hour sessions are really wearing. Yesterday, I tried to 
keep it down to a reasonable length, and keep it to the point. There is a 
great temptation to try to answer everything every time, but it seems to 
me that it serves little purpose. At times I have feared I was somewhat 
ahead of the Department, but was particularly glad to note that your 
1619 fully confirmed the line I have been building toward and which I 
fully developed yesterday.
I presume that everyone is very aware that we have now gone a 
long ways towards agreeing to talk with them about “tension in the 
Taiwan area” and much related thereto at such time as agreement may 
be reached on a declaration. It will be very difficult later to say that we 
cannot talk about it because it involves third parties. You will recall I 
raised this in para 4 of my 1241 back in December. It worries me a great 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret.
