and that should the Government persist in its attitude it might be necessary to invoke
the Capitulations. He found a ready listener in the King, who at all times is against
capital punishment, and the sentence was commuted to life imprisonment; which was
satisfactory to all concerned.
Inasmuch as the trial had caused a certain amount of comment, seeing that it comprised
[sic] foreigners, the British Legation requested what its attitude should be under similar
circumstances of the Home authorities. The reply was to the effect that in all cases of a
criminal nature as soon as the Legation learned of the arrest all possible facilities
should be arranged for the detained person. It is to be understood that this refers
primarily to political crime. Later, as the case developed would be time enough to
determine on a definite line of action.
The attitude of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs is that the Capitulations no longer exist.
They state that since the Capitulations have been abolished in Turkey they can no
longer be invoked in Bulgaria, as they were merely a relic of Ottoman rule. When faced
with Article 175 of the Treaty of Neuilly, to which the British Minister once called their
attention, they assume a calmer attitude. There is no doubt that their existence is a thorn
in the flesh, and that present Bulgaria would do much to remove them.
At this moment the attitude of the three Great Powers holding capitulary rights under
the terms of the Treaty of Neuilly is about as follows: Great Britain has withdrawn
rights in Civil cases, but have made definite statements concerning their rights in
Criminal cases. Will use Capitulations as a lever to obtain preferences in proposed
Commercial Treaty.
France has adopted a similar attitude, perhaps a trifle more conciliatory, but have made
it clear that Capitulations certainly exist in Criminal cases. It is to be noted that all
Roman Catholics in Bulgaria are supposedly under the protection of the French. This
dates from the time of Francis the First, and it appears unlikely that it would be
invoked.
Italy joined Britain and France concerning the Consular question pointed out in the
foregoing. Their Chargé (Italy’s) tells me that he does not believe that his country
would invoke the Capitulations except in a flagrant miscarriage of justice in a criminal
case. I believe, inasmuch as Italy is bending every effort toward capturing the trade of
Bulgaria, that she prefers to use the Capitulations to gain some end and that eventually
she will barter them away against some Treaty or Agreement.
At the present moment American citizens in Bulgaria receive the same treatment as that
accorded to the nationals of other countries. Moreover, such Americans as reside in this
country are unlikely to run afoul of the law in criminal matters. Their litigation, such as
it is, would come before a civil court.
