488
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
171.
Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department
of State1
Islamabad, January 17, 1980, 1415Z
438. Also for Ambassador Hummel (NEA). Subject: Agha Shahi
Gives Preliminary Views of Pakistan Government on Aid Package.
1. (S) Entire text.
2. I was called in this evening (Jan 17) by Foreign Advisor Agha
Shahi to receive what he described as preliminary reaction of Pakistan
Government to U.S. aid offer.2 Agha Shahi prefaced remarks by saying
U.S. should understand that GOP appreciates firm stand by President
Carter over Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and his offer to come to
Pakistan’s assistance. However, he would like Washington to have his
“informal and preliminary” assessment of initial GOP reaction to aid
package. Fuller and more formal GOP reaction would be forthcoming.
3. Agha Shahi said that initial reaction of government leaders was
one of disappointment. Considering the immensity of the threat, U.S.
offer of $400 million viewed as inadequate to meet the situation in
terms of the kinds of military equipment that Pakistan required, $200
million would not go very far, particularly if one took into account
requirements such as high performance aircraft. He had also discussed
offer of $200 million in economic assistance with Economics Minister
Ghulam Ishaq, who felt that this amount would not go very far in
meeting Pakistan’s needs, particularly with questions of debt resched-
uling still hanging over their heads. However, Agha Shahi added, aid
package more inadequate in regard to military needs.
4. GOP also concerned about degree of American resolve, since
already the “liberal” press in U.S. is attacking provision of assistance
to “undemocratic” government in Pakistan.3 Certainly Pakistan did
not enjoy an ideally democratic government and martial law prevailed,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South,
Thornton, Country File, Box 95, Pakistan: 1/79–1/80. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis.
Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
2 For the U.S aid package, see Document 151.
3 An apparent reference to an editorial in the New York Times, January 15, entitled
“The Tilt in South Asia,” which questioned Zia’s reliability as a U.S. partner. (New York
Times, January 15, 1980, p. A18)
