National Security Policy  745
flexible capability for military operations short of general war and an 
acceptable doctrine for the use of that capability against the full range 
of possible Communist aggressions. The former is a primary require­
ment, but its existence does not meet the total threat to our security. In 
a time of relative nuclear parity, the ability to conduct operations short 
of general war is of increasing importance. The deterrence of limited 
Communist aggression, and Free World confidence that such aggres­
sion will be deterred will depend more and more on the strengthen­
ing of U.S. limited war capabilities. The United States should possess 
a capability and a doctrine which are flexible enough to enable it to 
deter or to defeat limited Communist aggression with the degree of 
force necessary to achieve the objectives of the United States at the time. 
Three issues are fundamental to the necessary revision of our military 
strategy:
a. Relationship Between Strategy and Policy Objectives. U.S. strategy 
must serve our national policy objectives of maintaining the cohesion 
of the Free World and influencing the policies of the Communist Bloc 
in directions compatible with U.S. security interests. This strategy must 
also provide definitive terms of reference which will permit a measure­
ment of adequacy of retaliatory and defensive forces, thus facilitating 
the allocation of resources among the various elements which make up 
the total U.S. military posture.
b. Nuclear Weapons Policy. Relative nuclear parity has already made 
the policy of massive retaliation unacceptable as anything but a deter­
rent to total nuclear warfare. Therefore, the United States can no lon­
ger place main reliance on nuclear weapons for other forms of conflict, 
and must maintain forces capable of reacting to limited aggression with 
nuclear and/or non-­nuclear means, whichever is in the best interests of 
the U.S. in the situation then existing.
c. Limited War. With regard to limited war, it is necessary that no 
restriction be placed, by definition, on the locale, intensity, duration, or 
participants. In effect, limited war is recognized as any armed conflict 
short of general war.
4. The military elements of national strategy, as outlined in NSC 
5906 (majority view), do not provide for the flexibility and range of 
response essential to U.S. security in a time of relative nuclear parity. 
Additionally, they do not fulfill the Foreign Policy Requirements consid­
ered by the Secretary of State to bear upon U.S. strategy. These elements 
permit an interpretation which places undue reliance on nuclear weap­
ons to a degree incompatible with the Foreign Policy Requirements. 
Further, they define limited war in a manner which will prevent the 
U.S. developing the capabilities necessary to a broad range of response 
to limited communist aggressions. Modification of certain paragraphs 
will, however, correct these deficiencies and provide a military strategy 
which is realistic, and is responsive not only to foreign policy require­
ments, but also to the threat as discussed in the version of paragraph 3 
which is supported by the majority of the NSC Planning Board.
