1979 517 —[3 lines not declassified] We estimate that present Soviet antisatellite systems are capable of being employed against US satellites at low and medium altitudes, although the latter capability has not yet been demonstrated. In the 1980s the Soviets could have systems able to destroy or degrade satellites at higher altitudes, including those in geosynchronous orbits. Implications of Trends in Soviet Intercontinental Offensive Forces 4. Judging by developments under way or foreseeable in the near term, the early-­to-­mid-1980s will be a period in which Soviet intercontinental offensive capabilities are further improved relative to those of the West. Substantial increases in our estimates of Soviet countersilo capabilities and MIRV deployments over the next few years, combined with some slippages in US programs, lead us to believe that this period will arrive sooner and last longer than previously anticipated. Beginning around the mid-1980s, if Soviet programs proceed in accordance with our best estimates and US programs go forward without further slippages, US weapon systems becoming operational are likely to bring a new rise in US intercontinental offensive power along with continuing Soviet advances. 5. To assist in interpreting the implications of Soviet intercontinental offensive forces over the next 10 years, we compare them in the accompanying charts with projected US forces. The primary purpose of these comparisons is to display in graphic form some of the factors which may affect: the viability and stability of the US deterrent; the USSR’s evaluation of its comparative intercontinental offensive capabilities and vulnerabilities; and perceptions of relative power in the United States, the USSR, and elsewhere. —The future Soviet forces are intelligence projections, whereas the future US forces are based on Department of Defense projections. The projections assume adherence by both sides, through 1988, to the provisions of an agreement along the lines now being negotiated at the strategic arms limitation talks (SALT). The projections of Soviet forces represent our best estimates of Soviet deployments and technological progress under a SALT II agreement. —The forces compared consist of ICBM launchers and their missiles, SLBM launchers and their missiles, and heavy bombers carrying bombs, SRAMs (short-­range attack missiles), or ALCMs. The comparison of delivery vehicles includes all SALT-­accountable systems except for about 200 B–52 aircraft that are in storage and not operational. Systems off line for overhaul or conversion are included in the number of delivery vehicles but are excluded from the comparisons of numbers of weapons and equivalent megatons. —The comparisons also exclude a number of options each side could exercise to alter the striking power or survivability of its intercontinental forces. Options not illustrated on the US side, for example, include the deployment of ICBMs in a mobile basing configuration
