1979  517
—[3 lines not declassified] We estimate that present Soviet antisat-
ellite systems are capable of being employed against US satellites at 
low and medium altitudes, although the latter capability has not yet 
been demonstrated. In the 1980s the Soviets could have systems able 
to destroy or degrade satellites at higher altitudes, including those in 
geosynchronous orbits.
Implications of Trends in Soviet Intercontinental Offensive Forces
4. Judging by developments under way or foreseeable in the near 
term, the early-­to-­mid-1980s will be a period in which Soviet intercon-
tinental offensive capabilities are further improved relative to those of 
the West. Substantial increases in our estimates of Soviet countersilo 
capabilities and MIRV deployments over the next few years, combined 
with some slippages in US programs, lead us to believe that this period 
will arrive sooner and last longer than previously anticipated. Begin-
ning around the mid-1980s, if Soviet programs proceed in accordance 
with our best estimates and US programs go forward without further 
slippages, US weapon systems becoming operational are likely to bring 
a new rise in US intercontinental offensive power along with continu-
ing Soviet advances.
5. To assist in interpreting the implications of Soviet interconti-
nental offensive forces over the next 10 years, we compare them in the 
accompanying charts with projected US forces. The primary purpose 
of these comparisons is to display in graphic form some of the factors 
which may affect: the viability and stability of the US deterrent; the 
USSR’s evaluation of its comparative intercontinental offensive capa-
bilities and vulnerabilities; and perceptions of relative power in the 
United States, the USSR, and elsewhere.
—The future Soviet forces are intelligence projections, whereas the 
future US forces are based on Department of Defense projections. The 
projections assume adherence by both sides, through 1988, to the pro-
visions of an agreement along the lines now being negotiated at the 
strategic arms limitation talks (SALT). The projections of Soviet forces 
represent our best estimates of Soviet deployments and technological 
progress under a SALT II agreement.
—The forces compared consist of ICBM launchers and their mis-
siles, SLBM launchers and their missiles, and heavy bombers carrying 
bombs, SRAMs (short-­range attack missiles), or ALCMs. The compari-
son of delivery vehicles includes all SALT-­accountable systems except 
for about 200 B–52 aircraft that are in storage and not operational. Sys-
tems off line for overhaul or conversion are included in the number of 
delivery vehicles but are excluded from the comparisons of numbers of 
weapons and equivalent megatons.
—The comparisons also exclude a number of options each side 
could exercise to alter the striking power or survivability of its inter-
continental forces. Options not illustrated on the US side, for exam-
ple, include the deployment of ICBMs in a mobile basing configuration
