Afghanistan
569
201.
Intelligence Appraisal Prepared in the Department of
Defense1
Washington, February 8, 1980
AFGHANISTAN: THE PARCHAM REGIME (U)
Summary
(S) The Soviets apparently are using the current government to
restart the Afghan revolution in the moderate direction in which they
had hoped both Taraki and Amin would proceed. Despite numerous
conciliatory gestures and the announcement of a “Fatherland Front,”
members of the new government are leftists and Communists. They
do not represent a broad national front and are instead a Soviet puppet
government. Lacking credibility, legitimacy, and popular support, the
government’s authority extends to those areas where it can be backed
primarily with Soviet military power, on which it depends for survival.
(S/[handling restriction not declassified]) Babrak’s regime, installed
by Soviet paratroops on 27 December, has been troubled by serious
instability. Babrak’s Parcham group is engaged in a power struggle to
consolidate its control of the new government and consequently has
not addressed the nation’s problems, which are largely out of control.
His Soviet mentors are displeased with the regime they installed, and
especially with the incessant factional strife. They, however, rather than
Babrak, will decide the outcome of the power struggle, and his tenure
is likely to be brief. The Soviets have little to lose in experimenting
with the government to find a leadership combination that might be
capable of establishing tolerable conditions in the country. Under cur-
rent conditions, their chances to do so seem very slim. In the short
term, the Army officer corps, which is almost the only functioning
national-level organization, is likely to assume a larger political role.
The Soviets, however, have invested heavily in Afghanistan’s future. By
the mid-1980s, thousands of Afghans now in Soviet and East European
schools will begin to return to their country. These students are the
future leaders of a Communist Afghanistan, which will remain under
close Soviet guidance if not outright control.
[Omitted here is the body of the appraisal.]
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 1, Afghan Politics.
Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].
