National Security Policy  643
wait until after the 1960 election. General Norstad had pointed out that 
he desires to retire rather than continue on active duty, since his invest­
ment in the European job in so heavy as to practically cut him off from 
any terms of reference of a job in the U.S.
The President was in general agreement with General Norstad’s 
desires, although he feels that late summer of 1960 would be a prefera­
ble time for the switch. He stated that he would like to make the change 
about three or four months before the end of the Administration. He 
would like General Norstad to remain on active duty after his return to 
the U.S.; but he fully realizes the difficulty in readjusting from a posi­
tion of SACEUR to any other. He asked General Twining to request 
General Norstad to come and visit him next time he is in Washington.
As to the timing of a departure by General Norstad, the President 
sees no problem. General Schuyler’s changeover will occur in June 
1959. His replacement will eventually become SACEUR. This will 
make June 1960 the first time in which General Schuyler’s replacement 
could take over from General Norstad, since it would require at least a 
year for an officer in the Chief of Staff position to “sell himself” to the 
European nations. The President pointed out that he had followed this 
procedure with General Gruenther, and that only in the case of General 
Ridgway had an officer been sent in from another area to take over that 
command.
General Twining then stated that General Norstad would favor 
General Taylor as his replacement, although they all realize that 
General Taylor has completed his tour as Army Chief of Staff, and the 
Secretary of Defense thinks it unwise to appoint him for a third term. 
Accordingly, General Twining feels that General Taylor could take over 
the position of Deputy CINCEUR, now held by General Palmer. On 
this the President reviewed some names of officers he would nominate 
for this position. He agrees with the difficulties in the appointment of 
General Taylor, but feels (and General Twining agrees) that the offi­
cer should come from the Army. Specifically, the President mentioned 
General Decker, General Davidson, and General Lemnitzer. In response 
to General Twining’s statement that General Lemnitzer is slated to 
be Chief of Staff, the President answered that that officer should be 
groomed for General Twining’s position, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff. Some discussion of individual officer qualifications then fol­
lowed, with General Twining expressing the view that if SACEUR is to 
be an Army officer, then the position of Deputy CINCEUR, presently 
held by General Palmer, should be held by an Air Force officer. He also 
stated that General Norstad is making every effort to consolidate some 
Army headquarters in Europe. To this the President responded with 
enthusiasm.
*    *    *
