1955 257 officially informed by US of agreed announcement, if they have done same no reason United Kingdom and India should not assume func­ tions. However, believe we cannot finally decide how handle this until we know what attitude India is taking with respect our invitation on which I have no info here. 6. With respect second question of timing of discussion about agenda item two will desire make carefully prepared statement and in this regard would appreciate Department’s instructions in light what I said in last meeting and my subsequent public statement. 7. Am confident I can avoid any question of a break at next meeting but believe it important do maximum handle matter so as avoid ultima­ tum or challenge which could lead to freezing positions. Gowen Mr. Waddell’s office (FE) notified 9/16/10:31 a.m. EMB (CWO) 196. Letter 14 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 14 Washington, September 16, 1955 Dear Alex: You raise some basic questions in your letter No. 7 of September 7. Of course these questions had occurred to us and had already been given some thought. But the answers are not easy and Messrs. Robert­ son and Phleger feel I should not write anything on policy questions to you until the Secretary returns and gives us some guidance. He is due back tomorrow the 17th from Duck Island. He leaves after the close of business on the 19th for the opening of the UNGA Session in New York. We hope to have some time with him over the week end. The telegram containing the instructions to you for your Tuesday meeting will not be drafted until after we get the benefit of the Secretary’s thinking. I hope to be able to give you some helpful background thinking in my next letter of Monday morning the 19th. We have prepared a summary of develop­ ments at Geneva since September 1 for the Secretary to read on the plane enroute to Washington so that he will be fairly current when he gets here. For your background information the Secretary will return to the Depart­ ment from New York on Friday, September 23. He will be absent again from September 26 through September 28. 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official– Informal.
