816
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Q (Manor): He was very interested in the lighting which had been
installed at Desert 1 and asked for some more details.
A (DCI): [8 lines not declassified]
Q (Manor): He asked if we were involved in the choosing of
Desert 1.
A (DCI): He responded that we were and that the Desert 1 site
was the result of our own initiative.
Q (Gray): Referring to the Director’s comments on security he noted
that there must clearly be some sort of balance between secrecy and
potential compromise. He asked whether the Agency could monitor
the scope of activity in order to determine if the number of those aware
of an operation, or the activity involved, was getting too great.
A (DCI): [3 lines not declassified]
Q (Piotrowski): Further on this question of monitoring security he
asked whether we could provide information as to whether ten versus
eight helos could or should be used (this from a security standpoint).
A (DCI): He suggested that this was more something for the Delta
force to do; that they could perhaps best perform the mathematics and
be the judge of what was detectable versus what was necessary.
John McMahon then commented that we were, however, carefully
monitoring various communications nets in order to ascertain whether
any security breach had occurred, but all we found was “business
as usual.”
—The Director then mentioned an incident at Diego Garcia where
some sailor commented to a Navy commander and one of our people
that he had figured out why all of this activity was going to the Nimitz;
he told them he guessed that they were going to be conducting a rescue
of the hostages; at this point the Navy commander took the sailor with
him to the Nimitz, thereby preventing his discussing his “educated
guess” with anyone else.
Q (Piotrowksi): He noted that the arrival of the fuel trucks and the
bus at Desert 1 proved to be an unfortunate circumstance; he then
asked whether this site, so close to a road, was the only site or whether
there were alternatives.
A (DCI): He responded that this was the only site that we had seen
in photography and subsequently checked out on the ground.
—He said the plan was initially to land on the road, but that when
the OTTER made its reconnaissance the crew found that they could,
in fact, land on the desert.
—He said that we had seen nowhere else that we were as confident
of for use as a landing zone.
—He mentioned that we were, at the time the “go” was given,
looking at another option which involved the dropping of fuel bladders
into the desert, but that there had been no time to organize for, or
explore, that option further before the operation was ordered.
