International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 sources.) French policy on MTN seems to be rather tightly layed down by Giscard himself. I believe our best approach for the early fall is to keep in touch informally with the French; to proceed with business as usual in Geneva; and to take them on frontally only after we have created a situation in which Community pressures (hopefully with the FRG in the lead) can be brought to bear on them. The next Franco- German summit is September 14–15 and we hope that Schmidt will reiterate his support for a successful MTN. End summary. 2. Franc¸ois de Laboulaye has made the rounds prior to his return to Washington, D.C. He told me he had discussed the MTN at the Elyse´e and had had a long talk with Barre as well. He found both men personally very tough on this subject. His conclusion is that, as far as France is concerned, there is little chance of meeting the mid-December target for conclusion of the negotiations.5 The French are acutely sensitive to any suggestion that the Geneva memorandum of understanding represents even an implicit agreement or series of potential commitments that point to probable outcomes on the various subjects. 3. Laboulaye’s judgment is that the French will only let the Community conclude the negotiations once the French have obtained the various specific concessions they want. All of this will require time and much detailed haggling as they see it. They are aware of the problem with Congress about expiration of our waiver authority on countervailing duties. But this does not give them any real sense of urgency. 4. In a frank talk with us, Paye said that while Barre favors a vigorous defense of French interests in the MTN, the most important factor remains Giscard’s “extreme coolness” on the whole subject. Paye hinted that he himself has wondered about just why Giscard is so negative. He believes that Giscard reasons along the following lines: There will be little positive benefit for French trade interests from the MTN— especially in a world characterized by rapid and substantial fluctuations in exchange rate relationships. On the other hand Giscard is likely to have a lot of domestic difficulty, including but not limited to the agricultural lobby, if he agrees to the kinds of things we are asking. (Comment: From a recent talk I had with Chirac6 it is clear that the Gaullists are watching the government like a hawk on everything that looks like giving in to US pressure.) Paye thinks that an additional concern for Giscard is doubt about whether the administration can deliver the Congress on a final package. 5. We gave Paye the counter-arguments which he already knew and appeared at least partly to accept. We stressed the urgency of get-
