Afghanistan
481
to Baluchi as well as to Azari and Kurdish separatist movements.
Furthermore, it has done so at a time when Iran is going through a
paroxysm of anti-American hysteria and may be on the brink of politi-
cal, social, and economic chaos. Since this is also a time when the
Soviets are about to encounter significant shortfalls in domestic energy
production, it seems probable that the expansion of its influence over
Iran will rank at or near the top of the Kremlin’s hierarchy of
regional priorities.
7. Although the possibility cannot be excluded, it does not seem
likely that the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan will turn out to have
been a dress rehearsal for an impending gala performance in Iran.
Unlike Afghanistan, Iran is clearly too important to the West to make
the risk of a counterintervention seem negligible, and the exercised
American reaction to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan has probably
convinced even the Kremlin’s most unreconstructed hawks that a fron-
tal attack on Iran could lead to a full-fledged military showdown with
the United States. However, fear of such a showdown will not lead
the Kremlin to forsake its ambitions or prevent it from pursuing them
by more circuitous means. At the margin, apprehension that any impor-
tant Soviet breakthrough in Iran would elicit a determined US military
reaction may exercise a restraining influence, but the Soviets will proba-
bly still have extensive room for maneuver in a situation in which
American options are severely circumscribed and Iranian vulnerabili-
ties are very large.
8. At least for the immediate future, the Soviets are likely to make
assiduous efforts to improve their relations with the Khomeini regime.
Among other things, they will probably signal their willingness to be
supportive diplomatically and to provide Tehran with economic and
military aid. Such overtures will not prevent the Soviets from
entrenching themselves on Iran’s Afghan border, cultivating their con-
tacts with anti-Persian nationalist movements, and supporting the
Tudeh’s efforts to build up its organizational infrastructure and pene-
trate the country’s governing elites. Instead of flaunting these activities,
however, the Kremlin will probably try to keep them inconspicuous
and take special precautions to neutralize their potentially provoca-
tive effects.
9. Although the Soviets can have few illusions about the possibility
of altering the fundamentally anti-Communist ideological tenets of the
Khomeini regime, they probably do foresee a possibility of growing
Tudeh influence over current governmental policy and of a significant
Tudeh role in a more secular and “progressive” post-Khomeini regime.
The early emergence and smooth stabilization of such a non-Commu-
nist but Communist-tinged regime probably represents the Soviets’
preferred outcome to the Khomeini succession, since they could then
