Arms Control and Disarmament  1659
Individual members of the Working Group will prepare detailed 
papers on each of these methods which will be submitted to the Chair­
man within two weeks. These papers will present estimates of the 
capabilities, and, if possible, the availability and costs of each of these 
systems. A final meeting of the Working Group will be held within a 
month to prepare a general report covering the detailed conclusions on 
this problem.
Wolfgang K.H. Panofsky
Chairman, Panel on High
Altitude Detection
466.	 Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, May 5, 1959
Gordon Gray gave me several comments concerning Secretary 
Herter’s memorandum of April 27th on disarmament policy review, 
indicating that they had been discussed with Dr. Killian, who seemed 
to be at least in general agreement with them:
There is a question of bringing into the study personnel outside the 
established governmental departments. Dr. Killian thinks this is very 
much needed: it is doubtful that State has been thinking in these terms.
The terms of reference seem rather long and comprehensive. Ques­
tions No. 2 and 5 in particular seem to be rather far-­reaching and not 
susceptible of definite treatment.
If such a study is to be conducted with any great promise of suc­
cess, it should have the President’s support and commitment. In addi­
tion, there would be no point in going into it unless Defense, not only at 
top level but at military level, were quite serious about it.
It is worth considering whether this should not be initiated with 
an NSC action. Perhaps the terms of reference should bear the stamp of 
the NSC. If this were done, a NSC meeting with the JCS and the Service 
Secretaries present might be a desirable way to start the project off.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
1 Source: Gray’s comments on Department of State proposal for disarmament policy 
review. Secret. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Records of the Office of 
the Staff Secretary, Disarmament.
