724  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
GT–36.	
Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, Prepared in 
the Office of the Secretary of State1
Washington, November 14, 1960.
The Secretary telephoned the President in Augusta to say that he 
has been in a huddle with Allen Dulles and our Latin American experts 
on Guatemala.2 The Secretary said the situation looks very serious; that 
our information is still a little scattered but it looks as though the rebels 
had control of Puerto Barrios on the coast and it looks as though the 
Cubans have a hand in this. The Secretary said if the Cubans are plan-
ning actual assistance to the rebels on the coast by either ship or air, we 
having a feeling perhaps we could get from Guatemala, Costa Rica and 
Nicaragua a request that we give them assistance against such a move 
by the Cubans. The Secretary said he had talked to Secretary Gates,3 and 
that Admiral Dennison has been briefed, and Defense has been alerted 
to the possibility of putting ships off Guatemala to interdict this.
The President said he thinks this is what we have to do. The 
President said his paper morning did not give a correct report on the 
situation in Guatemala.4 The Secretary said we are having troubles com-
municating; that [text not declassified] we are sending messages down 
right away. The President asked as a matter of fact whether we would 
need a request from all three countries, and the Secretary said we would 
1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers. “Phone Calls & Miscellaneous Memos, 
November 1960–January 1960.”
2 Regarding Secretary Herter’s meeting with Allen Dulles, see footnote 3, below.
3 A memorandum of a telephone call by Secretary Herter at 9:10 a.m., Monday, 
November 14, reads as follows: “Telephoned Secretary Gates to say he was now meeting 
with Allen Dulles and others on the situation in Guatemala and understands Admiral 
Dennison has been briefed on the situation there. Secretary said we are considering get-
ting Nicaragua, Costa Rica and Guatemala to ask for help to interdict any help from 
Cuba and this would obviously involve naval forces. Secretary asked how far Gates can 
go in the services on what might be necessary and also asked what they had in that area. 
Gates said he would alert the services and said he assumed we had forces in that area 
in view of the situation in Cuba.” (Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers, “phone Calls and 
Miscellaneous Memos, November 1960–January 1961”)
4 The intelligence item concerning Guatemala reported to President Eisenhower 
on November 14 read as follows: “President Ydígoras remains in control in the capi-
tal following coordinated insurgent attacks on military installations in Guatemala City 
and two key provincial capitals on 13 November. The attackers, however, apparently 
withdrew from their Guatemala City objective with a quantity of military equipment 
and were joined by an unknown number of defecting soldiers. Ydígoras, faced with the 
most serious threat of his nearly three years in office, immediately declared a state of 
siege throughout the country. Preliminary reports indicate that the insurgents are led by 
a coalition of expediency composed of a rightist faction and a Communist front polit-
ical party which has ties with the Castro regime in Cuba.” (Memorandum by Lt. Col. 
John S. D. Eisenhower, Assistant Staff Secretary, White House Office, November 14, 1960; 
Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, “DDE Diaries”)
