1072 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement authorization for the new fiscal year, in the budget of the Army Atta­ che at Paris. Defense says that the Army Attache at Paris is squawking at the long duration of Ekvall’s detail to Geneva. The Paris Attache apparently was led to believe that he would get more benefit out of Ekvall’s assignment to Paris (especially as to North African matters) than has proved possible. I don’t know why the attache at Paris should be allowed to rock the boat when it was clearly understood last year that the assignment to Paris was merely a device to get around some administrative problems, and that Ekvall’s real responsibility was to you. Defense said it may be necessary to inquire again into the possi­ bility of assigning Ekvall to Berne. In that event they want FE to try to get the active assistance of EUR in inducing the Swiss Government to agree to this. I told Defense I felt it would be preferable not to meddle with the existing arrangement. In any event the continued presence of Ekvall on your staff is assured and you should not lose any sleep over the administrative problem. Enclosed is a copy of our letter to the Indian Embassy of June 18 and the Indian Embassy reply. You will see that the Indians are blowing very cool all of a sudden. I fear they have received the word from the Chinese Communists and do not intend to make any protest. I doubt if we will make any reply to the “Observer” article in the “Peoples Daily” of June 21 replying to our press release of June 12. I suppose you have the full text of the “Observer” article. In case you don’t, a copy is enclosed. I will be writing you a short letter on substantive matters Monday morning, which should reach you in time for Thursday’s meeting. Regards and good wishes, Sincerely, Walter P. McConaughy PS: Krishna Menon had lunch privately at the Indian Embassy with Sherman Adams on June 19, but did not raise any topic connected with the Geneva talks or any other Chinese Communist question. Enclosures: 1. Copy of letter from British Consulate General Peiping re Bishop Walsh 2. Letter to Amb. Mehta from Mr. Robertson dated June 18, 1956. 3. Letter to Mr. Robertson from Amb. Mehta dated June 19, 1956. 4. Copy of “Observer” article in “Peoples Daily” of June 21, 1956.
