3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
409
State Department had indeed provided some explanations, that Am-
bassador Warnke had publicly taken a positive stand, and that this had
had some effect. But, what he was talking about now was that it was
necessary for the U.S. Administration to speak out in a firm and deter-
mined voice to put things into the right perspective. Soft spoken state-
ments were not enough.
It was being asked: “Suppose the Soviet Union violates the Treaty?
What then?” One could not base policy on that kind of an argument.
One might just as well ask: “What if an earthquake were suddenly to
occur and everything come tumbling down?” He was reminded of a
couple of characters in one of Gogol’s4 stories called “Old World Land-
owners.” In that story there is a conversation between an old couple
where one asks the other: “What if our house should burn down?” The
other replied, “Well, in that case we shall move into the storehouse.”
The first continues, “What if the storehouse should burn down?” The
other replies, “In that case we shall move into the barn,” and so on and
so forth. It must be pointed out firmly that both sides have experience
in implementing bilateral agreements between us and are fully re-
solved to use the positive experience of SALT I to move on to SALT II.
The Secretary said that, while he would not try to respond to all the
statements Gromyko had made, he would like to say a few words. First,
it was correct that the President and the Secretary himself had said on
numerous occasions that they wanted to see an early conclusion of the
negotiations, conclusion of the new agreement, and that they were
doing all in their power to bring this about. He would stand on this
statement. Just two days ago he had made a statement to that effect in
Congress. As far as defending the ultimate agreement was concerned,
perhaps Gromyko’s information was not very good. The Secretary had
said countless times that the agreement that would be achieved would
be fair to both sides and was essential for stability not only between our
two sides, but also for general stability and peace throughout the
world. Mr. Warnke had also said so on numerous occasions, and not
just last week or two weeks ago, but on countless other occasions. After
his return from Moscow the Secretary had called on all but one of the
leaders of Congress, and had talked to each privately regarding the im-
portance of reaching agreement and his belief that the agreement that
will be achieved will be very much in the interests of the United States,
the interests of the Soviet Union and the interests of world peace. As re-
cently as last Friday, Warnke and he had testified at length in a positive
fashion before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and had ex-
pressed their hope that the negotiations would be brought to a suc-
cessful conclusion. Therefore, he simply could not accept the sugges-
4 Nikolai Gogol, Ukrainian author.
