Human Rights
419
nificant, however, that the tone of these resolutions was moderated to
split the WEO’s between consistent U.S. and Canadian “no” votes and
other WEO abstentions.
8. The HRC also adopted two South African resolutions. The first
dealt with the HRC working group report on Southern African human
rights violations. However, due to African desires to avoid provoking
outright Western, especially U.S. opposition, it was toned down sub-
stantively and rhetorically from the counterpart resolution adopted in
1977, despite Cuban preferences and pressure for explicit endorsement
of the 1977 Havana Seminar decisions on Africa. Similarly a resolution
concerning WEO commercial-nuclear links with South Africa was also
notably free of anti-Western verbiage. Instead the emphasis was on in-
troducing pressures for practical application of the concept of apart-
heid as an international crime. This was coupled with other resolutions
bearing on implementation of the Anti-Apartheid Convention and the
celebration of 1978 as International Anti-Apartheid Year. It is possible
that for the longer term the Africans have decided to move for in-
creased practical pressures in UN fora rather than indulgence in emo-
tional anti-Western outbursts.
9. UN human rights machinery: HRC actions on improving human
rights reporting and procedural mechanisms were mixed but generally
positive. Other Commission members were clearly unreceptive to en-
dorsing or taking steps toward the creation of the post of a UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights despite our strong urging. This idea
was listed along with a number of other suggestions bearing on prac-
tical aspects of the UN human rights machinery that are to be studied in
an overall analysis to be presented to the next session. However, if con-
sidered against intense Soviet efforts to have the idea either disavowed
or buried permanently, the fact that the concept has been kept alive and
will be discussed further is significant. Clearly a lot more work has to
be done with the Third World countries who seem to perceive a High
Commissioner as being uniquely a high level investigator with a UN
carte blanche to interfere with or embarrass member states.
10. Similarly, a Jordanian proposal to lengthen HRC sessions was
not pressed to a vote, but forwarded as an idea to be considered in the
overall analysis exercise, when it became apparent there was insuffi-
cient Commission support.
11. However, the Commission did adopt an Indian initiated reso-
lution advocating the creation by all UN members of national human
rights commissions. Even more significantly, the Commission adopted
a Nigerian proposal calling for the creation of regional human rights
commissions where none presently exist. It was stated publicly as well
as privately by Third World proponents, e.g., Egypt, that the intended
model for Africa is the OAS Inter-American Commission on Human
