404
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
153.
Memorandum From the Deputy Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Bremer) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, January 17, 1980
SUBJECT
Your Breakfast with the President Friday, January 18, 1980
[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
6. Iran.
(a) Status of Sanctions. Chris and Dick2 found two causes for the
European reaction on sanctions: (1) With varying degrees of emphasis,
they argued they could not impose sanctions under their existing law
and that going to parliaments would be difficult; (2) they questioned
the efficacy of economic sanctions at the present time and the advantage
this might give the Soviets. All indicated, however, they would continue
informal financial and oil measures. And Genscher has now told us that
the Germans have decided to impose on their own a range of sanctions.
Dick Cooper recommends we should not press for full implementa-
tion of the UN sanctions resolution. In the end, we will not succeed;
and we could generate considerable ill will in the process, at a time in
which we need to reinforce and demonstrate our solidarity. Dick also
believes, however, we can enlist European cooperation in an embargo
on exports of manufactured goods (excluding those related to outstand-
ing contracts) if we are willing to push hard enough. If we decide to
push ahead with this, we will need to mount a major negotiating effort
encompassing Japan, Canada and the smaller European countries as
well as the major European countries, and encompassing for political
reasons some Third World countries as well. The last point is especially
important to the French.3
(b) Study of Soviet/U.S. Options. You may wish to tell the President
that the Department has begun an urgent, but extremely close-hold,
study of possible Soviet options for intervention, political and military,
1 Source: Department of State, Records of the Secretary of State, 1977–1980, Lot
84D241, Presidential Breakfasts Jan/Feb/Mar 1980. Secret; Sensitive. A stamped notation
in the upper right corner reads: “CV.”
2 Warren Christopher and Richard Cooper.
3 Tab 2, “Economic Measures Related to Iran and Afghanistan: Draft #3—January
16, 1980 PM,” is attached but not printed. The spreadsheet is appended to a section of
the memorandum dealing with allied reaction to Afghanistan.
