3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 510 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI ethnic minorities. The regime’s approach has been successful, but only up to a point. While dissident groups remain generally isolated from one another, they have maintained contact with sympathizers in the West, and the spectrum of dissent is somewhat broader than it was six months ago. [handling restriction not declassified] Morale among most dissident activists and religious groups dropped in the wake of the trials last July. The branches of the Helsinki Monitoring Group have been particularly affected. Two of the dissidents sentenced in July, Anatoliy Shcharanskiy and Aleksandr Ginzburg, were members of the Moscow branch. That group’s specialist on governmental psychiatric abuses, Aleksandr Podrabinek, was sentenced to five years of domestic exile in August. At a press conference in September, the Moscow branch’s spokesmen told of threats received by persons friendly to the group. They reaffirmed their intention to remain active even though only six of the group’s active members remained free at that time. Branches of the organization in Armenia and Georgia fared no better: Robert Nazaryan, a member of the Armenian branch, was sentenced to seven years total confinement and exile for anti-Soviet activities, and Avandil Imnadze, an associate of a member of the Georgian branch, received nine years for distributing anti-Soviet literature. Last November various members of the Helsinki Monitoring Group circulated a protest against a new Soviet law, which makes it relatively simple for the regime to deny citizenship in dissident cases; but in general the Group has been relatively inactive. [handling restriction not declassified] Government treatment of Soviet Jews is the one clear illustration of the regime’s willingness to grant limited concessions to dissidents. The total number of Jews permitted to emigrate in 1978 exceeded 30,000 and may average 5,000 a month for at least the first part of 1979. The backlog of Jews in Odessa applying for exit permits reportedly caused the government to open a large, new office to handle it. In explaining the higher emigration figures, Soviet Jews themselves point to the Jackson-Vanik amendment, to the larger number of applicants, and, increasingly of late, to a desire by the regime to get rid of “malcontents” before the 1980 Olympics. [handling restriction not declassified] The status of the Jewish “refuseniks” (those previously refused exit permits) may also be improving. According to Refusenik sources in Moscow and Kiev, some persons formerly denied emigration because they once held security clearances will now be permitted to leave. In addition, refusenik scientists held an international scientific conference in December. Authorities seized some of the conference documents from the residence of one of the organizers and denied visas to five US scientists who wanted to attend the event. The conference was held,
