890  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
29. I said I did not follow his point. I had submitted draft which 
I had hoped met his point view as well as our point view and upon 
which we could find agreement. He had not so far found that accept­
able and had said that only choice we had was to choose between his 
two previous drafts. Last draft before us was one incorporating my 
amendments his December 1 draft.
30. I said my point simply was that by all laws logic and normal 
negotiating procedures, if his desire was to find draft on which agree­
ment could be reached, it clearly up to his side to submit alternatives 
that they would find acceptable and would incorporate thoughts it 
contained, I had expressed willingness consider any thoughts he might 
have this regard. I did not know how I could be any more reasonable 
or show any greater desire to push ahead with essential task of issu­
ing such declaration. My assumption had been that there had been an 
equal desire to reach such declaration.
31. Wang said if as I said both sides desire to reach agreement then, 
of course, I could not ask one of two sides arbitrarily to do what I had 
said.
32. I asked what was there arbitrary about normal, natural and log­
ical procedure of doing such things?
33. Wang said problem was way I had put things in my statement 
which created impression that it only Chinese side which had been so 
desirous make such declaration. That why he felt necessary to clarify 
this matter. If we put things as if one side had desire and other side 
was without such desire, then pattern our discussions would be quite 
different.
34. Wang said if matter confronting us was, as I put it, that both us 
had desire reach agreement then his position regarding making dec­
laration has been quite clear and he had repeatedly indicated January 
12 draft presented by me unacceptable his side. And again I had not 
been able state definitely whether I could accept two drafts submitted 
by him. I had failed accept two drafts his side despite fact these drafts 
incorporated points view both us.
35. Wang said so that we could get ahead on this matter it was 
hoped I would produce new reasonable and constructive formula. 
And so he looked forward to any new proposals and opinions which 
I would put forward our next meeting. He desired know if I was going 
make such new and reasonable proposal next meeting.
36. I said I had already said if there were equal desire get ahead 
on this certainly all logic and normal negotiating procedures would 
require him to present some constructive suggestion our next meet­
ing that would meet points view I had expressed here regarding his 
December 1 draft and I would hope at next meeting he would have 
such suggestions.
