Chemical and Biological Weapons
281
to our previous de´marches on BW and urging consultations of Soviet
and US experts. He stressed that we were open to Soviet suggestions as
to how serious and meaningful consultations could be carried out. Do-
brynin recalled that the Soviet Government had given a formal reply2
to our earlier de´marches and reviewed the previously stated Soviet ar-
guments. However, he promised to forward our de´marche to Moscow
and said that either he or the Soviet Charge´ would get back to Ambas-
sador Earle with a reply. End summary.
3. In a meeting on July 103 Acting Secretary Christopher empha-
sized to Dobrynin the seriousness with which the US Government ap-
proaches the Sverdlovsk incident and our dissatisfaction with the
failure of the Soviet Government to cooperate. He stressed that failure
to resolve the issue could not only propagandize the Biological
Weapons Convention itself, but also the prospects for making progress
in other arms control areas. The Acting Secretary told Dobrynin that
Ambassador Earle would contact him to pursue the matter in more de-
tail, and he urged Dobrynin to see Earle despite Dobrynin’s crowded
schedule prior to departure for Moscow.
4. Ambassador Earle, referring to Dobrynin’s meeting the previous
day with Acting Secretary Christopher, said he had a statement to
convey to Dobrynin on the BW question. He stressed that this was an
unwanted problem for us and that our purpose was to clear up
ambiguities in a responsible fashion, not to make propaganda. Ambas-
sador Earle then read the following statement: Begin text:
—On several recent occasions, the United States Government has
raised with the Soviet Government the matter of an extensive outbreak
of anthrax in Sverdlovsk in the spring of 1979 pursuant to Article V of
the Biological Weapons Convention.
—The United States Government has studied carefully explana-
tions which were provided to US earlier by the Soviet Government. As
well as information contained in a May 1980 article in a Soviet scientific
journal.4 The explanation that the reported cases of anthrax were of the
gastrointestinal form and were caused by consumption of meat from
anthrax-infected cattle has left the questions of the United States Gov-
ernment unanswered and consequently our earlier concerns remain.
2 See Document 116.
3 See Document 130.
4 See footnote 3, Document 128.
