596
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
4. Medium-Term. Reducing the Japanese surplus will require not
only specific early decisions, such as noted above, but longer term
changes in Japanese policies regarding domestic demand and access to
the Japanese market. If persuasive assurances that these changes are
going to be made can be secured at the Summit, this will enhance our
chances of passing MTN and defeating anti-Japanese protectionist leg-
islation, both of which may be coming up for a vote in late summer. (C)
In part, these assurances require specific Japanese actions, e.g.,
commitments to submit a supplemental expansionist budget to the Diet
in September, and revision in present Japanese import procedures. In
part, they may require a long-range agreement between the US and
Japan about the trade and economic goals that both countries will seek
to achieve in the next five years. The specific actions would be an ear-
nest of good intent; the long term agreement would make clear both
that basic changes are needed and that these changes will take several
years to complete. (C)
If the Japanese decide to move in these directions, corresponding
US commitments (e.g., to promote exports, improve productivity, and
reduce oil consumption) could be used by the Japanese Government in
presenting its decisions to the Japanese public as part of a balanced
package. US actions in other fields might also help to create an environ-
ment in which we would be more likely to get the concessions we want
from Japan:
—Japan is interested in an Alaskan oil swap, and this is being
studied by DOE. (C)
—Gerard Smith believes that we might be able to meet Japanese
nuclear concerns by cooperating with Japan and Australia to build a
jointly owned and operated enrichment plant in Australia; he will ex-
amine this possibility. (C)
—A US-Japanese program of technical aid to Asian countries is a
favorite idea of Ohira; we are considering whether our proposed new
Institute for Technological Cooperation3 could be used to this end. (C)
—A US-Japanese grains agreement might be popular in both coun-
tries, and Agriculture proposes to discuss this at a technical level with
the Japanese.4 (C)
4.
Timing.
Needed
Japanese
actions
were
discussed
with
Ambassador-at-Large Yasukawa, when he visited Washington re-
cently.5 Further discussions will take place during Mike Blumenthal’s
3 See Document 311.
4 Carter wrote “good” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
5 Memoranda of conversation of the February 1979 meetings between U.S. officials
and Takeshi Yasukawa, Ohira’s personal representative, are in the Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects File, Henry Owen, Box 22, Japan Bi-
lateral 3/79 in Tokyo: 3/79 [II]; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Special Projects File, Henry Owen, Box 22, Memcons: 1–4/79; and Carter Library, Na-
