1338  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Admiral Strauss said that he thought the nuclear test matter was a 
false issue. The danger to humanity lies in nuclear war not in nuclear 
tests. If we were to freeze testing, the Soviet Union would have proven 
nuclear warheads in sizes up to four megatons, together with offensive 
delivery systems. The United States would not have defensive systems. 
And the United States will need clean warheads since defensive mis­
siles would be exploded over the heads of us and our allies.
Mr. Quarles agreed with Admiral Strauss. Even though the United 
States is ahead qualitatively in warhead development, our needs are 
different from those of the Soviet Union and there is not a reciprocal 
situation. So the JCS and the Defense Department after careful study 
believe it is not to our advantage to stop nuclear tests unless there 
are important compensating gains in other arms control areas. Admi­
ral Strauss added that he doubted that agreeing to a test suspension 
would help us significantly with world opinion. He pointed out that 
even our gains from a positive move like “Atoms for Peace” had been 
evanescent.
Mr. Killian said that his ad hoc panel had looked at the testing ques­
tion from the technical point of view and had found that the United 
States would, as Admiral Strauss and Mr. Quarles agreed, have a lead 
in nuclear warhead development over the Soviet Union at the end of 
HARDTACK. They had also found that an adequate inspection system 
to monitor a test suspension agreement could be devised. Another ad 
hoc group had studied the missiles situation and had reached the con­
clusion summarized by Mr. Dulles.
Mr. Killian continued that the Science Advisory Committee had 
then studied these matters from a broader military and technical point 
of view. They had a very great concern over the possibility that the 
USSR might in the near future call for a unilateral missiles test ban. 
They had reached the conclusion that, if the United States could act 
soon on nuclear test suspension, it might be more difficult for the Soviet 
Union to couple a suspension of both nuclear tests and missiles tests.
His Committee had then looked at the overall defense picture. 
They had concluded that not only would the United States have a lead 
in nuclear warheads over a wide range of sizes and types, [text not 
declassified]. The Committee felt that it was valid to question the need 
for five more years of testing just in order to make marginal improve­
ments and to clean up these weapons.
Mr. Dulles asked whether further small testing could be done 
underground. Admiral Strauss said that it could, but that the informa­
tion obtained would be reduced as a result. He remarked that there 
would be gaps in the warheads available after HARDTACK; for exam­
ple, we would have [text not declassified] less than 1600 pounds. Mr. Kil­
lian pointed out that we would have the Nike-­Zeus warhead. Admiral
