Non-Proliferation 803 recycle in present reactors and did not address the US breeder reactor development program. B. OVERALL STRATEGY The October 28 statement—and the Carter San Diego speech6— offer a similar political and technical basic framework for the conduct of non-proliferation policy. A common element in these policy statements is reinforcement of controls to ensure that civil nuclear supply is only used for peaceful purposes. They call for action to strengthen technical controls through more universal application of IAEA safeguards and improvement of safeguards and physical protection measures to deter unauthorized use of nuclear materials and facilities. A second key element is denial of access to sensitive technologies (e.g., enrichment and reprocessing) so as to delay the spread of stockpiles of weapons-usable material and the facilities that produce them, while the international community develops ways to shape the future of nuclear energy so as to reduce proliferation risks. Both policy statements also recognize that an effective nonproliferation policy cannot rely solely on denials and controls. A policy based solely on denial of sensitive technology transfers would lack legitimacy in the eyes of other nations, and over the long term would not present indigenous development of sensitive technologies and facilities. Similarly, a policy which permits the spread of sensitive national facilities, albeit under strengthened political commitments, international safeguards and physical security measures, would not in itself meet the problem of states acquiring capabilities which could quickly be turned to weapons purposes after abrogation of safeguards agreements. We believe that a meaningful long-term non-proliferation policy requires the addition of a third approach based on the principle of bilateral and multilateral incentives. Such incentives must be responsive to other countries’ energy requirements. In particular, in encouraging acceptance of our non-proliferation policy and objectives we must be able to provide assured supplies of non-sensitive nuclear fuels (e.g., lowenriched uranium) on a timely, adequate, reliable and economically acceptable basis and be responsive to concerns over the management of spent fuel and nuclear waste. 6 On September 25, 1976, in San Diego, Carter pledged that “if elected President, he would halt further arms sales of nuclear power technology and nuclear reactor fuel to any nation that refused to forgo nuclear weapons development or insisted on building its own national plant for reprocessing reactor fuel.” (Charles Mohr, “Carter Vows a Curb on Nuclear Exports to Bar Arms Spread,” New York Times, September 26, 1976, p. 1)
