Ecuador  559
With regard to the preoccupation manifested by Your Excellency 
concerning the concentration of Peruvian troops which may have been 
observed on the southern frontier of Ecuador, I wish to manifest to Your 
Excellency my confidence that no American country could today chal-
lenge the peaceful conscience of the continent and to remind you that 
solidarity in the face of aggression established by the Inter-American 
system is a secure guarantee against any armed threat.
The United States, together with the other guarantor countries, is 
confident that the contracting parties will maintain between themselves 
the close harmony and fraternal union which should prevail between 
republics of the American Continent.3
Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest 
consideration.4
Christian A. Herter
3 In telegram 758 from Rio de Janeiro, December 9, the Embassy quoted an appeal 
sent that day by the Brazilian Foreign Office to the Peruvian and Ecuadoran Foreign 
Ministers on behalf of the guarantor countries of the Protocol of Rio de Janeiro. They 
appealed to Ecuador and Peru “to remove all reasons for tension between them and 
establish an atmosphere of goodwill in their mutual relations which would permit them 
to overcome their present misunderstandings.” The guarantor powers offered “to lend 
every assistance toward that end.” (622.233/12–960)
4 The Spanish text of an eight-page telegram from Ecuadoran Foreign Minister 
Chiriboga to Secretary of State Herter, December 8, replying to the present telegram, is in 
ARA/EP Files, Lot 67 D 566, “Peru Relations—Peru-Ecuador Boundary.”
EC–23.	
Memorandum from the Director of Intelligence and 
Research (Cumming) to the Secretary of State1
Washington, December 16, 1960.
SUBJECT
Intelligence Note: The Situation in Ecuador
Dr. José María Velasco Ibarra was swept into the presidency on 
June 5, 1960 by almost an absolute majority of the total votes cast in 
a four candidate race. President of Ecuador three times previously 
(1934–35, 1944–47, 1952–56), Velasco has retained his personal political 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 722.00/12–1660. Secret. This memoran-
dum was transmitted to the Secretary of State via the Executive Secretariat.
