3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
268
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
77.
Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary
Brezhnev1
Washington, January 25, 1978
Dear Mr. President:
I was pleased to receive your letter of January 12.2 I was particu-
larly gratified by your view—which I share—that the predominant
trend in U.S.-Soviet relations is a constructive one, based on our jointly
shared determination “to reduce the danger of war, to limit and subse-
quently reduce armaments, to prevent and eliminate dangerous hot-
beds of international tensions.” Our personal dialogue is dedicated to
these ends.
Let me add that I am also gratified by the progress that we made in
1977. Despite the complexities inherent in SALT, our delegations have
moved forward—and Foreign Minister Gromyko’s visit to Washington
was particularly helpful in overcoming some obstacles. We also initi-
ated a wide range of additional negotiations, all of which have the pur-
pose of shaping a more stable and cooperative U.S.-Soviet relationship,
an objective that I consider essential.
I hope, therefore, that we can move expeditiously toward a SALT
II agreement. I have so instructed the U.S. delegation. At the same time,
I am sure that Ambassador Dobrynin keeps you fully informed re-
garding the strong domestic opposition already generated by the con-
cessions we have made. U.S. willingness to count heavy bombers with
air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) within the 1320 total for both
MIRVs and ALCMs and to limit cruise missiles has been perceived by
many Americans as insufficiently offset by Soviet concessions, compli-
cating the eventual process of ratification. This is why I hope that the
Soviet side will adopt a very positive attitude regarding the out-
standing issues, notably on the questions pertaining to MIRV sub-
limits, modernization, and the Backfire bomber.
Agreement in SALT would doubtless help us both generate a
wider movement in many of the other negotiations between our two
governments.
I am concerned that several developments may already be gener-
ating needless complications in our relations:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 69, USSR: Brezhnev–Carter Correspondence: 1–12/78. No classifica-
tion marking.
2 See Document 70.
