582
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Marcum,4 as well as the completion of plans for the visit of Soviet and
UK experts to US NSS facilities, contributed to good relationships
among the Delegations.
5. Accomplishments during this round. A few modest accomplish-
ments can be recorded. The political working group agreed on lan-
guage for a paragraph in Article III of the separate verification agree-
ment dealing with the privileges and immunities of On-Site Inspection
(OSI) designated personnel. In addition, at the end of the round, the US
tabled draft language for another paragraph of the same article, dealing
with expenses incurred during an OSI. The OSI working group re-
viewed the texts of Article III that had already been negotiated, and
agreed on a joint composite text (with some brackets denoting issues
not yet agreed) of the entire article. Apart from this accomplishment,
the OSI working group devoted many hours to debating the accept-
ability of portable seismometers as OSI basic equipment. The Soviets
introduced this issue at the beginning of the round by challenging the
US and UK Delegations to provide data showing that portable seis-
mometers would be useful in determining the nature of ambiguous
events and would not result in false alarms. Throughout the debate the
Soviets refused to deal in specifics but rejected all US/UK arguments as
unconvincing. It is still not clear whether the Soviets have serious objec-
tions to the use of portable seismometers or were merely looking for a
convenient issue that would keep the OSI group busy.
6. Our major effort during the round was to restate, clarify, and ex-
pand upon the US position regarding the use of US equipment for NSS
in the USSR. In that context I also outlined the main elements of a coop-
erative NSS program. In informal meetings, we concluded arrange-
ments for the visit by Soviet and British experts to our NSS develop-
ment facilities. In addition, the trip to Moscow mentioned above (June
25–30) provided an opportunity to establish contact with Sadovsky, Di-
rector of the Soviet Institute of Geophysics, who was identified to US as
the man responsible for the Soviet NSS Program.
7. The UK role in the negotiations. In private discussions with US,
members of the UK Delegation have betrayed some embarrassment
and concern over the prolonged delay in London in deciding on a posi-
tion concerning NSS on UK territory. It is our impression that the UK
Delegation recommended that the UK answer the Soviets during this
round by proposing a few (perhaps as many as four) NSS on overseas
territories (paid for by Britain, not the US). I have little doubt that the
4 York, Johnson, and Marcum visited Moscow from June 25–30. The trip included a
tour of the seismic observatory at Obninsk which the Soviets planned to use as a National
Seismic Station under a CTB treaty. York’s report of the visit is in telegram 11274 from
Geneva, July 5; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790306–0938)
