1022 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Likewise, Brooks was in no position to influence the Supreme Soviet into funding the hypothetical Soviet force that Brooks had developed. 15. Ladygin emphasized that the land-­based strategic missile force was the backbone of Soviet strategic nuclear potential. The SLBM forces would remain much smaller and Moiseyev had confirmed this. Ladygin said that he believed that the treaty would be signed and that both sides would be in full compliance. He said that neither he, nor anyone else in the room, would ever see 10 submarines with SS–N–23 SLBMs, however. He then opined that the sides should stick to real problems of getting the treaty done rather than creating “roadblocks” with hypothetical breakout scenarios. 16. Brooks said that, based on Ladygin’s comments it was clear that showing flexibility in Soviet SLBM forces was wrong. He had heard Ladygin say that an emphasis on land-­based forces would continue in the future. He asked Ladygin whether it was correct to say that downloading was important to the Soviet side because of a desire to assure flexibility to maintain certain force levels. 17. Ladygin said that he had repeated what Moiseyev had said the previous day. The Soviet Union had made the decision to go back to a basic force that they were familiar with—­a heavy reliance on land-­ based ICBMs. This decision had been made in the late 1980’s as part of a change in doctrine and future Soviet force structure would be based on such decisions. He repeated that the U.S. concern about the SS–N–18 was “groundless” and shouldn’t exist. All reentry vehicles, warheads, and “other parts” had been eliminated. Therefore, the number of warheads available for breakout could be reduced by 896, leaving only 1060 warheads available, hypothetically, from ballistic missiles. Comparing these totals to U.S. totals, the Soviet side should be twice as concerned and, when adding in heavy bombers, the Soviet side should be four times as concerned. 18. Brooks said that he had two final comments. First, it was up to each side as to what it showed for breakout potential, but the Soviet side should note that in 1987, the sides had agreed to attribute a certain number of warheads to each ballistic missile system, even though these attributions counted some systems with fewer numbers of warheads than they were capable of having. The U.S. side had not shown a breakout potential for the Trident-II, just as it hadn’t shown such potential for the SS–N–23. It was not prudent to go back to issues already decided. 19. Brooks’ second point was that the U.S. side had shown a reasonable assessment of where the Soviet side would get flexibility through downloading and how this would be used. Ladygin had said that the U.S. side should listen to the Chief of the General Staff because flexibility in naval forces was not the direction that the Soviet side was heading. Such comments were helpful. Brooks said that the sides were trying to solve the difficult issues of downloading and new types. It was
