1404 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement June 1949, he showed signs of and was treated for mental illness. I also pointed out to Wang that when Mr. Tseng asked to return to his country and it appeared that he was able to make a decision, he was given every assistance in doing so. The Indian Embassy with which he was in cor­ respondence was kept informed of his case. Not only was he permitted to return but an attendant to care for him during his trip was furnished by the United States Government. As I said at our last meeting, rather than ill-­founded complaints, an expression of appreciation for the care offered him would be in order. 20. I continued. As far as the Chinese returning to his country vio­ lating laws and regulations of the United States concerning the export of funds or regulations are concerned, all I can say is that they (no more than any other alien or American citizen) would not be permitted to do so. These long-­standing laws and regulations are applicable to all per­ sons. It is my understanding that his country has comparable laws and regulations which have been rigorously applied to Americans leaving his country. Dissatisfied as we may have been, I did not and have not raised this question with him. What I was interested in was that these Americans be permitted to return. 21. Wang replied with regard to the question of civilians he had already made it quite clear that U.S. residents are free to return with­ out any obstruction. His position in this regard is exactly in conformity with the agreed announcement between us. Insofar as American civil­ ian offenders are concerned the facts also have given evidence that of the 40 persons in this category at the beginning of our talks there now remain only six. We have noted that many Chinese are imprisoned in the United States. Of 34 persons whose names I gave him, there still remain 33 in prison. 22. Wang continued with reference to the question of an expression of their will, while these persons still are being kept in prison, he had made it clear that it was hard for him to believe persons in these cir­ cumstances are able to express their free will. The number of Chinese in the United States is very great. The number of Chinese students alone is about some 5,000 persons. The number of persons who have returned to his country is very small. 23. Wang continued. There are still many Chinese in the U.S. who desire to return and are not able to do so. Those who did return did not return easily but only after they have experienced all sorts of obstruc­ tion and all sorts of threats or inducements have they succeeded in coming home. Persons are even dealt with as mental patients without any reason at all and are handcuffed as criminals. No amount of words can cover up these facts. If any side is dissatisfied over this question, it is his side. It is his sincere hope that the American Government will
