354
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
23. Question 11(b) rpt 11(b): Focusing on the phrase “applicable
UN Resolutions,” Begin stated that could imply resolutions, including
those of the General Assembly which are not binding, that Israel does
not accept, especially the one of 1948. He said that at CD it had been
made clear that the refugee question would include not only Pales-
tinians but Jewish refugees as well. In the ensuing discussion at Camp
David the US had suggested deleting such a phrase. President Carter
had inserted it again into his address to Congress9 without Israeli con-
currence. “I found it difficult to applaud that portion of the President’s
speech,” Begin said. Now this idea appears in reply to Hussein.
24. Question 12 rpt 12: Begin charged that the reply was mis-
leading in stating, as regards an eventual peace settlement between Is-
rael and Syria for example, “the principles of the Framework should
apply to treating.” He argued that the CDA enumerated a limited
number of principles which were agreed to be applicable between Is-
rael and other confrontation states. It was not, he said, agreed at CD
that all the principles embodied in the framework document would be
applicable in these cases: “We will withdraw to the international
border in Sinai. We will not do that in Judea Samaria and Gaza Strip.”
25. Thanking me for my patience, Begin summarized his general
reaction to the US responses to Hussein’s queries by stating that he felt
the document will harden Sadat’s attitude in the Blair House negotia-
tions. He wanted to express his “deep sorrow” that such a document
was given to King Hussein. I replied to Begin’s lengthy analysis by
stating that, as the signature on the document attested, President Carter
had personally gone over every word of the replies carefully and is
completely familiar with their content. He will, therefore, be especially
interested in the Prime Minister’s comments.
26. I said that I would like to make two general points on the re-
plies and then, with Begin’s agreement, try to respond to his specific
comments and criticisms when I meet with Ciechanover on Sunday. He
agreed. I said I felt that it was important to stress the philosophy of US
strategy in the peace effort. We realize that we cannot solve all
problems at one time and for this reason we decided a year and a half
ago on the idea of a transition period in the West Bank/Gaza. We pur-
sued this tack mindful of the interest Israel has in seeing what it can live
with in the territories as we go along. Because we are putting some
problems off for later resolution, however, we felt strongly that we
should save for ourselves some options to tackle them in imaginative
ways and there is an element in our replies to Hussein of keeping the
door open to human creativity. It is true, as Begin noted, that we had
9 See footnote 14, Document 64.
