LXXIV  Summaries of Compilations
Honduras
U.S. Relations With Honduras
Note: The parenthetical citations are to the numbered documents 
in the text.
Throughout the 3-­year period, U.S.-Honduran relations were cor-
dial and unencumbered by vexing problems. The United States wel-
comed the administration of President Ramon Villeda Morales as one 
with which it could do business and one which typified the type of 
decent, democratic government in Latin America that it liked to see. 
(HO–1, 2) Unfortunately, although Honduran needs were not great in 
terms of dollar expenditure, the United States had to be cautious in 
responding to requests for assistance. (HO–3) Villeda’s middle-­of-­the-­
road policies inspired grumbling by the Chief of the Armed Forces, but 
U.S. officials counseled patience and assistance to the civilian authori-
ties. (HO–4) Although by no means a strong-­arm leader, Villeda fended 
off two military coups launched from outside the country in 1959 by the 
former Honduran Chief of Staff. (HO–5, 9)
In 1960, Villeda made an informal visit to Miami and New Orleans 
and received a warm letter of support from President Eisenhower 
who praised the Honduran leader’s efforts to strengthen his coun-
try’s democratic institutions. (HO–13) Villeda was clearly perceived 
as someone friendly to the United States and aware of the dangers of 
international Communism. (HO–2) From this perspective, it was not 
surprising that in the late months of 1960, the Department of State took 
extraordinary measures to arrange loans for the financially troubled 
United Fruit Company, since it was felt that collapse of the company 
would seriously destabilize the Honduran economy, cause loss of jobs, 
threaten the future of the Villeda administration, provide a seedbed for 
Communist discontent, and deprive local Honduran communities of 
numerous public services which United Fruit provided in the absence 
of the Honduran Government’s ability to do so. (HO–15, 16, 20, 21)
Happily for Villeda and Honduran morale, late 1960 also witnessed 
a great political victory for the country when the International Court 
of Justice provided a peaceful settlement to a longstanding dispute by 
awarding to Honduras territory long contested with Nicaragua. (HO–
18, 19)
Finally, a month before the end of the Eisenhower Presidency, the 
Department of State secured approval for the United States in concert 
with Honduras to refer to the International Court of Justice the ques-
tion of jurisdiction over the Swan Islands. The islands had been occu-
pied by the United States for a century and Secretary of State Herter felt
