64  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
the problem as exceptionally urgent and as an obstacle to progress in 
other directions, one of the major problems that the Soviets believed 
need to be clarified was the approach to the ABM Treaty.
The Secretary asked whether Shevardnadze was proposing that the 
U.S. change its position on the ABM Treaty—­on the narrow vs. broad 
question and on the right to deploy—­in exchange for the Soviets’ agree-
ing to dismantle Krasnoyarsk.
Shevardnadze responded that the Soviets did not consider the 
Krasnoyarsk radar to be a violation of the ABM Treaty. But if the U.S. 
did consider it to be a violation, and if the U.S. accepted the narrow 
interpretation, then the Soviets would agree to dismantle the facility.
The Secretary said that we would probably end up disagreeing on 
this. The U.S. position was that Krasnoyarsk was a violation regardless 
of which interpretation of the ABM treaty one used. Thus he did not 
believe the U.S. would be prepared to accept Shevardnadze’s approach. 
We would, however, look at the proposal.
The Secretary added that Krasnoyarsk still represented an imped-
iment to the conclusion of a START agreement. Moreover, we still 
needed to talk about Gomel as well. Compliance was an important 
principle. We knew that the things at Gomel were no longer deployed, 
but some of the procedures to which the Soviets had agreed were not 
fully carried out; this had already been discussed in the working group. 
When we go to the public and Congress with arms control agreements, 
we needed to be able to say that we can hold the Soviets to strict adher-
ence. We wanted at all costs to avoid another SALT II experience in 
which we could not get an agreement ratified. We needed at all costs to 
convince those who have doubts about arms control by demonstrating 
that we are serious, scrubbing agreements very carefully, and not rush-
ing things, that we have explored all the issues in a thorough, method-
ical way.
Shevardnadze replied that the Soviets were not asking for anything 
that would not appear to be natural. The sides should reaffirm their 
adherence to the agreements reached in Washington and Moscow. For 
example, in Moscow, the joint statement declared that the sides had 
agreed to work out an agreement that would “commit the two sides 
to observe the ABM Treaty, as signed in 1972, while conducting their 
research, development and testing as required, which are permitted 
by the ABM Treaty, and not to withdraw from the ABM Treaty for a 
specified period of time.” If we could reach understanding and agree-
ment on the basis of this provision, then Krasnoyarsk would not be 
an impediment. “We would be prepared to dismantle everything we 
have there,” Shevardnadze declared. He went on to say that the Soviets 
understood that the U.S. had problems with Congress. They did not
