Yugoslavia 797 moment. Although JAT received increased frequencies and capacity rights in the agreement, the Yugoslavs are likely to press for additional U.S. gateways (such as Chicago or Los Angeles) in the future. 11. There are no major outstanding bilateral agricultural trade problems at this time. Although the two-way trade balance in agricultural products still favors Yugoslavia, it narrowed appreciably last year to about 10 million dollars, due to increasing imports of soybeans and soybean meal. If the GOY accepts the CCC credits for soybean purchases currently being offered, then the agricultural trade gap should close in 1978, even though our imports of hams are expected to increase. 12. The establishment of joint U.S.-Yugoslav economic working groups, which we have proposed to the Yugoslavs as part of the Tito visit, should provide a useful inter-governmental mechanism to address economic and commercial problems on a regular basis. Nonproliferation: Nuclear License for Krsko: 13. The trilateral agreement with the IAEA and GOY for the supply of nuclear equipment and material for the Krsko nuclear plant being built here by Westinghouse does not conform to the criteria for nuclear exports now required by the USG and contained in pending antiproliferation legislation. In December 1976, the Department moved to rectify this and asked the GOY to grant the U.S. approval rights on retransfer and reprocessing. The GOY has refused to accept any new conditions unless internationally agreed. The Yugoslavs claim that the U.S. request infringes national sovereignty, could impede their economic development, and is unfair given Yugoslavia’s record on nonproliferation. To avoid delaying the project, an equipment export license was issued last May in return for the GOY’s commitment to negotiate the conditions for the fuel export. Negotiations held on February 17–18 produced a possible solution. However, the GOY may not have time to react before the Tito visit. If Tito raises this issue, and he probably will, we suggest a reply along the following lines: —Place Krsko in the broader context of U.S. international policies on disarmament and nonproliferation. —Note that the USG and GOY objectives in nonproliferation are identical. —Note that USG nonproliferation policies are nondiscriminatory and that the U.S. is not asking more from GOY than from other nations. —Praise spirit of cooperation shown by Yugoslav side during negotiations. —Hope that a mutually satisfactory resolution will be found before the fuel should be exported, autumn 1978. Scientific Cooperation: 14. There are clear indications that the decline of bilateral scientific cooperation will be raised during the Tito visit. On November 24, 1977,
