893.5045/170: Telegram
[Document 541]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, August 8, 1925—9 a.m.
[Received 6:13 p.m.]
319. Your number 192, August 6, 6 p.m.
1. Minister for Foreign Affairs August 6th recounted to me an informal
conversation with British Chargé d’Affaires in which the former had
expressed objection to the proposed judicial inquiry into the Shanghai affair
on the ground that it would merely delay a settlement of the case.
2. He asked my views and I told him that while I had received no final
instructions from my Government on this point I was personally of the
opinion that such an inquiry would be of value and might in fact obviate
delays in the negotiations prescribed otherwise likely to occur through failure
to agree on the actual facts involved. He very persistently argued that the
reports made by the Chinese commission and by the commission of the
diplomatic body would furnish an adequate basis for negotiations, even
though they represented ex parte investigations by the two parties in interest.
He clearly implied that the Chinese would find it easier to deal with the
matter through mutual concessions rather than on the basis of an impartial
and precise ascertainment of facts.
3. From this and previous indications of Chinese feeling, I judge that the
acceptability of this proposal to the Chinese has been prejudiced by publicity
from London regarding the British Government’s intention to bring about a
judicial inquiry, these reports having first reached the Chinese in a form that
made no reference to Chinese participation.
4. At a meeting of interested ministers August 7th senior minister informed us
that the Minister for Foreign Affairs had told him the Chinese Government
had noted press reports concerning the proposed inquiry and stated that he
hoped no such proposal would be made as the Chinese Government would
categorically refuse to entertain it and would not only be unwilling to
participate but would take no cognizance of any of the findings of the
inquiry. Senior minister said he inferred, though it was not stated, that it was
the intention of the Chinese Government to decline all cooperation in such
matters as the summoning of witnesses under Chinese jurisdiction.
