Chapter 2, January–June 1989 155 Includes SS–24 and 25, Peacekeeper (if deployed in a mobile mode), Small ICBM, and any future mobile ICBMs. — Option 6—Do not require numerical limits on any nondeployed missiles. (JCS) Includes no systems. Missile Destruction. When the U.S. dropped NDM limits from some categories of missiles, our START position no longer guaranteed that missiles would be destroyed as part of START reductions. To address the political and possible military implications of this change, a study was made of an additional treaty requirement that for every launcher destroyed in reducing to new limits, one missile associated with that type of launcher must also be eliminated. All agencies concluded that such a provision was more complicated than expected and of limited military benefit. The current U.S. approach would not require the elimination or conversion of any Soviet SLBMs or existing silo-­based ICBMs other than SS–18s, but could result in such missiles simply being placed in a nondeployed status. The primary issue here is whether the political benefit of requiring visible missile destructions is worth the price of giving up missiles for such uses as RDT&E boosters, space launch vehicles, operational spares, flight testing, or conversion to other ballistic missiles. U.S. production lines for existing missiles (except MX) are now closed, and the destruction of missiles followed by the prohibitively expensive reopening of old production lines would not be attractive. There are two options: — Option 1—Retain the existing U.S. position; do not add an additional treaty requirement that for every launcher destroyed in reducing to new limits, one missile associated with that type of launcher must also be eliminated or converted to other purposes as space launch vehicles. — Option 2—Require missile conversion or elimination incident to launcher destruction. Task an interagency study of the best approach for implementation. We believe you should try to achieve a consensus on option 1 for now. The impact of option 2 on U.S. programs as well as the political impact, cannot be determined until we decide on a NDM proposal, including a specific numerical limit. A low numerical limit may cause some visible missile destructions, even without this destruction requirement; a high limit may undercut the impact of any required destructions because modern missiles could replace the older ones destroyed. We believe a missile destruction proposal is worth pursuing as part of fleshing out the numbers in our NDM proposal, but no decision need be taken before we return to Geneva.
