840  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Naturally, many of those issues and others find able spokespersons 
in Congess, and we have a full plate of ongoing Congressional actions, 
but we still may need further White House assistance. (U)
The first of two important events in the coming months is publica-
tion in July of the Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) in sup-
port of the deployment area selection and land acquisition. Following 
public hearings during the comment period, the final EIS is to be sub-
mitted in November, leading to a December decision and subsequent 
introduction of necessary land withdrawal legislation to Congress. Our 
schedule requires legislative action by mid-1981 in order to protect our 
1986 IOC date. (U)
The second important event is the System Design Review, begin-
ning next month and continuing through September, that will give us a 
more detailed look at the consequences and benefits of design decisions 
we have made since you authorized the start of full scale engineering 
development last September. (U)
In summary, I am pleased with engineering progress on the M–X 
program and am more confident than ever that we made the right basic 
decisions last year. We are still facing some battles to obtain a high 
degree of public and Congressional support, but we have a very vig-
orous program and I feel the situation is improving. Your continuing 
support has been most helpful. (U)
Harold Brown
196.	 Memorandum From Stuart Eizenstat and Steve Simmons of 
the Domestic Policy Council to the President’s Assistant for 
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the Director of the 
Office of Science and Technology (Press)1
Washington, June 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Study of Accidental War Potential
It was recently reported that for the third time in seven months 
a computer malfunction signaled erroneously that the Soviet Union 
was launching a nuclear attack.2 Although the computer mistakes were 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 42, Missile Warning Incidents: 11/79–8/80. No classification marking.
