486  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
to negotiate all night if Karpov agreed to participate. (Subsequently 
agreed Elements of Common Ground on Non-­denial of Telemetry are 
attached.)6
START: Non-Deployed Missiles
Shevardnadze asked whether there were any questions on non-­
deployed missiles. He understood there had been full agreement.
Burt said that the only question remaining was the precise num-
bers each side would be permitted to have. We could agree on these 
numbers in Geneva. (Text of Elements of Common Ground attached.)7
Shevardnadze asked whether the Secretary wanted to talk about 
ALCMs. Akhromeyev noted that the Secretary had said the U.S. dele-
gation wanted to caucus first. The Soviet side would need to do this as 
well. The Secretary asked whether we should turn to SLCMs.
START: SLCMs (continued)
Burt said that he could speak for Ambassador Nazarkin, who was 
not present. The sides had had a good discussion of SLCMs, but had not 
returned with a common text. Nazarkin wanted to consult with Karpov 
to see if it were worthwhile to have a larger meeting with Karpov pres-
ent. The sides had spoken of the idea of exchanging information. They 
still had a problem with the duration of the proposed declarations. The 
Soviet Union wanted the limits to apply for the whole period, whereas 
we were not prepared to go that far. Therefore the discussions would 
benefit from one more working meeting.
The Secretary agreed and proposed a break. Shevardnadze agreed. 
He noted that the Ministers still had to address bilateral, transnational 
and human rights questions. As for the Soviet experts on these topics, 
he said, “Let them wait.” He was not sorry for his group, although as 
guests perhaps the U.S. experts should be given some sympathy.
(The proceedings recessed at 7:15 p.m. During the next two hours, 
the delegations caucused and a series of working group meetings and 
one-­on-­ones between the Ministers were held on ALCM and SLCM 
questions. The proceedings resumed at 9:26 p.m.)
START: ALCMs (continued)
The Secretary said it was fair to say that the sides had been able to 
resolve many, if not most of the ALCM issues. The only unresolved 
6 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “Elements of Common 
Ground on Non-Denial of Telemetry Data.”
7 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “Elements of Common 
Ground on Non-Deployed Missiles.”
