462 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX can do. We have sent a team to Israel which will report the facts.5 Then we can make a decision. 2. In New York the Prime Minister had raised a new issue, namely, the loan request. We need to study this, the President needs to make a decision and then we need to consult Congress before informing Israel of our decision. We do not yet have the facts and cannot give an answer at this time. We must follow the regular budgetary process as does Israel. We are far along on the FY ’80 military and economic assistance question. We need time to give answers on these new items. The Prime Minister said he understood U.S. procedures but what would he tell his people. He hoped the treaty would be signed; then Israel would start to withdraw. He wanted to know tomorrow what the President would suggest. The Secretary said he could not promise a reply by a given date, but we would be glad to receive the memorandum from the Finance Minister. Dinitz interjected that it covers the airfields, special assistance, and regular FY ’80 assistance. The Secretary said we would need to study it to see if it contains sufficient facts for us to make a basic judgment. He could not give a decision now on whether we would provide further assistance or how much. The President has talked to Congress but needs more information about what is involved. The Prime Minister said there will obviously be additional expenses for Israel, and it is strange that the U.S. cannot say it will view Israel’s request favorably. The Secretary replied that we do not have the necessary information. Weizman suggested that the “second mission” be expedited to look at the other parts of the problem. The Secretary responded that he had not understood Israel expected a second mission. (Comment: Weizman’s reference was apparently to the postponed McGiffert trip.)6 The Secretary said we are awaiting data from Israel. Begin said this was logical. The Finance Minister would discuss the matter with Blumenthal, who would need instructions from the President. The Secretary responded that, if Finance Minister Ehrlich has the figures, he would ask Blumenthal to listen to them. We could not now, however, make a commitment on a grant or loan in any given amount. Begin con- 5 Reference is to the Department of Defense team tasked with surveying potential sites in the Negev for the relocation of the Israeli airbases in Sinai due to be closed upon Israeli withdrawal. The leaders of the group met with Weizman on October 17 to discuss four possible locations for the new bases. (Telegram 263281 to Tel Aviv, October 17; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780425–0818) Surveys of these sites were undertaken November 4–18 and a final report was drafted and forwarded by Brown to Carter on December 16. See footnote 3, Document 159. 6 A planned visit to Egypt and Israel by McGiffert, October 30–November 5, was postponed “indefinitely” on October 30. (Telegram 275500 to Tel Aviv and Cairo, October 30; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780446–0655)
