El Salvador  619
Rene Fortin Magana—Lawyer, aged 30. As a University student was 
an active leftist, anti-U.S., an associate of Communists, and an alleged 
“Communist.” A Salvadoran source here, however, whose judgment I 
value, described him as young, honorable, violent, rich, and not left. In 
view of my personal knowledge of the University of El Salvador, I am 
inclined to the latter view.
Ricardo Falla Caceres—Lawyer, aged 32. An active leftist at the 
University in recent years who has been consistently alleged to be a 
“Communist,” but is described as liberal by other sources considered 
reliable.
The individuals comprising the Junta and the new cabinet appear 
to represent a cross-­section of Salvadoran political views. This is 
undoubtedly deliberate, in an endeavor to attract widespread support 
for the new Government. They are largely younger men who are rel-
atively unknown politically. A tentative appraisal indicates that the 
new Government is nearer the “middle of the road” than to either 
extreme, with a definite tendency towards the left on the part of the 
civilian members. Ambassador Kalijarvi views a substantial proportion 
of the civilian members as being to the extreme left. The Department’s 
sources indicate many of them to be moderates, although preponder-
antly to the left.
The new Government’s first actions have been to release political 
prisoners, lift the state of siege, cancel the law restricting the right of 
assembly, and to announce that it would hold free elections as sched-
uled in 1962 and would govern by means of decrees during the tran-
sitory period of government. Also, it has declared its firm intention to 
comply strictly with the political Constitution of 1950, to respect exist-
ing treaties and international conventions, to fulfill its obligations and 
commitments, and to respect human rights. These latter assurances 
have been given by the new Minister of Foreign Affairs in a note dated 
October 27 to our Embassy in San Salvador.2
Among the principal factors leading to the overthrow of the 
Lemus Government have been (a) his failure to carry out social reforms 
announced following his inauguration in 1956; (b) his failure to accept 
the advice of and delegate responsibility to the better-­qualified mem-
bers of his cabinet; (c) his vacillation in controlling the increasing activ-
ities of pro-Castro and pro-Communist agitators, first by failure to act 
and later through strong-­arm suppression; and (d) his alienation of 
the military by his apparent intention to make his aide, Major Rubio 
Melhado, his successor to the Presidency.
2 The text of the Note was translated in telegram 222 from San Salvador, October 27, 
1960. (716.00/10–2760)
