American Legation at Peking. It must be borne in mind, however, that the purposes of
the Special Conference and the scope of its activities as they now stand are defined by
treaty and are a matter of treaty obligation. The work of the Conference cannot,
therefore, be modified or extended without the concurrence of the governments of all
Powers signatory to the Treaty. It is my hope that, either before the opening of the
Conference or during the course of its sessions, agreement may be obtained which will
enable the various delegations to take up for discussion such further matters relating to
its purpose as will constitute a program sufficiently liberal in its agenda to satisfy the
demands of the conservative elements of the Chinese people and at the same time not
be subversive of the fundamental rights and interests of all the Powers concerned. With
this contingency in mind, you are being equipped with full powers to negotiate with the
representatives of the Chinese and other signatory or adherent Powers, and to conclude
such agreements as may be adopted by the Special Conference, the same to be
submitted to the President of the United States for his ratification by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate. Such negotiations on your part will eventually call
for further instructions; for the present instructions have been framed with a view to
your guidance merely in matters specified in the Treaty, the agreements of the
Conference in regard to which do not appear to call for subsequent approval by the
Senate.
I am of the opinion that the ultimate interests of the United States will best be served by
your work being approached in the broadest spirit and with the purpose of rendering
the utmost possible contribution to the improvement of trade and of the general welfare
in China in so far as these matters may be promoted by the decisions reached in the
Conference. The primary function of the Conference is described in Paragraph 1 of
Article II of the Customs Treaty wherein it is clearly indicated that its main objective is
the amelioration of conditions of trade through the diminution and ultimate removal of
local taxation on merchandise in transit. Although in the treaties referred to in Article
II, China agreed to abolish likin and the Powers concerned agreed in return to consent
to an increase in the import tariff to 12½ percent ad valorem, likin has in fact never
been abolished; and, in recent years, numerous other forms of taxation, such as “sales
taxes” and “protection fees”, have been additionally imposed upon goods offered for
sale which have in effect nullified to a certain extent the provisions of the conventional
tariff. From such information as is available on the subject, it appears doubtful whether
the Chinese Government, however desirous of so doing, is now, or in the near future
will be, able to take any effective measures for the abolition of likin or even to make
any substantial progress toward that end. Nevertheless, such an assumption, however
well justified it may seem from a survey of existing conditions in China, cannot be
taken as an established fact. It is my earnest hope that the contrary may prove to be the
case. The Chinese Government must be given an opportunity to present such plans as it
may have formulated on the subject; and these proposals should receive your careful
and sympathetic consideration. They should, however, be studied strictly in the light of
their practical applicability to conditions now existing in China. It is essential that any
