672 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement grants the Soviets the capability to begin deployment during 1959, to reach 100 missiles one year later, and to reach 500 a year after that. The estimates are not committal as to when, during 1959, one should reckon the starting date. A supplement to this August estimate was issued in November, emphasizing that dates about a year later than the original ones seemed more probable for the Soviet capability to reach 100 and 500 respectively. This supplement also emphasized the difficulties the Soviets might encounter in reaching even these objectives. What has been drawn on this chart are then two curves which include between them something of the range of possibilities allowed by the August and November estimates. They picture, of course, a range of estimates; not the whole range allowed by the published NIE. They illustrate one of the variable factors that enter into an examination of the strategic situa­ tion. These same curves have been repeated on some of the subsequent charts. The second chart, plotted to the same scale, shows for comparison the present United States intercontinental missile programs. As you well know, these have proceeded rapidly in the recent past, and oper­ ational intercontinental missiles will begin to appear in 1959. Present programs terminate in early 1964 with 180 Atlas and Titan missiles on site, and nine Polaris submarines capable of carrying a total of 144 mis­ siles. All 144 Polaris missiles have been shown, even though, typically not more than half of them will be at sea at one time. We turn specifically now to the question of the force needed by the Soviets to attack us. The third chart shows, against the background of the intelligence estimates, an estimate of the number of aiming points we present in the continental United States, and an estimate of the num­ ber of intercontinental ballistic missiles the Soviets would need against them. The lower curve counts the targets the Soviets would have to attack in order to destroy or neutralize: 1. all SAC air bases in the United States, 2. key air defense installations in the United States, 3. all missile bases in the United States. This curve begins with about 40 targets at the present time and grows to about 140 as we add SAC bases, missile bases, and air defense control centers. The blue curve above estimates the number of Soviet missiles needed to attack these targets. In addition to these missiles, the Soviets would probably wish to bring over some aircraft in a follow-­up blow, but at no time would he need more than [text not declassified] over the United States to complete the destruction of all strategic targets. The number of intercontinental ballistic missiles here estimated as his needs makes generous allowance for unreliability and aiming error
