1957 1339 ­meeting.2 The instructions will also cover the action you should take if Wang should insist on a meeting at some level while you are away. EE feels in any event you should go back to Prague for two or three days after the next meeting because there may be some excitement on March 15 generated by the Hungarian issue, which might have some repercussions throughout the bloc. We assume you would not plan to come direct to the States from Geneva in any event. The foregoing is all based on the assumption that you would like to take your home leave immediately. If you would prefer to postpone it until late spring or early summer, there is no opposition on anybody’s part. More on this in your guidance telegram, and possibly in a follow-up letter by Monday’s pouch which should reach you on or before the next meeting.1 3. We are sending you several enclosures on the issue of American travel to Communist China, including the Secretary’s comments at his March 5 press conference and a memorandum of conversation he had with an executive of the UP at the Gridiron Club dinner last Saturday night March 2. Also enclosed is an excerpt from the President’s Press Conference of yesterday. This whole question is probably being debated right now on the Secretary’s plane enroute to Canberra. The Secretary, Robertson, and Andrew Berding, the new Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, were planning to review the matter at length aboard the plane. It looks as if there certainly will be no general relaxation and we in FE are hopeful that a strong line can be maintained. 4. You will have received news of Mackensen’s reported release from prison upon expiration of his sentence. But we gather that he is so thoroughly brain washed that he is likely to elect to remain in Communist China at least for the present. No Departmental comment on Mackensen’s release and his apparent decision to stay in China is now contemplated. 5. We are enclosing a copy of recent correspondence regarding the cases of prisoners Edwin Pon and John Woos. In regard to the Woos case, it is the confirmed U.S. Government position that dual nationals who are not dependents are not entitled to the benefits of the Agreed Announcement. For your background, we do not consider that we are bound to extend the benefits of the Agreed Announcement to alien Chinese criminals incarcerated after our offer to Chinese aliens of last summer. The benefits of the Agreement are being offered to Pon because it seems desirable to do so in view of the fact that he was sen­ tenced about the time of the arrangement of last summer. But this does 2 The Secretary wants you to describe your home leave to Wang as being for the purpose of consultation and a needed rest, when the time comes to inform him. [Footnote is in the original.]
