508  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
44. Wang said this is proof US intent is to require his side to 
renounce exercise sovereign rights in regard to China’s Taiwan and 
to accept status quo of US encroachment on Taiwan and interference 
in China’s internal affairs by armed force. He wished categorically to 
repeat that his side could not agree to this.
45. Wang said he had stated before that mere statement of princi­
ple force will not be used in relations between China and US without 
providing steps to realize that principle would make US inconsistent 
in words and deeds, would not contribute settlement tension in Tai­
wan area, and would be likely give rise to misunderstanding that China 
admitting to US encroachment in Taiwan and interference in China’s 
internal affairs.
46. Wang said he had on many occasions raised question of with­
drawal of US armed force from Taiwan area. However, I had failed to 
make any answers this proved entirely necessity of holding conference 
of Foreign Ministers.
47. Wang said at last meeting I had said that response to question 
of embargo must depend on degree of agreement on renunciation of 
force. The policy of embargo was itself unreasonable and hence must be 
lifted. That was exactly his intent in the question of embargo and that is 
unanimous demand of people of whole world. If US after using force in 
encroaching on Taiwan should further demand China recognize status 
quo and renounce liberation of Taiwan before US side would consider 
lifting embargo, his side could not accept.
48. Wang said his draft agreed announcement represented great 
effort seek concretely apply UN Charter to the situation. If our side 
were genuinely desirous of peaceful settlement there is no reason why 
our side could not agree to his draft agreed announcement.
49. I replied that he had properly pointed out that it is now two 
months since agreed announcement on return of civilians was issued. 
Only two of those who remained in prison at that time have returned. At 
this rate it presumably would be 17 months until all have returned.
50. I said that by no stretch of the imagination or any interpreta­
tion can this be considered “expeditious” or fulfillment of commitment 
made by his government in agreed announcement.
51. I said continuation of this situation would inevitably influence 
my government’s view of reliance which can be placed on commit­
ments made by his government and thus profoundly influence other 
aspects of our talks.
52. I then presented prepared statement on our counter-draft 
agreed announcement as follows:
A. I have listened carefully to your statement this morning. My 
government has also given careful study to draft agreed announcement
