August 8–September 17, 1978 95 1040–120541 President Carter President Sadat Subject: Memcon—Tab . 1030–111542 Dr. Brzezinski Prime Minister Begin Subject: Settlements. Memcon—Tab . 1300–134543 Secretary Vance Foreign Minister Dayan Subject: Luncheon conversation. Dayan urged that as a fall-back position to avoid a breakdown, the West Bank/Gaza agreement should be separated from Sinai since the latter seemed at that point insoluble. Secretary said this would not work. Memcon—Tab . 1400–161544 Secretary Vance Foreign Minister Kamel U.S. Delegation Egyptian Delegation 41 For Carter’s accounts of this meeting, which covered regional security, as well as the draft Framework document, see White House Diary, pp. 232–234, and Keeping Faith, pp. 383–385. During their exchange, Carter informed Sadat that the United States would formally propose that Israeli settlements in the West Bank “should not be expanded or the number increased.” Moreover, he informed him, “we had to delay some questions: permanent borders in the West Bank; permanent status of the Palestinian Arabs; permanent status of Jerusalem. Palestinian Arabs might after five years—if there was a genuine self-government and genuine autonomy—prefer, with Israeli and Jordanian withdrawal, to keep the interim government intact. He [Sadat] said he would keep an open mind about it and accept that possibility in the language to be drafted.” (Carter, White House Diary, pp. 233–234) Following this meeting, Carter reported on these discussions in a meeting with members of the U.S. delegation. (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, p. 263) Carter then returned to his cabin and “looked again at the detailed maps of the Middle East I had been studying for the last few months. All of a sudden, I felt fairly confident that I could get both leaders to agree to a general proposal that could resolve all the long-term differences concerning the Sinai, and also provide the basis for a future treaty between the two nations. The only exception was the Israeli settlements, which remained a crucial problem. Within about a half hour, I had jotted down my thoughts on a yellow pad.” (Carter, White House Diary, p. 234) 42 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found. For Brzezinski’s account of this meeting, during which Begin stated that his “right eye will fall out, my right hand will fall off before I ever agree to the dismantling of a single Jewish settlement,” see Power and Principle, p. 263. 43 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found. 44 See Document 46.
