3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
714
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
—that the disadvantages of a military move into Afghanistan at
this time were minimized by the current slump in U.S.-Soviet relations,
and the deterioration of U.S. relations with Iran and, to a lesser extent,
Pakistan.
3. In my view this action marks a dangerous and unacceptable
change in Soviet policy. I trust Washington is considering a response
appropriate to the threat this Soviet action represents. End summary.
4. It is too early to undertake a definitive analysis of the Soviet ac-
tion in Afghanistan. But we offer the following preliminary thoughts.
5. The Soviets apparently decided that it was essential to replace
Amin with a leader who offered some possibility of winning broader
popular support in Afghanistan and was more amenable to Soviet di-
rection, and we assume that was the principal purpose of the rapid So-
viet military buildup.
6. It has become apparent that the Soviets hoped to broaden the
base of the Afghan regime through a political solution, which involved
plotting against Amin as the focal point of popular discontent with the
DRA. The Soviets presumably were involved in the move against Amin
in mid-September which backfired, at least in part because Afghan
troops in the capital remained loyal to Amin. Soviet coolness toward
Amin since then has been evident in their media treatment of him and
in official messages to his government. The Soviets also made it clear
that their commitment was to the Afghan nation, the DRA and the
People’s Democratic Party—not to a particular leader. Since the key
Kabul military units remained loyal to Amin, however, the Soviets
played along with him—until the effectiveness of these units could be
neutralized by the introduction of Soviet units into Kabul.
7. Presumably one of the main constraints on Soviet introduction
of their own combat troops into Afghanistan had been their concern
about the detrimental effect on their relations with the U.S. and particu-
larly on SALT II ratification. Concern about the impact on their rela-
tions with neighboring Muslim states such as Iran and Pakistan prob-
ably also played a role. The Soviets may have concluded that U.S./
Soviet relations were already so bad, and the chances for ratification of
SALT II so poor, that there was little to be lost on that score. Moreover,
they probably calculated that the continuing crisis in U.S.-Iranian rela-
tions would minimize an adverse Iranian reaction to the Soviet move,
which might otherwise have pushed Iran toward the United States. In
the case of Pakistan, the Soviets may have calculated that the U.S.
Congress’ cutoff of military assistance to Pakistan over the nuclear
issue would leave the Pakistanis little alternative but to accommodate
themselves to the Soviet move.
8. It is too soon to tell whether Soviet calculations about the poten-
tial political gains and losses from replacing Amin with Babrak Karmal
