50
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Some of these thoughts [less than 1 line not declassified] might better
be raised in David Aaron’s special group on intelligence. I am providing
David a separate copy. However, my analysis leads me to the conclu-
sion that ending the hostage situation and ending Khomeini’s absolute
power in Iran are in fact two sides of the same coin. (S)
22.
Editorial Note
On November 12, 1979, President Jimmy Carter announced an
embargo on the import of Iranian crude oil into the United States. He
stated that the “grave situation” in Iran required “constraint” but that
the United States must “refuse to permit the use of terrorism and the
seizure and the holding of hostages to impose political demands.” He
urged the U.S. public to reduce its consumption of oil. The announce-
ment and Carter’s remarks are printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1979,
Book II, pages 2109–2111. Members of the International Energy Agency
(IEA) were also informed of this decision, citing it as necessary “in the
interest of removing oil as an issue in our efforts to free the American
hostages held in Iran” and in order to “emphasize that the issues at
stake are the fundamental international principles of the safety of our
citizens abroad, the prevention of the use of hostages for political
purposes and respect for diplomatic personnel.” (Telegram 294946 to
multiple posts, November 12; Department of State, Records of David
D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files,
1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Iran NODIS Cables Nov 1979) Talking points
prepared by the Department of Energy and the White House for brief-
ing the House and the Senate, November 13, stated that such an
embargo would not increase gasoline rationing, would be supported
ultimately by IEA members, would only briefly increase the price of
oil, and would not affect heating oil supply prices for the coming
winter. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office
File, Box 17, SCC Meeting #200 held 11/13/79)
After Carter’s announcement, Iranian Acting Foreign Minister
Bani-Sadr announced in Tehran that the Iranian Revolutionary Council
had decided to stop all oil exports to the United States. (Jonathan C.
Randal “Aide Lists Terms on Captives,” Washington Post, November
13, 1979, page A1)
