Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 211 was heightened by worries that we are not able to manage the overall U.S.-Soviet relationship. Less important, but more visible, is widespread European uneasiness about your human rights policies (especially in Germany and France). This uneasiness is only in part based on different tactics or different concerns (as with the ethnic Germans in the East). It is more a fear that basic relations with Moscow will be damaged. Brezhnev has been quick to exploit these fears: in his visit to Paris, in his courting of the Germans, and in the effort to split us off from our allies at the Belgrade conference by presenting a “non-confrontational” alternative to Soviet-American bickering on human rights. In fact, however, your human rights position will in time be seen as a basic underpinning of European society—i.e., as supporting democratic structures and practices. It is already proving to be a weapon against the West European Communist parties. For our allies, the alternatives to our effective managing of relations with Moscow are not pleasant: a return to earlier tensions; pressures to build up defenses (which their economies and their populations would not tolerate); damage to independent initiatives with the East (particularly by Germany and France); disruption of trading relations with the East; and perhaps even being left holding the sizeable debts of the Soviet Union and East European states. Difficulties in U.S.-Soviet relations also remind our allies that they have very little influence over the course of these relations—on which so much depends for them. Thus our Indian Ocean policy illustrated for Britain and France that security decisions are being taken about an area in which they have interests and involvements, but without their playing a real role. If it can happen there, what about in Europe? 2. Economic security for our allies in Europe depends in large part on their confidence that we can cope effectively with our own problems, that we will not export our problems to Europe (e.g., through protectionism), and that we will in fact see our economic future as bound up with Europe’s. The London Summit was an excellent beginning—but only that. The Europeans are waiting to see: —Can we continue our economic recovery—without excessive increases in exports to Europe or succumbing to protectionist efforts to decrease their exports to us? —Will we adopt a truly effective energy program to reduce dependence? (This deep concern is partly psychological: constant European pressing on this point goes far beyond the merits or value of an effective energy program, to the heart of our determination—or lack of it— to take the energy problem seriously.) —Will we help finance weak European economies to avoid their having to impose import restrictions or undertake drastically restrictive measures?
