428
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
apparent, and his support is waning. His hospitalization will reinforce
the sense of uncertainty and drift. It will remind everyone of his mortal-
ity and the absence of any structure to provide continuity if he is
incapacitated.
The process of seeking alternative to Khomeini’s leadership was
already well underway, and it is gaining momentum daily. The Kurds
will not be reconciled with him. They have learned they cannot trust
him and they are naturally inclined to grasp such moments to assert
their own nationalistic aspirations. Azerbaijan is simmering just below
the level of full scale rebellion. It is only the uncertainty of Shariatma-
dari’s status—and the possibility that he might be harmed—which
restrains them from even more overt opposition. Khomeini has met
their demands with naked force and contempt. They are not going
to be wooed back into his fold. The other tribes—Qashqai, Baluchi,
Khuzistan Arabs—recognize weakness when they see it, and their open
opposition to the central regime is the best evidence of how they view
the prospects of the present regime.
The regime itself is a collection of second-rate, venal, power hungry,
self-centered, inexperienced and disreputable individuals. There is not
a good mind or a good idea in the lot. The power struggles which at
first were hidden beneath a superficial unity have now emerged into
public view. One of the current rumors in Tehran is that the Forgan
assassination group2 in fact does not exist at all—it is the invention of
the ruling mullahs for their own political assassinations. No one in
Tehran today believes that Ayatollah Taleghani died a natural death.
Rather, he is considered to have been too much of a rival to Khomeini
and was quietly dispensed with. The fact that these rumors have credi-
bility is unmistakable evidence of the decay of the revolutionary elite.
People have seen mullah rule, and they are appalled. Khomeini’s
son-in-law is rumored to be exporting large amounts of money to Swiss
accounts. The level of bribery and corruption extends from the lowest
level (where the local mullahs and komiteh members “borrow” cars,
furnishings and bank accounts of their opponents) to the very top.
Nothing in the performance of the present regime has given any basis
for encouragement about the future.
Khomeini insists on retaining all power to himself. He makes pro-
nouncements and expects them to be carried out according to his vision.
When things go wrong, he fires those most directly involved—or those
who have been fingered by the members of his court. As a result,
2 Purported to be a religious extremist assassination group that followed the teach-
ings of Ali Shariati. The leader, Akbar Goudarzi, reportedly was arrested January 8.
(Report by UN High Commissioner for Refugees, February 1, 1999; www.unhcr.org)
