818
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
should have American support. It was being stated in army circles that
Shah himself had given orders for these officers to maintain contact
with Baqai.
2. Shah seemed somewhat embarrassed. He said true several years
ago he had used General Deihimi, one of Deputy Chiefs Staff, as con-
tact man with Baqai but was not doing so now. Deihimi seemed to have
become infected with urge engage in political intrigues. It might be nec-
essary transfer him other duties. He had on preceding day given strict
instructions officers Iranian Security Forces to cease engaging in polit-
ical activities any kind. He hoped that Americans would cooperate so
that they would not allow themselves be drawn into political discus-
sions with Iranian officers; he did not distrust Americans on my staff,
but feared if Iranian Army officers should form habit discussing polit-
ical matters with them they might be tempted enter similar discussions
with other foreign officials, including in certain circumstances even
those of Iron Curtain countries. I again promised convey his request to
American officials in Iran and expressed hope his officers would carry
out his instructions.
3. Last evening at Turkish reception, Generals Batmangilich and
Deihimi approached me. They referred to conversation which at sug-
gestion Batmangilich I had had with Baqai on October 24 and asked if it
had been helpful.2 I replied it had been interesting but I not sure it had
served useful purpose. Batmangilich asked if he could not arrange an-
other conversation. I replied it might be preferable for Baqai and me ar-
range our meetings direct. Deihimi said “we are afraid that unless we
help in this matter you will not see Baqai again and that you will drift
apart”. I made vague reply and changed conversation to generalities.
4. At same reception General Farzanegan, Acting Minister Posts
and Telegraphs, told me that earlier in evening at request Batmangilich
he had discussed Iranian political situation with latter and his two dep-
uties Deihimi and Akhavi. Three had tried enlist his support in pre-
vailing on Zahedi agree to appointment Deihimi as military governor
Tehran in place of Dadsetan. They had charged Dadsetan inefficient
and corrupt. They also had told him they knew there were rumors that
they were cooperating with Baqai but these rumors totally untrue.
5. Purpose this telegram illustrate kind of political intrigues taking
place in Iran and participation in them officers Iranian armed forces.
Dozen incidents similar those cited herein could be advanced. Difficult
ascertain role played by Shah. It seems quite clear it not entirely inno-
cent one. His desire that American officials refrain from having polit-
ical conversations with Iranian officers may arise more from concern
2 An apparent reference to the conversation between Baqai and Henderson on Oc-
tober 23. See the attachment to Document 341.
