3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
490
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
160.
Backchannel Message From the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Ambassador to
the Soviet Union (Toon)1
Washington, November 21, 1978, 2104Z
WH81548. For immediate delivery to Ambassador Toon.
At the President’s direction, please transmit the following message
for President Brezhnev to Minister Gromyko or as appropriate. Secre-
tary Vance concurs.
Begin text:
Dear Mr. President:
I have given your private communication of November 17 on
events in Iran2 my most careful and thorough attention.
As you know, my government issued a statement Sunday3 which
reiterated my firm support for the Shah in his efforts to restore do-
mestic tranquility in Iran, our confidence that Iran can solve its own
problems, and the United States’ intention to preserve and pursue with
Iran our strong bilateral political, economic, and security relationship.
The United States remains fully committed to the independence and in-
tegrity of Iran.
The statement also made clear that the United States does not in-
tend to interfere in the internal affairs of any country, and that reports
to the contrary are totally without foundation. The statement expressed
my expectation that other countries would conduct themselves in sim-
ilar fashion. In this connection, I took note of your statement in the
Pravda interview that the Soviet Union will not interfere in the affairs
of Iran and will respect its territorial integrity, sovereignty, and
independence.
In this connection, some aspects of your letter are troubling to me. I
trust it was not your intention to suggest that the incorrect reports to
which you refer might be used to justify Soviet interference in Iranian
affairs. I am sure you appreciate that any such interference would be a
matter of the utmost gravity to us.
It is important that our two countries have made our positions
clear and explicit. My views in this letter and in our public statement
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 69, USSR: Brezhnev–Carter Correspondence: 1–12/78. Secret.
2 See Document 158.
3 See Bernard Gwertzman, “Carter Answers Soviet on Iran,” The New York Times,
November 20, 1978, p. A1.
