Hungary 523 ry’s Western trading partners to fourth behind the FRG, Austria and Italy. Economic factors hindering increased commercial exchanges include a lack of dependable availability of parts and servicing for U.S. equipment and Hungary’s need to conserve foreign exchange. Policy issues influencing trade expansion include the annual U.S. review of MFN status which Hungarians see as an impediment to long term trade development and the U.S. failure in some cases to act expeditiously on export license applications not involving strategic items. Conclusion. Without losing sight of the overall geopolitical realities which condition Hungary’s relationship with the U.S., we can say our policy of differentiation has paid dividends. Hungary continues its internal economic decentralization and increased use of market economy techniques. Its record of CSCE compliance, while still requiring improvement, is second to none within the Soviet Bloc. The opportunity for average Hungarians to travel to the West and be exposed to Western culture at home continues to increase. All of these factors are in the long-term interest of the United States. Encouraging their development should continue to be at the core of our policy toward Hungary. [Omitted here is information unrelated to Hungary.] Bergold 176. Telegram From the Embassy in Hungary to the Department of State1 Budapest, January 13, 1981, 1602Z 153. Subject: Ambassador’s Meeting With Mr. Gyula Horn, HSWP. Ref: Budapest 0131.2 1. Horn and I had agreed to meet January 13 for a general review of the international situation. Horn is Deputy Head of the HSWP International Department; he specializes on Western countries and is adver- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D810019–0324. Confidential; Priority; Exdis. 2 In telegram 131 from Budapest, January 12, the Embassy reported the conversation between Bergold and the State Secretary of the Hungarian Foreign Ministry, Janos Nagy. Bergold reported that Nagy was optimistic about the Reagan administration, and believed relations would return “to a more predictable and reliable atmosphere in East/West relations associated with the early and middle seventies.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D810017–0314)
