Romania 583 as a nation-state is the one that least follows Soviet foreign policy. Nonalignment is a concept that has to do with the will of the leadership to be all-powerful and not with the will of the people to be free.” The brief existence of an intellectual dissident group, and several work stoppages last year are symptoms of serious domestic discontent. That there are not more “dissident” activists is probably because of fear, the efficiency of the security organs, and the passivity of the Romanian character, and not because of harmonious internal conditions. In a society where listening to Radio Free Europe (RFE) is against the law (one which is unevenly applied as 61 percent of Romanians do listen to RFE) and can be punished by a fine of up to 5,000 lei (about two and one-half times the average monthly salary), there is no place for a phenomenon such as Warsaw’s illegal “flying universities.” Without determined leadership or cooperation among the various groups, however, dissidents will continue to have limited impact. INTELLECTUALS: 16. According to its own measures, Romania has an overbalance of intellectuals, that is, persons with no vocational or directly productive skills per se. The regime views its people primarily as productive units and believes that it is the individual’s first goal to serve the needs of society as perceived by the leadership. Historians (there is no place for philosophers outside the strict confines of Party dialectics) and artists, who both depend on the state for their salaries, are kept busy with propaganda projects designed to justify official policies and exhort the working population to greater effort. Some intellectuals are reportedly doing solid work in their fields; however, since creative prose can be dangerous to the author, many writers turn to translating foreign classics into Romanian. Among the things that the intellectuals share with the general population are their repugnance for Ceausescu’s personality cult, for nepotism at many levels of the hierarchy, and for the privileges enjoyed by high Party and government leaders. 17. As a group, intellectuals are passive; their dissidence quotient is low. They seek to accommodate themselves to the current ruling class’s whims and dictates in such a way as to ensure a safe and comfortable life. MINORITIES: 18. The Hungarian minority in Romania (which will be referred to as Magyars hereafter), comprising roughly 10 percent of the population, is the largest national minority in Europe. There are also about one-half million Germans but only enough Romanian Jews to fill a good-size stadium. These two groups are less vocal, however, preferring to emigrate or otherwise solve their problems with the help of influential external sovereign sponsors. The Magyars, not encouraged
