Eastern Europe Region 37 point of diminishing returns: it may be better for us all, and make for less tension among us, if for some aspects (review of implementation, for instance) we seek not an identity of action, but parallel action within an agreed framework (“themes”). —are different kinds of consultations necessary? They may be, not as a substitute for the NATO process but in addition to it. What we hear from the Canadians, and in a less direct but stronger form from the Germans, is a political worry. That must be responded to in a political forum, not in the NATO context that emphasizes process over substance. If there are real differences of view, or real fears among the Allies about Belgrade, those need to be surfaced, not papered over. There may be value in some sort of consultation at the foreign minister or political director level. New Proposals —the main issue is clear and we are on the right side of it. The choice is between trying to pre-empt Soviet grand designs and scoring points on the one hand, and, on the other, trying to structure a continuing CSCE process with incentives for the East to participate. Yet there remains the tension between our current (proper) emphasis on constructive proposals and the need to convey a sense of political initiative on our side. Our proposals as a package look less trivial than do many of the constituent proposals. This may be an area in which unanimity within the Alliance is not imperative (for instance, there may be no harm in supporting a proposal like the Belgian one for a human rights court, presuming the Belgians are still interested.12 —how do we respond to grandiose Eastern proposals—for instance, for a non-first use of force? Again, there need be no reason to be fearful. We can convey to the Soviets our belief that CSCE is not the forum for such proposals. But at the same time we should be prepared to turn those proposals, if made, to our own purposes, to make of them something we could accept (even if the East could not). CSCE in Context —how does CSCE relate to our bilateral (or other multilateral) initiatives (this issue is flagged in the follow-on draft)? Should we step up those initiatives in the months before Belgrade, play them down or continue as is? —more generally, are there ways, as yet unrecognized, that CSCE needs to be made to fit better with our general approach to human rights, or to relations with Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union (for 12 Brzezinski placed a checkmark in the left-hand margin next to this sentence.
