International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 625 The threat of a stringent application of the current U.S. countervailing duty statute (without an injury test) is our only means of persuading a number of countries, particularly advanced developing countries, to accept the obligations of the code. It is difficult to maintain a consensus for open trade if such countries continue to refuse to accept international discipline over their export subsidy practices. Also, in my judgment, we could not obtain congressional approval of the new subsidy code if a large number of countries were excluded from the discipline of the code (giving them a “free ride”). Although there are persuasive reasons for discriminating among countries with regard to the use of the injury standard in the U.S. countervailing duty law, this step represents a departure from traditional U.S. trade policy. The U.S. has in the past extended the benefits of trade concessions on an unconditional “most-favored-nation” basis (i.e. without regard to reciprocity). This may involve controversy, especially from developing countries. Your advisors have carefully reviewed the pros and cons of this issue, and they see no alternative but to deny the benefit of the injury standard to countries not assuming code obligations. At the same time, we expect to be flexible in working out transitional arrangements for developing countries who need time to phase out their current export subsidy practices. The policy argument for this approach is compelling, and your advisers believe that in most cases this decision is legally defensible in the GATT. In those instances in which this decision would violate the provisions of bilateral agreements, specific legislative exceptions to this rule will be provided. Reorganization of the Executive Branch for the Conduct of Trade Policy: As we have discussed before, there is a strong consensus on Capitol Hill that the trade policy functions of the Executive Branch are in need of reorganization. The agreement we have reached with the Hill is that the Administration will submit its recommendations to Congress by July 10, 1979, without prejudging what form those recommendations will take. We are working with OMB and other agencies to prepare the Administration’s recommendations.3 3 The Carter administration announced a plan to reorganize the making of trade policy on July 19. (Clyde H. Farnsworth, “Carter Asks For Trade Revamping,” The New York Times, July 20, 1979, p. D1) On September 25, Carter sent a trade reorganization plan to Congress. For Carter’s message to Congress, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 1729–1738.
