Yugoslavia 959 balance of payments problem was discussed (septel),2 asked for the meeting in order to follow up on the Vice President’s attendance at the Tito funeral.3 The Vice President stressed how impressed he was at the way the new leadership is handling Yugoslavia’s problems and expressed concern about the Yugoslav financial situation and anti- Yugoslav terrorism. Loncar expressed pleasure with the unprecedented progress in US-Yugoslav relations and discussed the President’s visit and dynamics of the Nonaligned Movement. The Vice President said he would like to meet periodically with Loncar to discuss Yugoslav developments. End summary. 3. The Vice President opened the discussion by saying how impressed he had been during the Tito funeral at the sense of confidence of the new leadership and the Yugoslav people. Paraphrasing Mark Twain, he said that press reports of the problems of post-Tito Yugoslavia were grossly exaggerated. Tito had used the years well in preparing for the transition to a new leadership. Post-Tito Yugoslavia certainly faces problems but the prospects for success in dealing with them are good. The Vice President noted that Loncar had just come from a meeting with Secretary Miller at which Yugoslavia’s financial problems were discussed. This was a matter of concern to all of us and we hope we could be helpful. The Vice President referred to the bombing of Yugoslav DCM Sindjelic’s house as an outrage and pointed to the difficulties we had in educating other countries about US law. US law enforcement authorities are making a major effort to find those responsible for this crime. The Vice President referred to the “full court press” the FBI had instituted at the time of the Tito funeral to prevent terrorist incidents. 4. Loncar expressed gratitude for being received by the Vice President and said that he was glad that he had been in Yugoslavia for the funeral—not only to pay condolences to Tito but also to see the country during a unique period in its history where self-confidence and complete unity were reflected. He said his meeting with Secretary Miller had been useful and that the GOY hoped that the USG and the Secretary of the Treasury would be able to help with Yugoslavia’s 2 The meeting on June 11 between Miller and Loncar was reported in telegram 155726 to Belgrade, June 12. In the meeting, Loncar informed Miller that the Yugoslav Government found Rockefeller’s suggestion of a $500 million syndicated loan as insufficient, and that the Yugoslav Government hoped to keep U.S. and Canadian loans separate from European loans. Miller told Loncar that, if the Yugoslav Government presented its case well and prepared the groundwork, it might be able to get more than Rockefeller suggested initially, if indeed its case was strong. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800288–0545) 3 Mondale was in Belgrade May 5–8. For the Embassy’s report on his conversation with Yugoslav leaders, see Document 290.
