December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
615
on Diego Garcia. This is not for purposes of reassuring the moderate
Middle East states, who showed little interest. Rather, its justification
would rest on broader geo-political grounds or on improvement in our
rapid deployment capability. I will send you a separate memorandum
on this.
My impressions of the military capabilities of these countries can
be only very sketchy ones, but I’ll give them anyway.
Israel’s forces are very capable, very tough, and very ready. In a
short war with Egypt and Jordan, they should have no trouble win-
ning, but could take casualties substantial for their small population. I
have no way to judge their expressed strong concern about Syrian and
Iraqi capability (the latter is touted in many of the countries of the re-
gion as the coming military power) but I hypothesize that during the
next few years this would not change the outcome.
Egypt’s forces have rather good morale, are quite large, and claim
to be ready. I doubt the last, and their denials of equipment unread-
iness are undercut by their expressed concerns about spare parts. They
are competent technically and professionally. I think they’d do well
against anyone in the area except the Israelis, if we help them solve
their equipment problems.
The Jordanians show spit and polish, are probably well trained (I
saw only the honor guard!) but their forces are both small and very
modestly equipped. They probably have considerable defensive capa-
bility, but would be wise to stay out of offensive operations. They can
make a useful military advisory contribution in the Peninsula (there are
said to be about 1500 Jordanian military personnel seconded to various
countries in the Gulf and North Yemen).
The Saudis, though they are moving ahead toward a professional
air force, seem to me a military zero at this time.
Recommendations
Our assurances of greater US interest and involvement are perish-
able. We need to follow through:
1. By means of the follow-on security consultations with the four
countries to which I have agreed, we should:
(a) Further explore forms of US presence—short of permanent
bases—which would be politically acceptable to host nations and mili-
tarily useful to the United States in deterring Soviet adventurism or en-
hancing our capability for rapid deployment of US forces in a crisis.
(b) Lay the basis for multinational regional security cooperation.
We should concentrate on situations where stability is threatened by
Soviet surrogates, in particular North Yemen and potentially Oman.
2. We should modestly step up the pace of our arms supply ap-
provals within present dollar levels with Israel, Jordan, and Saudi
