436
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
widen the scope of our global cooperation. You might mention that I
specifically told Chairman Hua on your behalf that we seek closer rela-
tions with China for long-term strategic reasons and not because of any
tactical expediency. How fast we move on normalization depends on
our ability to negotiate successfully some of the outstanding issues; it
also depends on Congressional attitudes, and here asking for their ad-
vice may also be the best way to deal with the issue.
91.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, July 7, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #66
1. Opinion: Choices
In four key policy areas—China, the Middle East, Africa, and the
Soviet Union—we are at the point where some basic choices need to be
made. If we do not make them explicitly and consciously, we are likely
to find it more difficult to attain our key objectives.
Let me state them very concisely:
A. China
We have embarked on a course that could have very great interna-
tional consequences. U.S.-Chinese normalization could open the doors
to a political-economic relationship with one-fourth of mankind. It
could alter the international balance. Success here would be a very
major and historic accomplishment for you.
However, in seeking it, we should avoid actions that convey to the
Chinese insensitivity to their concerns. The issue of Vietnam is very
germane here. The Chinese see Vietnam as veering towards the So-
viets, and they are genuinely alarmed and outraged. A Soviet presence
in Vietnam would provide the Soviets with a strategic springboard,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National Security Report: 7–9/78. Secret;
Sensitive. On the first page of the memorandum, the President noted: “Zbig—1. I should
think that a U.S.-VNam relationship would be better for PRC. Worse for USSR. I agree
with State, but don’t wish to push any effort now. J.”
