Eastern Europe Region
145
—Poland’s reforms, if implemented, could threaten the party’s
monopoly on political power, and Moscow is concerned that elements
in other Eastern European countries might emulate Poland. Therefore,
the Soviets are likely to press the Poles to roll back—to the degree
possible—the concessions made to workers on the right to form inde-
pendent trade unions and the right to strike.
—While the Soviets seem certain to heighten their efforts on ideo-
logical vigilance, they are unlikely, at least for the present, to pressure
the Poles or the other Eastern European countries to curtail their eco-
nomic ties with the West.
—The Soviets are able and ready to provide Poland with some
economic assistance, as the recently announced agreements indicate.
Soviet hard currency balances are up, and so long as Polish develop-
ments remain within bounds acceptable to Moscow, the Soviets are
likely to provide carefully measured assistance. It is unclear at this
point how far Soviet leaders will find it possible or desirable to go.
—The Soviets also seem prepared to tolerate a degree of economic
experimentation, perhaps along the lines of Hungary’s new economic
mechanism, although they will caution against reforms which affect
the political structure of the state.
—Polish events point up particularly clearly the increasing difficul-
ties of the Soviet Union in resolving the problems in its economic and
political relationships with Eastern European countries.
—Domestically, the Soviets have taken steps such as the jamming
of VOA, BBC and Deutsche Welle to insulate their population from
information on developments in Poland.4 Although there are certain
parallels between Soviet and Polish economic problems, we see little
prospect of Soviet workers raising demands for fundamental reform
of the Soviet system.
6. Impact of Polish events on Europe as a whole:
—Detente and CSCE. In view of the low key posture of Western
European Governments with regard to the Polish crisis and Soviet
hopes of preserving the structure of detente in Europe, it seems unlikely
that the Polish developments will lead to a more pugnacious Soviet
stance at Madrid.
—It would be shortsighted, however, to attribute the “successful”
outcome in Poland as evidence of Soviet restraint in Europe or as a
triumph of detente.
4 See Document 79.
