22 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement CHART 4 This chart represents the host air base with a launch position of three THOR missiles. The host base also provides necessary buildings for maintenance of missiles and ground support equipment and other logistical support. The other three launch positions are dispersed to insure survivability. Plans to deploy the JUPITER missile are following a similar squadron configuration. CHART 5 The outstanding POLARIS development events of 1957are indicated on this chart. Among these are: the successful tests of thrust termina­ tion for large solid propellant motors; the establishment of the POLARIS weapon system parameters; a demonstration of the warhead design fea­ sibility in which the re-­entry body is part of the warhead envelope. CHART 5A Successful tests of the gas eject method of launching the missile; the feasibility of achieving the required specific impulse in a large solid propellant motor of the size of POLARIS; excellent progress in developing precise navigation equipments and methods for POLARIS submarines; completion of the breadboard design of the missile guid­ ance system and a successful test of the prototype first-­stage POLARIS motor as well as a flight demonstration of the jetavator control system. As a result of the foregoing tests, it was decided that the POLARIS pro­ gram could be accelerated. This was done in December 1957. 3 submarines CHART 6 The year 1957 also saw many significant achievements in the ATLAS program. Three launches took place, of which, one was com­ pletely successful and two partially so. Subsequently, in January 1958, a fourth ATLAS flight test was successfully accomplished. Cooke AFB was obtained as the first ATLAS operational site in addition to being a THOR and TITAN training base. Warren AFB at Cheyenne, Wyoming, was selected as the second ATLAS operational site. Approval was obtained to conduct confidence firings for operational crews from Cooke AFB and construction of ATLAS launch sites is well under way. CHART 7 The basic building block of the ATLAS force is the squadron. The basic squadron is composed of six horizontal readiness launchers; two block-­houses or launch control centers; two guidance stations com­ posed of six doppler radars, two track radars, and the guidance build­ ing. A squadron maintenance area is located about one mile behind the
