National Security Policy  553
Shifts in Economic Policy
48. Soviet economic policy continues to be marked by a spirit of 
innovation and experimentation. With the announcement early in 1958 
of the program to abolish the Machine Tractor Stations, the present 
leadership added another to the series of major measures of change it 
has undertaken in recent years. Most of the steps taken, in particular 
the reorganization scheme of 1957 involving the dissolution of central 
ministries and their replacement by 104 regional economic councils, 
have figured as issues in the political struggle for Stalin’s succession. 
Khrushchev’s rise to power was probably due at least in part to his ini­
tiative in sponsoring novel measures to cope with the problems of eco­
nomic policy with which the regime found itself confronted at Stalin’s 
death.
49. These problems arose in part because of the great growth and 
increasing complexity of the Soviet economic system and the failure 
of the Soviet leadership to adapt its planning and control mechanisms 
to these developments. Difficulties were aggravated during Stalin’s 
later years by his unwillingness to countenance any departures from 
the pattern of economic policy laid down during the early Five-Year 
Plans. Concentration on heavy industry led to imbalances in the econ­
omy; agriculture and housing were denied investment and generally 
neglected. When the Soviet leaders turned to reforming measures after 
1953, the problems which immediately confronted them included the 
increased complexity of planning and administration as industrial out­
put became more varied and specialized, the need to employ labor and 
material resources more efficiently as these came to be more fully uti­
lized, higher investment requirements to maintain gains in output, and 
the necessity to provide greater material incentives in order to improve 
labor discipline and obtain higher labor productivity.
50. The attack on these problems has involved a variety of meas­
ures over the last five years. First, there was a change in the political 
atmosphere—­the easing of police terror and penalties for economic 
dereliction. The intention was to improve the conditions for manage­
rial initiative in enterprises and to aid the campaign for faster growth of 
labor productivity. Second, changes in investment priorities were made 
in order to alleviate the desperate situation in housing, to lift agricul­
tural output out of its stagnation, and to overcome the failure of basic 
materials output to keep pace with the requirements of fabricating 
industry. These changes also reflected the regime’s desire to improve 
living conditions, in the expectation that political and economic bene­
fits would flow from improved attitudes on the part of the Soviet pop­
ulation. Finally, in 1957–1958, the regime undertook a sweeping reform 
of economic administration in an effort to overcome the impediments
