1978 511 level, the total would still be over $500 million for five years. ($96.5 million annually plus inflation.) By subtracting that amount from the $1.26 billion figure (Tab B), it is clear that the real increase is about $700 million spread over five years. This is a far cry from the $2 billion annual increase suggested by press reports. (C) How much civil defense to buy in FY 1980? Since 1975 we have been buying a skeletal staff capacity for about $96.5 million. A few pilot areas have inchoate plans. Most cities have nothing. Defense proposed to upgrade our effort in various program categories as indicated under the FY 1980 column in Tab B, eventually achieving a nation-­wide one-­ to-­two-­week relocation capability. The program can be stretched out, or it can be left at $96.5 million. (C) I encourage you to add no less than $20 million for FY 1980 for two reasons: (C) —The step up to roughly $140 million is a small one, but it moves us from doing virtually nothing to doing something in an area which is part of the overall strategic balance. (C) —If you feel you must cut back, some increase is politically important for giving substance to the civil defense policy as it is perceived, both domestically and by the Soviets. (C) What is CRP? You have raised questions about the substance of crisis relocation planning. I am attaching (Tab C) a short description of the general concept.7 In judging the efficacy of such planning, it is important to remember that no plan will work smoothly. It can only reduce the level of chaos attendant to spontaneous evacuation. In the 1962 Cuban crisis, about 10 million people evacuated spontaneously. The future choice will be whether or not to facilitate it. The occasion could arise far short of war—­from a nuclear power plant accident or a nuclear terrorist threat. (C) Given some of the hostile press reaction, I thought you also might like to review the item at Tab D on public attitudes.8 The editorial opinions of the New York Times and the Washington Post do not, apparently, reflect the broader public attitude.9 (U) 7 Attached but not printed is a December 8 paper entitled “Developing Crisis Relocation Plans and Capabilities.” 8 Attached but not printed is a December 6 paper entitled “Public Support for Moderate-Level U.S. Civil Defense Programs.” 9 See “Mr. Carter’s Fallout Biscuits,” New York Times, November 14, 1978, p. A26; and “No to Civil Defense,” Washington Post, December 15, 1978, p. A22.
