from Paris39 to the sub-committee of the T. M. C. to the effect that while this government was already voluntarily and in a purely informal way furnishing the League of Nations with information and statistics on a variety of subjects neither he nor his government could undertake to indicate whether or not the Congress would bind itself to a treaty provision of this nature. The Department also desires to call your attention to its instruction to Mr. Grew, through the American Consul at Geneva, under date of February 7 with reference to the supervision of the League of Nations in the matter of arms traffic. Your attention is also directed to the statements in the Department’s instruction of March 7 … that “this government cannot place itself in any manner under the direction or supervision of the League of Nations, of which it is not a member.” While the Department does not desire that objection in matters of administration should be given undue prominence, the provision in Article 9 that the “Central International Body shall be established by the Council of the League of Nations” would increase the opposition in this country to American adherence to the convention—opposition which might be obviated on this point by providing that the Central International Body in question should be established by agreement among the High Contracting Parties ratifying or adhering to the convention. (In this connection see Legation’s 1458, April 4,39 enclosure page 8). The Department of course appreciates that if, as suggested, the Central International Body should be selected by the H. C. P. those powers would be free to designate the organization which they might consider best suited to perform the duties prescribed. ARTICLE 10 In connection with this article, which relates to the prohibition of importation of arms and ammunition in the barred areas, as well as the prevention of such “exportation to, importation and transportation” in a certain maritime zone the Department calls your attention to the provisions of Article 6 under which the H. C. P. reserve the right to grant export licenses for the barred zone. The provisions of these two articles do not appear to be entirely consistent.
