800.51 W 89France/52: Telegram
[Document 84]
The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State
PARIS, January 3, 1925—11 a.m.
[Received 10:24 p.m.26 ]
8. Your number 2, January 2, 5 p.m. Following is translation of Clémentel’s
memorandum on the state of French opinion relative to France’s debt with regard to the
United States.
“1. For a long time French public opinion believed in a general cancelation of
debts contracted between the Allies during the war. France was conscious of
having given to the common cause more than any other nation in the world;
she had sacrificed the greatest number of men; she gave her richest provinces
for battlefields. She thought she was right in expecting the Allied nations to
forgive her the sums she had asked of them in order to conduct the common
war, as she herself would have forgiven her Allied debtors.
Furthermore this attitude of French opinion found its justification as regards
the debt contracted towards the United States in the speeches that were made
in 1917 in the American House of Representatives and the Senate and which
it is unnecessary to recall here.
A perfect expression of French opinion at the end of the war and during the
first years which followed the cessation of hostilities is summed up in Mr.
Lloyd George’s speech in the House of Commons in February 1915: “A war
alliance cannot be concluded on principles of limited responsibility. If one of
the nations of the alliance has instructed and armed more men than another
allied country is able to do it should use them against common enemy
without considering the fact that the others cannot for the time being furnish
a similar contribution. The same principle applies also to a nation which has
greater resources in capital or credit. It should use them to the greatest extent
for the good of the alliance even if the other nations may or may not be
capable of making a similar contribution.”
2. Little by little however beginning with 1919 French opinion realized that
the United States would never agree to a general and complete cancelation of
interallied debts. It then appeared to it fair that the problem of interallied
debts should at least be dealt with in its entirety and united with that of
