Afghanistan The recommended subtle change in terminology, initiating a limited defense arrangement with China, could be the point of departure for a wider security effort in the region. You are already moving firmly on Pakistan, and I believe the Congress will support you. We should implement rapidly your decisions on new bases in the Indian Ocean/ Gulf of Oman area, and survey teams will now be going out. Beyond the above, we will need an aid package for Pakistan, and that could be expensive, though it might be shared with Saudi Arabia. Also, if we can stiffen Pakistan’s back, we should be in a position to extend some aid to the Afghani rebels, in order to keep the Soviets bogged down. Finally, we need to do something to reassure the Egyptians, the Saudis, and others on the Arabian peninsula that the U.S. is prepared to assert its power, and that requires a visible military presence in the area now. You might consider consulting with Sadat about military deployment to an Egyptian base of a U.S. brigade for joint maneuvers. This would be an impressive demonstration of U.S. determination to contest, if necessary, Soviet military preeminence in the region. The above recommendations require major decisions by you, but I believe that a major historical turning point has been reached. You have the opportunity to do what President Truman did on Greece and Turkey, and I believe that this is desirable both for domestic and international reasons.2 The country will respond to a firm call for measured but also sustained action, and I am sure the Congressional leadership will support you. I would recommend that you raise the above issues at the breakfast, and provide Harold with whatever guidance you think is appropriate for his trip.3 2 See Document 127. 3 No record was found of the January 4 foreign policy breakfast meeting attended by Brown, Vance, Brzezinski, Donovan, Jordan, and Cutler in preparation for Brown’s upcoming trip to China. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
