78 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Conclusion Except for domestic economic policy, the chief problem will be the inherent tendency of any meeting to water down controversial specifics and resort, instead, to generalities. Nothing would be more dismaying to the media than a Summit that produced only such bland generalities. We need specific content if our basic purpose—strengthening international institutions and giving a sense of hope and leadership to the industrial democracies—is to be achieved. The Declaration now has that content; I suspect that you will have to fight hard to keep it—e.g., in respect of the listing of trade issues to be settled in 1977, the reference to international grain reserves, the request to the World Bank and IMF to study the World Development Program, and the announcement of the international fuel cycle evaluation program studies. To judge from the Preparatory Group meetings, you will find the Germans a strong ally in arguing for specificity; the Japanese generally feel the same way, but have to be prodded to say so. The Canadians are also generally on our side; the Italians were pretty much a cipher, but don’t seem anxious to disagree with any positions strongly held by the U.S. The push for blandness comes mainly from the British, with French support: The UK is now a weak country, and its representatives are wary of launching initiatives that imply new burdens. In the end, however, they recognize that world economic problems won’t wait and are ready to go along with realistic proposals, if strongly favored by the other participants. Follow-Up Effective follow-up was largely lacking after previous Summits. At the final session of the Summit, you might propose that there be a meeting of the Group that helped prepare the Summit, say five months after the Summit, to survey progress made in executing Summit decisions and to prepare a report for the heads of government on what has been done and what remains to be done to this end. You will encounter these objections: —The follow-up takes place anyway in other forums: OECD, IMF, GATT, World Bank, etc. Answer: We need to be sure that our ministers in these forums are following Summit guidance, instead of allowing that guidance to be eroded by time and new events, as in the past. —This would institutionalize Summitry and antagonize nonattending nations. Answer: There is no reason why this follow-up meeting could not be as private and free from publicity as the preparatory meetings have been. Countries will not be antagonized by a non-event. —It would place an additional burden on busy officials. Answer: This burden would be small, compared to the advantages of ensuring
