Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX where it is in UN Resolution 242. El-Reedy stated that it is in 242 because it is also in the UN Charter. Egypt suggested that there might be a general part of the paper to cover fundamental principles. The issue, he pointed out, would not be important if the Israelis had not come up with the idea that the “inadmissibility” language is not binding because it is in the Preamble. The Secretary said he believes it should be in the Preamble. Perhaps the matter could be treated by citing the entire Preamble. El-Reedy noted that the American paper had also added to the pertinent preambular language the phrase, “within secure and recognized borders.” This is not in the UN Resolution 242 Preamble. El-Baz noted that because the Israelis insist that because the “inadmissibility” language is in the Preamble, it is not important. For that reason the Egyptians believe it should be in the operative language. The Secretary pointed out that the Israelis “climb up the wall” with any such suggestion. El-Baz suggested that this shows their intentions. El-Baz then referred to para 7 on page 12 having to do with the possible inability of Jordan to join in the negotiations. This, he insisted, does not help and could be offensive to Jordan. The Secretary responded that the phrase is intended to show that the negotiations would go ahead even if Jordan does not participate. Kamel observed that the Egyptian side is proceeding on the assumption that Jordan will join. The Secretary said we hope so, but cannot be sure. El-Baz thought it is not necessary to provide for such a contingency. It goes without saying, he argued, that if Jordan does not participate, Egypt will go ahead. The Secretary noted that the language is for Egyptian protection. El-Baz argued that Egypt does not need it. Boutros Ghali thought that the matter might be handled by a side letter. El-Baz then referred to para B–2 on page 12 having to do with diplomatic, economic and cultural relations. He contended that diplomatic recognition does not require immediate diplomatic or other relations. Sadat, he claimed, is clear that diplomatic relations should not be provided for at this stage. On page 13, El-Baz referred to para 3–E on the deployment of armed forces. He noted that the Egyptians had proposed regulating the acquisition of arms in order to stop the arms spiral. This, he noted, had been taken from the original Israeli proposal of last year. The Secretary thought the entire paragraph might be eliminated. The police issue could be taken care of on page 4. The Egyptians seemed agreeable, but El-Baz insisted that what is also needed is a reference to a general reduction of armaments. He reiterated that the Egyptian language had been taken from the September 77 Israeli draft.8
