188
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
where it is in UN Resolution 242. El-Reedy stated that it is in 242 be-
cause it is also in the UN Charter. Egypt suggested that there might be a
general part of the paper to cover fundamental principles. The issue, he
pointed out, would not be important if the Israelis had not come up
with the idea that the “inadmissibility” language is not binding be-
cause it is in the Preamble. The Secretary said he believes it should be in
the Preamble. Perhaps the matter could be treated by citing the entire
Preamble. El-Reedy noted that the American paper had also added to
the pertinent preambular language the phrase, “within secure and rec-
ognized borders.” This is not in the UN Resolution 242 Preamble.
El-Baz noted that because the Israelis insist that because the “inadmis-
sibility” language is in the Preamble, it is not important. For that reason
the Egyptians believe it should be in the operative language. The Secre-
tary pointed out that the Israelis “climb up the wall” with any such sug-
gestion. El-Baz suggested that this shows their intentions.
El-Baz then referred to para 7 on page 12 having to do with the
possible inability of Jordan to join in the negotiations. This, he insisted,
does not help and could be offensive to Jordan. The Secretary re-
sponded that the phrase is intended to show that the negotiations
would go ahead even if Jordan does not participate. Kamel observed
that the Egyptian side is proceeding on the assumption that Jordan will
join. The Secretary said we hope so, but cannot be sure. El-Baz thought
it is not necessary to provide for such a contingency. It goes without
saying, he argued, that if Jordan does not participate, Egypt will go
ahead. The Secretary noted that the language is for Egyptian protec-
tion. El-Baz argued that Egypt does not need it. Boutros Ghali thought
that the matter might be handled by a side letter.
El-Baz then referred to para B–2 on page 12 having to do with dip-
lomatic, economic and cultural relations. He contended that diplomatic
recognition does not require immediate diplomatic or other relations.
Sadat, he claimed, is clear that diplomatic relations should not be pro-
vided for at this stage.
On page 13, El-Baz referred to para 3–E on the deployment of
armed forces. He noted that the Egyptians had proposed regulating the
acquisition of arms in order to stop the arms spiral. This, he noted, had
been taken from the original Israeli proposal of last year. The Secretary
thought the entire paragraph might be eliminated. The police issue
could be taken care of on page 4. The Egyptians seemed agreeable, but
El-Baz insisted that what is also needed is a reference to a general re-
duction of armaments. He reiterated that the Egyptian language had
been taken from the September 77 Israeli draft.8
8 For documentation on this draft, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-
Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978.
