due to the positive control that they exercise over Chinese customs receipts through the conventional tariffs annexed to the several treaties, and the least that these Powers can do is to agree to an early calling of the Conference on Chinese tariff provided for in the Treaty of February 6, 1922. Public opinion in the United States definitely favors some such course. As regards the question of extraterritoriality, this Government feels that definite steps should be taken by the Powers in line with the promises made in the commercial treaties which followed the settlement of the Boxer uprising of 1900. At that time the promise was formally made to China by the Government of the United States that, when it was satisfied that the state of the laws of China, the arrangements for their administration and other considerations warranted, extraterritorial rights would be relinquished.89 The most feasible way in which the question can be approached and considered is to send to China the Commission provided for in Resolution V of the Washington Conference,90 in the expectation that the investigations made by that Commission will help to guide the treaty Powers as to what, if any, steps should be taken as regards the possible relinquishment of extraterritorial rights at this time. You state in your Note of July 3, 1925, that the British Government is somewhat apprehensive lest the Chinese Government interpret a promise to expedite the meeting of the Commission on extraterritoriality as a sign of weakness on the part of the Powers. This Government does not share in that apprehension. It, as well as other Governments which participated in the Washington Conference in the Autumn of 1921, affixed its signature in good faith to the Resolution regarding extraterritoriality in China. It is true that some responsibility for the delay in carrying out the terms of this Resolution must be put to the account of China, which had requested a postponement of one year in calling a conference. However, that year has long since lapsed and nothing has been done to make effective the solemn obligations then assumed. The conditions which now prevail in China differ only in degree from those which prevailed while the Resolution was being adopted and since its adoption. This Government cannot recognize that any such condition prevails which would invalidate its undertakings embodied in the Resolution. This Government cannot believe that a policy which consists in carrying out agreements undertaken in good faith and already overdue can be interpreted as a sign of weakness.

It was in consideration of the above facts that this Government instructed its Legation
