920 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 282. Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, February 14, 1980 SUBJECT President’s Attendance at Tito’s Funeral I understand that you feel that the President should not go to Tito’s funeral. While I appreciate the difficulties his attendance might pose— especially in regard to any meeting with Brezhnev—in my view the primary consideration should not be how to handle a meeting with Brezhnev (who may well not attend the funeral) but the type of signal the President’s attendance—or failure to attend—would convey to the Soviets, to the Allies, and above all to the Yugoslavs. From this perspective, there are strong and compelling reasons why I believe the President should lead the funeral delegation: 1. The Impact on the Yugoslavs. Despite the outward calm and all the preparations for Tito’s death, the Yugoslavs still remain nervous about what the future portends and suspicious of the depth and the sincerity of U.S. support. As Ambassador Eagleburger has rightly stressed, what we do in the first few days and weeks after Tito’s death will have a major psychological and political impact on the Yugoslav leadership and on future Yugoslav attitudes. Nothing would do more to reassure the new leadership and underscore our support for Yugoslavia’s independence and nonaligned position than for the President to go to the funeral. His attendance would also be a clear signal to others, who in the wake of Soviet invasion of Afghanistan are concerned about Soviet intentions, that the U.S. is firmly committed to supporting Yugoslavia. (C) 2. The Danger of Ambiguity. Conversely, if the President does not go, and other major European leaders do (Thatcher already plans to go, and it is almost certain that Schmidt and Giscard will go), it will appear as if the U.S. is less concerned about Yugoslavia than are our allies, and the credibility of our past statements of support will be weakened. Many people will undoubtedly recall the President’s ambiguous campaign statement on Yugoslavia,2 and he will be criticized by 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 1–2/80. Confidential. Sent for information. A stamped notation on the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.” 2 See footnote 2, Document 235, for Carter’s 1976 statement on Yugoslavia during the Presidential debate with President Ford.
