3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
320
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
since by the end of the period the systems would be destroyed thought
could be given to ways to provide confidence that that was being done.
C. He was firm on exception for single warhead RV, and Korni-
yenko told Warnke privately that there can be no agreement without
such an exception.
D. He was also firm on range definition for cruise missiles, no use
of transports for cruise missiles, and a bomber-type rule for counting
ALCM-equipped heavy bombers.
E. He reiterated the Soviet position on Backfire despite my sugges-
tion we discuss it privately.
F. He did not react to our new types definition proposal.
4. In view of the fact that he confined himself to going over old
ground in the morning session and did not react to our movement, in
the afternoon session I treated him to a lengthy recapitulation of the ne-
gotiations on some key issues in order to clarify the record. At the end
he complained that he had heard nothing new and brushed aside our
new types proposal. I pointed out that we had presented several new
proposals but had heard nothing new from them, and said that I would
respond to their exceptions proposal when they responded to my new
types proposal. He quarrelled with our position on cruise missile car-
riers, to which I responded. He then asked whether I would be pre-
pared to discuss levels in the context of a discussion of an exception
from the new types rule. I said I would. At that point Gromyko pro-
posed that we meet in private. That meeting is reported separately.
Vance
101.
Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department
of State1
Moscow, April 21, 1978, 1915Z
Secto 4131. For Christopher from the Secretary. Dept pass White
House for the President and Mr. Brzezinski. Pass DOD for Secretary
Brown. Subject: SALT Meetings With Gromyko, April 21.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Unfiled
Files, Box 152, [USSR]: 1/77–4/78. Secret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Printed from a
copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room.
