1286  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
noise levels of the order of 5 millimicrons, signals should be detectable 
at all distances out to 6000 nautical miles. A minimum of four detect­
ing stations is required to determine the location, time of occurrence and 
depth of focus of each shock. Suitable station sites south of the equator 
are rather limited in number, since the Southern Hemisphere is predom­
inantly oceanic, and island locations are generally found to be extremely 
noisy. With the addition of stations shown in Figure 12, it is believed that 
signals could be received at four or more stations from large subsurface 
shots in all parts of the world. The region of least detection capability 
is an area of about 1000 miles radius centered near 10° S, 165° W in the 
South Pacific Ocean. It is estimated that such a worldwide net would 
have a capability of 90–100 per cent to detect subsurface bursts of 20 KT 
or larger. Below 10 KT the detection capability deteriorates very rapidly, 
e.g., at 5 KT there is virtually no possibility of three-­station detection.
The identification of those natural earthquakes producing signals 
of the same size as a 20 KT sub-­surface burst is discussed in paragraph 
2b. It is estimated that 400 shallow earthquakes per year will be in this 
class. Of these, about 300 can be identified as earthquakes with reason­
able certainty, leaving 100 events per year requiring detailed investiga­
tion by inspection teams.
c. Electromagnetic Net. Electromagnetic detection of tests in the 
Southern Hemisphere is favored by the fact that most of the propaga­
tion paths will be over water, which will give somewhat less attenuation 
than over land. However, an unfavorable characteristic of the Southern 
Hemisphere with respect to detection is that South America, Africa and 
the East Indies are areas of high thunderstorm activity. Furthermore, 
the inter-­tropical front which encircles the globe approximately at the 
equator with seasonal shifts from the north to south, constitutes a band 
of additional thunderstorm activity.
A network of 23 electromagnetic stations has been selected, with 
the stations made parasitic on the acoustic or seismic locations shown 
in Figure 12. The detection capability for the network as a whole is esti­
mated to be 90–100 per cent for tests of 100 KT or greater throughout 
these remote areas of the world.
d. Air Sampling Net. In designing a network of air sampling flights 
for nuclear detection in the remote ocean areas of the world, consider­
ation has been given to the complexity of the wind patterns on a global 
basis. It is estimated that daily aerial filtering along three meridians 
with approximately pole-­to-­pole coverage at each of two altitudes, e.g., 
20,000 and 40,000 feet, will provide a detection capability of 90 per cent 
or greater for tests of about 5 KT detonated between the surface and 
25,000 feet. Tests detonated at altitudes higher than 25,000 feet will 
require special-­vectored high altitude sampling flights based on early 
warning from other components of the detection system.
As is shown in Figure 13, the pole-­to-­pole coverage is along merid­
ians at approximately 140° E longitude, 50° W longitude and 20° E
