500.A 4 e/434
[Document 683]
The American Minister (MacMurray) to the Chinese Minister for Foreign
Affairs (Shen)36
PEKING, September 4, 1925.
No. 41
EXCELLENCY: With reference to my Legation’s note (No. 1094) of June 26th last, I have the
honor to inform Your Excellency that the important questions raised in your note of
June the 24th have been carefully considered by the Government of the United States
which has for some time been aware of the growing feeling in China in favor of a
readjustment of Chinese treaty relations with the foreign Powers. It is believed that the
Chinese Government does not require to be reminded of the concrete evidence of this
interest which has been made manifest on each occasion when a question of treaty
revision has occupied the attention of the two countries. The United States is now
prepared to consider the Chinese Government’s proposal for the modification of
existing treaties in measure as the Chinese authorities demonstrate their willingness and
ability to fulfill their obligations and to assume the protection of foreign rights and
interests now safeguarded by the exceptional provisions of those treaties. It is because
of a most earnest desire to meet the aspirations of the Chinese Government that the
Government of the United States desires to impress upon the Chinese Government the
necessity of giving concrete evidence of its ability and willingness to enforce respect
for the safety of foreign lives and property and to suppress disorders and anti-foreign
agitations which embitter feeling and tend to create conditions unfavorable for the
carrying on of negotiations in regard to the desires which the Chinese Government has
presented for the consideration of the treaty Powers.
My Government sympathizes with the feeling of the Chinese Government that the tariff
schedules attached to the various treaties between China and other Powers have
become a severe handicap upon the ability of China to adjust its import tariffs to meet
the domestic economic needs of the country. It must not be forgotten, however, that
these tariffs were first inaugurated in 1842 and that they were a modus operandi
originally devised to meet and remedy a condition which had been a fertile source of
friction in the relations between China and the foreign Powers due to the uncertainties
connected with the rates and methods of levying the tariffs then existing. Schedules of
those tariffs were seldom available for the information of the merchant, who was
hampered in his business by the irregular, arbitrary, and varying methods in the
assessment and the collection of the duties. It is the belief of my Government that the
