same as the alignment in the Preparatory Commission on the question of “potentiel de guerre”. My suggestion as to limiting the category to those “destined for the armed forces” met with no more favor, nor were the two formulas even seriously discussed. It was merely stated axiomatically that so far it had been impossible to distinguish between civil and military aviation. (One of the French experts confided to me that they felt that a distinction was possible in America, but that they had no confidence in the results of any distinction for the continental states). The delegate of the Netherlands, in the final plenary meeting, made a formal proposal that experts should discuss Category IV as well as the Belgian proposal, but was voted down. I declared that the title of the proposed convention and the phraseology of the first sentence of Article 1 were such that if the convention were accepted as it stands, Category IV would constitute an undertaking by all States that they considered civil aviation as war material. Since the points of view expressed by the other delegations, with the exception of the British delegate, are already familiar to the Department, I shall confine myself to describing that taken by Mr. Cadogan. He declared that his Government had been preoccupied, as mine had been, with this question of the definition of civil aviation as war material and for this reason they had in the first instance objected to the inclusion of Category IV in Article 1; that they had withdrawn their objection in deference to the wishes of the other nations, but still felt the inadvisability of cataloguing all aircraft as implements of war. M. Massigli, the French delegate, finally proposed a clause reading as follows: “Owing to the difficulties in the way of formulating precise rules which would enable a distinction to be made between military and civil aircraft and without prejudice to any definitions which may subsequently be set up of the one and of the other, no distinction will be made between aircraft built for military purposes and aircraft built for or capable of being used for other purposes”. I transmitted this clause in my telegram No. 2, of December 5, 10 p.m.,79 not with the idea that this phraseology was satisfactory, but with the
