Comprehensive Test Ban
499
The President asked what kind of stockpile surveillance method
was used. Agnew responded that all kinds of statistical sampling tech-
niques were employed, weapons were disassembled occasionally, and
the components were examined. He noted that the weapons were de-
signed to last 20 years, but that any time the materials used in manufac-
turing components are changed one can get problems. He pointed out
that the devices we had developed were very delicate and that in his
view it would not be prudent to consider maintaining the stockpile in-
definitely without testing.
The President asked what Agnew meant by indefinitely. Agnew re-
sponded that in an example which Roger Batzel would describe, a
problem had been experienced within four years. Roger Batzel ex-
plained that [3½ lines not declassified]
The President asked whether the problem had occurred after devel-
opment of the warhead. Batzel replied that it had actually been after
deployment of the warhead and had been discovered through surveil-
lance of warheads deployed in the fleet. The problem had been a me-
chanical safety device which was intended to insure that the weapon
would not produce a significant nuclear yield if the high explosive (HE)
was detonated accidentally.
The President said that he understood that the problem was not
identified in an explosion but in an inspection of the safety device.
Batzel agreed and stated that we had subsequently replaced the pri-
mary on that device. He pointed out that we have a similar problem
now with the primary of the Poseidon warhead. He pointed out that
the Poseidon produced a nuclear yield [less than 1 line not declassified]
packaged in a re-entry vehicle weighing [less than 1 line not declassified]
He explained that although primaries used to have hundreds of deto-
nators distributed over the surface of the HE in order to generate a
spherical implosion wave, [1 line not declassified] In the Poseidon pri-
mary a new HE material had been used which exuded a liquid which
corroded [less than 1 line not declassified] that with time, no yield would
have resulted. Fortunately, during the process of development, an al-
ternative design using different HE material had been fully tested and
we were able to simply substitute this primary for the defective one.
Otherwise further nuclear testing would have been required.
Roger Batzel also argued that US designers in responding to mili-
tary requirements had made remarkable achievements in minimizing
weight and maximizing yield of warheads. [3 lines not declassified]
Agnew interjected that without the one-point safety requirement we
would not be so close to the edge. Batzel agreed, adding that a factor of
two increase in weight would also avoid some problems. He also re-
marked that while these were remarkable accomplishments we might
