Chapter 7, January–May 1991  961
187.	 Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the 
Soviet Union1
Washington, January 8, 1991, 2108Z
6093. Subject: Bartholomew-Bessmertnykh Meeting 1/4: START
1.  Secret—Entire Text.
2.  Undersecretary for International Security Affairs Reginald 
Bartholomew called in Soviet Ambassador Aleksandr Bessmertnykh on 
1/4 to deliver a paper detailing concerns on CFE (reported Septel)2 and 
to discuss START. Also present at the meeting were Soviet Counselor 
Aleksandr Churilin, EUR DAS Avis Bohlen, Chris Dell and James 
Timbie (T Staff) and EUR/SOV Anne Herr (notetaker).
3. On START, Bartholomew noted that recent meetings in Houston 
and Washington had been hard but good. He said that his own meet-
ings with Obukhov had helped, and emphasized that he thought his 
work with Obukhov was very important.
4. Bartholomew said Secretary Baker had received Shevardnadze’s 
response3 to his letter. Although there were a few points we would take 
issue with, in the main, the letter was good in that it confirmed the 
package agreed on in Houston.
5. Bartholomew voiced concern that what has been tabled in 
Geneva walks back in some very important respects from what had 
been agreed upon at Houston. He singled out bombers as an example, 
along with PPCM and definition of new types.
6. Bartholomew observed that this leaves us in a situation where 
we are 5 weeks away from the summit and the package agreed upon in 
Houston seems to be coming apart as a result of Soviet positions tabled 
in Geneva. If we don’t correct this situation we will not be able to get 
START in time for a summit. Priority should be to put START back 
together again by getting a Soviet position in Geneva that confirms 
Shevardnadze’s letter.
7. Bartholomew informed Bessmertnykh that Baker would be 
sending Shevardnadze a letter4 which Moscow could expect tonight 
or tomorrow. He wanted Bessmertnykh to stress the importance of 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, 
N910001–0087. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Also sent to NST Geneva. Drafted by Herr; 
cleared by Bohlen, Ordway, and Timbie, and in S/S and S/S-O; approved by Bartholomew.
2 Reference is to telegram 6158 to Moscow, January 9. (Department of State, Central 
Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D910024–0563)
3 See Document 183.
4 See Document 184.
