642 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 238. Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1 Washington, March 18, 1980, 1:45 p.m. PARTICIPANTS The President The Vice President Secretary of State Cyrus Vance Secretary of Defense Harold Brown Deputy Secretary of Defense Graham Claytor Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff David Jones Director of Central Intelligence Stansfield Turner Zbigniew Brzezinski Hamilton Jordan David Aaron MINUTES The President began by saying that he wanted to try to keep the meeting short and not go into great detail, but he wanted a general discussion about what is taking place in our foreign and defense policies. It was his sense that the last two weeks were the worst since he has been in office. We are confronted by several important issues which are not directly related but which are tied together in terms of the overall posture of the U.S. and the impression that our country is making at home and abroad. The President said that after a general review this afternoon, he wished to get together again, perhaps at Camp David this weekend, after our subordinates have had an opportunity to clarify the issues and define the options. The President’s analysis of the current situation was as follows: at best we have a stagnant situation in Iran and Afghanistan, as well as in the Israeli/Egyptian peace talks. We have a deteriorating position, and perhaps worse, with our European Allies. Finally, our relationship with the Soviet Union is dormant and perhaps deteriorating as well. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] As for Afghanistan, it was the President’s judgment the Soviets are going to stay in that country for at least a year. He thought they were making progress against the resistance and they were succeeding in driving a wedge between ourselves and our Allies—with the help of the Allies, particularly the French. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Meetings File, Box 2, NSC Meeting #27 Held 3/18/80, 3/80. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Aaron. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room.
