272 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 99. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State1 Kabul, December 27, 1979, 1101Z 8624. Subj: Soviet Intervention in Afghanistan: What To Do About It. Ref: Kabul 8623.2 1. (S—Entire text) 2. Summary: The arrival of Soviet battalions at Bagram Air Base and now in Kabul significantly changes the Afghan political picture, and points to a need for a new policy review. The intervention not only suggests an extension of the Brezhnev Doctrine to Afghanistan, but it also raises the related question of whether the Amin regime has not now lost its legitimacy. Hence, I recommend a new policy review of Afghanistan/USSR by a group of countries, such as the NATO powers, Pakistan, India and China, to try to bring about a Soviet withdrawal; or the U.S. raising the issue of Soviet intervention in the UN Security Council, and our urging the termination of UNDP and World Bank aid to the Soviet satellite; and/or our giving massive assistance to the Afghan insurgents. Were either or both of the latter two options adopted, we would have to break our relations with this puppet regime and withdraw all official American personnel from the country. Our SALT monitoring capability would thereby also suffer. End summary. 3. Whether you call it a “qualitative change” or a new ball game, we have now a different political situation in Afghanistan. By reftel, we have just reexamined the question of why the Soviets chose to bring in troops at this time. We concluded that the reasons were probably multi-purpose, but at heart were to try to make sure the Khalqi party remained in power and the country within the Soviet orbit. 4. The fact that the Soviets, with presumably Hafizullah Amin’s consent and/or invitation, were impelled to introduce combat troops suggests too that both parties had concluded that the Khalqi regime could not otherwise long survive. Counter-insurgency efforts were having mixed results, urban terrorism was increasing, dissatisfaction in the Khalqi party was widespread, and the Soviets were probably painfully conscious that they were expected to meet all the expensive bills for hardware and the ever growing numbers of Soviet advisors. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the Secretary on Soviet Affairs, 1977–1981, Lot 81D109, untitled folder. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. 2 See Document 98.
