1955  469
matters by invoking treaty. His side could never accept this. Wang said 
I had stated I had no intent debate conflicting policies Taiwan in order 
to avoid long futile controversy. However, if we to discuss how non-­
recourse to force may be applied to Sino-­US dispute in area, we cannot 
evade fact US resorting to threat and use of force. That fact gave rise to 
Sino-­US dispute in area, which is pressing for solution.
20. Wang said he had repeatedly pointed out that in discussing 
principle of non-­recourse to force, distinction must be made between 
internal conflict and international dispute. Internal conflict no business 
of present talks. Anouncement should not have anything to do with 
internal matters of any country.
21. Wang said Chinese people always strive for peaceful solutions 
even in realm of internal matters. But it was Chiang Kai-­shek who 
started large scale internal conflict in 1946, as even State Dept White 
Paper admitted. Chinese people compelled resort to war to overthrow 
Chiang rule and establish PRC.
22. Wang said today remnant elements Chiang clique still haunt 
Taiwan, waging disruptive war against mainland China. Nevertheless, 
Chinese people still willing, conditions permitting, strive liberation Tai­
wan by peaceful means. This internal matter, not subject present talks.
23. Wang said US Govt had indicated it does not intend speak for 
Chiang Kai-­shek, nor can his side accept US to represent Chiang in 
talks. He cannot agree to a public announcement which would touch 
on a Chinese internal affair.
24. Wang said I had spoken of situations of division in other parts 
of the world. As far as China concerned, this metaphor out of place and 
cannot justify US encroachment on Taiwan. Any attempt split China 
into two Chinas unacceptable to Chinese people.
25. Wang said his draft announcement on basis UN Charter called 
for peaceful settlement of disputes without resorting to threat or use 
of force. This met spirit of my statement concerning settling disputes 
between our two countries peacefully.
26. Wang said, in order realize this desire, appropriate both sides 
hold conference of Foreign Ministers to settle question of and eliminate 
tension in Taiwan area.
27. Wang concluded if US genuinely seeking peaceful settlement, 
there no reason we cannot agree make such announcement. No justifi­
cation for stalling in issuing such announcement.
28. I replied that I did not see how his remarks advanced the sit­
uation very much. Was I to take it as his position that negotiations 
between our two countries could be carried on only at the Foreign 
Ministers’ level?
