Covert and Overt Operations 927 issues. The Report avoids being personal, but the finger is pointed at Vaught on OPSEC. In fact, General Jones and others share this burden as well. 2. Independent Review of Plans The lack of an independent review group is underscored as a source of trouble. The Chiefs acted like their own “action officers” in the words of the Report. Sitting in one Sunday when the Chiefs were briefed, I wondered myself how they could know what they pretended to know about feasibilities. 3. Organization, Command and Control, and the Applicability of JCS [less than 1 line not declassified]3 [1 paragraph (10 lines) not declassified] —The Marine Colonel in charge of the helicopters had no staff, believed he was in charge of helicopters, but was never appointed as head of helicopters. He was an officer from Jones’ special staff group. Thus no Marine helicopter unit and commander were ever selected. Jones’ choice of Colonel Pittman insured an ad hoc approach to helicopter operations (one of the minor issues in the Report). —General Gast, USAF, was made a consultant on air operations, but his role in air operations, planning, and training was never clarified with the Marine Colonel, the Air Force, or the Navy. Again he was the Chairman’s ad hoc appointment. —The Air Force component commander, who managed the C–130 training, was given “on the scene commander” responsibility just prior to the mission with no chance to plan or rehearse. —No Navy component commander was ever designated. This is standard Navy practice to avoid being entangled in truly Joint organizations (the RDJTF today has no Navy component commander). Here you have the “joint system” at its traditional best: one or two of the services do not participate fully, usually the Navy, and the Chairman tries to by-pass the CINCs because he does not command them by law. The Holloway Report makes it seem that Vaught is at fault for the confusion in the air operations responsibilities. Gast as a consultant, however, and his special relation with Jones probably made it difficult for Vaught to manage Gast. No reason is given for no Navy component commander and staff. The Report also leaves the impression of a chaotic “Joint” air operations and training endeavor. The JCS has 3 PRM–30, “Terrorism,” January 2, 1977, is in Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–Files), Box 1.
