Hungary 497 of acquiescence. The Soviets did not seem quite to understand this. They seemed to equate the verification activities with more traditional forms of intelligence gathering. The United States felt there was a fundamental distinction and that a more sophisticated Soviet attitude on this question would be an important contribution to detente. Precisely because Hungary had a fundamental interest in US-Soviet detente, the Hungarians had an interest in this question and could make a contribution to detente if they could influence the Soviets in a positive direction on this question. (S) Dr. Brzezinski stated that his last point was motivated by his desire to widen and make more firm US-Soviet detente. Contrary to his reputation, he strongly believed that unless US-Soviet detente was broadly based and genuinely reciprocal, the American people would eventually reject it. He then turned to the question of instability in the Third World. To the end of this century, many parts of the world were going to be in turmoil. This was not our doing, nor was it the Soviet’s doing. This was a result of internal dynamics in many of the countries involved. However, he wished to emphasize that if this turbulence was exploited by one side or the other, it could undermine detente. The US was particularly concerned by the Soviet use of Cubans as proxies in certain areas of the Third World. This use of the Cuban military was bound to have an impact on American attitudes, and in fact the impact was already beginning to be felt. It was always more difficult to start something like that than to terminate it. We did not expect the Soviet Union to turn it off like a faucet, but we would hope that the Soviets would be sensitive to our concerns, whether in Africa or Latin America. We had been sensitive to Soviet concerns so far. But the Soviet side had to understand the need for restraint. This was why in Vienna that we told the Soviets that it was not our purpose to use our relations with China against the Soviet Union. We understood Soviet concerns and we realized any attempt to use China against the Soviet Union would create problems for detente. However, if present trends continued, there would be a strong reaction in the United States. The Presidential elections had a way of surfacing these visceral attitudes. He mentioned this, he said, because we recognized the larger interest which Hungary had in East-West cooperation and coordination. (S) Dr. Brzezinski concluded the meeting by taking DPM Huszar on a tour of the Oval Office. (U)
