National Security Policy 471 deficiencies continue in the practical and experimental aspects of train­ ing, particularly in some fields of biology and engineering, although efforts are being made to overcome them. The USSR is also not as well supplied with nonprofessional technicians, mechanics, and mainte­ nance men as are the Western industrial countries, where broader sec­ tions of the population have acquired mechanical skills over a longer period. Considerable progress is being made in increasing the supply of such personnel, but shortages of skilled technicians will persist in the USSR as in other countries. 76. Soviet scientific facilities, in terms of financial support, orga­ nizational direction, and number and quality of laboratories, are gen­ erally adequate for the effective utilization of scientific talent. In a few fields Soviet facilities are superior to corresponding installations in the West. Notable in this regard are certain high energy particle accelera­ tors and electronics research establishments. Although some shortages of complex research instruments are believed to exist, they probably do not significantly hamper research programs of major importance. For instance, though the US has a considerably larger number of high speed electronic computers than the USSR, the number of computer hours actually utilized for high priority research is probably nearly the same, since Soviet computers are not called upon to serve routine busi­ ness and government functions. 77. During the next five years the Soviet Union will continue efforts to improve its capabilities in scientific instrumentation. More highly qualified engineers will probably be made available for the development and production of scientific equipment, especially in pri­ ority research areas, and an increasing amount of equipment will reflect original design concepts. 78. The Satellites continue to make significant contributions to Soviet technological development in certain fields, principally in optics, electrical measuring instruments, electronics, communication equip­ ment, synthetic fibers, and pharmaceuticals. However, the importance of Satellite contributions is diminishing as Soviet capabilities in these fields improve. 79. The USSR is also progressively less dependent on Western research and development. Nevertheless, the Soviet leaders have adopted a policy of acknowledging foreign achievement and encourag­ ing maximum use of foreign experience. The USSR is clearly anxious to take advantage of the possibilities in international scientific exchange, and to make Soviet scientists fully conversant with developments in the West. The All-Union Institute of Scientific and Technical Information of the Academy of Sciences publishes and circulates extensive abstracts of foreign journals, and at least in high priority fields Soviet scientists
