would be pleased to receive the duly accredited agent whom the Republic of Panama would despatch to negotiate and conclude with the Government of Colombia a boundary convention and a treaty of peace and friendship and to adjust all questions of pecuniary liability as between the two countries, in accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents. He added that the Government of Colombia would also be pleased to accredit a Minister to the Republic of Panama. Thereupon, the Secretary of State, addressing the Panaman Minister, expressed the hope that the Panaman Government was ready to enter into diplomatic relations with the Government of Colombia and inquired whether his Government would be inclined, with a view to instituting official relations between the two Republics, to accredit a diplomatic agent to the Republic of Colombia, for the purposes mentioned, and to receive the Minister whom the Republic of Colombia might accredit. Doctor Alfaro replied that he was authorized by his Government to express its gratification at the recognition of Panama by Colombia as an independent nation and added that his Government would despatch a duly accredited agent to negotiate and conclude with the Government of Colombia a boundary convention and a treaty of peace and friendship and to adjust all questions of pecuniary liability as between the two countries, in accordance with recognized principles of law and precedents. He added that his Government would be pleased to receive the Minister accredited by the Government of Colombia. The Secretary of State then stated that he desired to avail himself of that opportunity to offer to serve as a medium for the request of the agrément of the Ministers who should be accredited by the Republics of Colombia and Panama, respectively, if Messrs. Olaya and Alfaro had instructions on the subject. The Panaman Minister stated that he was authorized by his Government to inquire, in case the Minister of Colombia should have been instructed to answer, whether Mr. Nicolas Victoria J. would be persona grata to the Colombian Government.
