544
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
it will certainly reduce that danger. It will strengthen our efforts to ban
nuclear tests and to stop the spread of atomic weapons to other nations.
And it can begin the process of negotiating new agreements which will
further limit nuclear arms.
The path of arms control, backed by a strong defense—the path
our Nation and every President has walked for 30 years—can lead to a
world of law and of international negotiation and consultation in
which all peoples might live in peace. In this year, 1979, nothing is more
important than that the Congress and the people of the United States
resolve to continue with me on that path of nuclear arms control and
world peace. This is paramount.
I’ve outlined some of the changes that have transformed the world
and which are continuing as we meet here tonight. But we, in America,
need not fear change. The values on which our Nation was founded—
individual liberty, self-determination, the potential for human fulfill-
ment in freedom—all of these endure. We find these democratic prin-
ciples praised, even in books smuggled out of totalitarian nations and
on wallposters in lands which we thought were closed to our influence.
Our country has regained its special place of leadership in the world-
wide struggle for human rights. And that is a commitment that we
must keep at home, as well as abroad.
The civil rights revolution freed all Americans, black and white,
but its full promise still remains unrealized. I will continue to work
with all my strength for equal opportunity for all Americans—and for
affirmative action for those who carry the extra burden of past denial of
equal opportunity.
We remain committed to improving our labor laws to better pro-
tect the rights of American workers. And our Nation must make it clear
that the legal rights of women as citizens are guaranteed under the laws
of our land by ratifying the equal rights amendment.
As long as I’m President, at home and around the world America’s
examples and America’s influence will be marshaled to advance the
cause of human rights.
To establish those values, two centuries ago a bold generation of
Americans risked their property, their position, and life itself. We are
their heirs, and they are sending us a message across the centuries. The
words they made so vivid are now growing faintly indistinct, because
they are not heard often enough. They are words like justice, equality,
unity, truth, sacrifice, liberty, faith, and love.
These words remind us that the duty of our generation of Amer-
icans is to renew our Nation’s faith—not focused just against foreign
threats but against the threats of selfishness, cynicism, and apathy.
The new foundation I’ve discussed tonight can help us build a na-
tion and a world where every child is nurtured and can look to the fu-
