International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 969 292. Memorandum From the Assistant to the President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Fill) to the President’s Special Assistant for Health Issues (Bourne)1 Washington, July 25, 1977 SUBJECT Meeting with the President, Friday, July 29, 1977 In order to begin to map out a strategy for your meeting on Friday,2 the following items are suggested for you to think about raising during the meeting. 1. International Health Strategy. —Decision memorandum on this subject will be ready by late September. —The structure has been agreed to; it has applicability to be used as a planning and analysis tool on other crosscutting issues which cover both domestic and international issues such as hunger, family planning, disaster relief, child health. —It has been very difficult to gain agreement on structure of all the agencies involved to procedures to follow on international health because of the competing and overlapping interests on this issue; the same problems are relevant to World Food policy which encompasses 26 Federal agencies. 1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues— Peter Bourne Files, Subject Files, Box 34, International Health, 7/1/77–7/31/77. No classification marking. 2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Bourne met with the President in the White House Oval Office on July 29 from 1:57 to 2:12 p.m. to discuss drug policy-related issues. No record of the meeting has been found, although the Daily Diary indicates that a Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) crew filmed a portion of the discussion for inclusion in a three-part series on international drug issues, scheduled to debut during the spring of 1978. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) In Carter’s personal diary, he noted: “Peter Bourne came by to go over the final drug message and to talk about his role in the White House. I want him to be in charge of drugs, world hunger, world health, and so forth, and to work directly with me.” (White House Diary, p. 74) In a July 29 memorandum to Bourne, Fill outlined his thinking regarding the benefits and problems associated with Bourne’s international role, concluding: “There is no place in the U.S. government similar to where you have placed yourself; there is no one else in the White House that has the combined relationship to the President, credentials, intellectual capacity, and openness which you bring to your position. The power of fresh, new, human needs ideas or old, good ones emanating from the White House is enormous, and may be critical to the balance which needs to be maintained between political/institutional needs and human needs.” (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—Peter Bourne Files, Subject Files, Box 34, International Health, 7/1/77– 7/31/77)
