Chapter 2, January–June 1989 57 toward defenses, we have proposed a package of predictability measures aimed at giving each side greater confidence about the pace and direction of the other’s defense program. But the Soviets say they want to block the path to reliance on defenses, not make it more predictable. Accordingly, they argue that such measures should serve the narrow purpose of verifying compliance with the ABM Treaty. Despite this difference of philosophy, the Soviets have begun working with us on a Predictability Protocol and have accepted U.S. concepts on annual exchanges of data, meetings of experts, and observation of field tests. They also proposed mandatory consultations and inspections that we have rejected. Linkage between D&S and START. From the outset of the talks, the Soviets have never wavered in making completion of START conditional upon conclusion of a D&S agreement. They later reinforced their linkage by including in their START treaty draft a provision that would automatically terminate START if either side violated the ABM Treaty or D&S agreement. We have opposed these linkages, arguing that neither side’s security would be jeopardized by completing START and bringing it into force even in the absence of agreement on D&S. However, we introduced a linkage of our own: a provision enabling the D&S agreement to enter into force only if there is a START agreement. Subsequently we offered to withdraw our linkage if the Soviets withdrew theirs, but they refused. Implications of our Defense Review From what has been made known so far, the President’s recent SDI decision will not involve major changes in the goals or direction of the program (although spending will clearly be cut). The President seems to have decided against near-­term deployment of ground-­based systems with limited objectives (e.g., thin protection against accidental or third-­party launches) and in favor of continuing to explore a layered approach with both groundand space-­based elements that would be designed to meet the JCS’s fairly ambitious Phase I effectiveness goals. Special attention would apparently be given to determining the feasibility of promising technologies such as Brilliant Pebbles. Until program restructuring decisions are taken and a budget figure is approved by Congress, it will not be clear what effect the inevitable spending cut will have on the program’s estimated schedule. Given the continuity in the SDI program, no changes in our D&S negotiating positions will be required to make them consistent with the President’s decision. Nonetheless, in the weeks leading up to the expected June resumption of NST, the Arms Control PCC will conduct a review of our D&S approach. Although no issues have yet been singled out for review, several are prime candidates:
