Chapter 5, May–June 1990 759 Bartholomew: I ask Grinevsky and Woolsey to meet separately. They can make sure we have a common text for the CFE joint statement. This is just a technical matter. I have no reason to doubt that the CFE statement is finished, just to check. Karpov: I reported to my minister that we have agreed on a text. Bartholomew: I have learned to be careful. Second, I would like to ask Grinevsky and Woolsey to make yet another effort on the outstanding issues. Now we have a tremendous concentration of political energy and political will in this city at this time, let us use it. I ask Grinevsky and Woolsey to go back at it again. I know this will not make Grinevsky and Woolsey happy. I also ask Brooks and Masterkov to leave to complete the SLCM declaration. Karpov: I would like to turn to our offer of draft language on the TU–22M, what you call Backfire. Bartholomew: I am in fact in a position to give a considered and authoritative response. I discussed this subject with my minister2 and at a meeting at the lighest level with the President yesterday.3 Our considered view is that we cannot accept the Soviet proposal for the following reasons: — First, the form. We believe this should be a politically binding declaration by the Soviet Union, much as we agreed to do for the Soviet Union on SLCMs. — Second, we believe there must be a reference, as in the draft declaration we gave you, a specific reference to in-­flight refueling, as well as “in any other manner,” in the section on upgrade of intercontinental capability. — Third, we believe the 400 number of Backfire must include naval Backfire, or that number will have no meaning. That number should be stated in terms of “will not exceed 400 at any one time,” not a reference to plans. For all these reasons, we are firmly of the belief that the US draft declaration of policy is adequate to solve our common problem. We propose that you accept the draft declaration as the solution to the Backfire problem. I am prepared to expand on the reasoning on each of these points. Karpov: What we specifically would like to reflect is, first, TU–22M is dealt with in the context of working out a START agreement. The fact is that we have agreed that the TU–22M should be discussed in Vienna within the framework of overall limitations on aircraft. There is 2 No memorandum of conversation was found. 3 According to the President’s Daily Diary of May 30, Bush participated in a briefing on arms control issues in the Cabinet Room from 10:50 a.m.–12:04 p.m. No minutes were found.
