432 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 of the procedure. The objective would be to give moderate elements sufficient ammunition to go to Khomeini and try to persuade him that the Americans had been defeated and the time had come to release the hostages. The French lawyers and Cottam believe this is the only strategy which will pay off. 2. Focus our attention on getting the hostages out of the embassy and out of the custody of the militants. If successful, this would undercut the militants’ political leverage and eventually make it easier for the government to decide to release the hostages. Our tactics would be to focus on the condition of the hostages and the need to move them to more adequate quarters with better care, for humanitarian reasons. They have shown themselves to be sensitive to such arguments in the past. 3. Focus primarily on the Islamic Conference and the Islamic states as a means of getting through to Khomeini. There are mixed views about the usefulness of pursuing sanctions aggressively. Some believe that the threat of sanctions merely stiffens the back of the regime and weakens the bargaining position of the moderates. Others think that the sanctions are taken very seriously in Iran and that they create domestic political pressure to find a settlement. All agreed, however, that pushing sanctions before the election and before the Islamic Conference meeting would be counterproductive.4 We recommend proceeding as follows: —First, we will focus on the forthcoming Islamic Conference as a means of getting our views across to the Iranians from a group of states and leaders who would be credible in their eyes. State is actively pursuing this. —Second, State will develop a series of alternative negotiating strategies which we might use after the Islamic Conference and after the initial balloting for President. These will be reviewed at a subsequent meeting.5 —Third, we will collect and examine names of private individuals who might be able to organize a global effort drawing attention to the plight of the hostages on purely humanitarian grounds. A non- American with leftist credentials would probably be ideal, if we can find such a person and persuade him to undertake the effort.6 4 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “[illegible—Push?] for very firm sanctions, but minimal publicity.” The Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers held an emergency session in Islamabad January 27–29 to discuss the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. 5 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Expedite, to me.” 6 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Andy OK.” Reference is to Andrew Young. In a February 6 memorandum, Brzezinski informed Carter that Jamaican Prime Minister Michael Manley was sending a team to Algeria to pave the way for a Young visit to Iran should Carter so decide. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 31, Subject File, Iran 2/80)
