723.2515/1691: Telegram [Document 254] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) WASHINGTON, November 27, 1925—9 p.m. For General Pershing: Following telegram received from Collier at Valparaiso dated November 25, 4 p.m. “Am in receipt of a letter signed by citizens of Valparaiso to which I have not replied but whose substance I communicate because expressive of universal opinion here: The employment of Americans by Peruvians in Tacna is intentionally calculated to produce friction between their country and Chile. America is thus made a party to the conflict instead of a judge. This causes the Chilean masses to distrust America’s fairness and to take action expressive of their resentment. All is designated by Peru to create incidents and hatch complications yet up to date no blood has been shed except that of very few Chileans who have been assassinated. Chileans cannot be expected to maintain Christ-like resignation in the face of premeditated provocation. End of résumé. Chileans feel that American Government is responsible since mere hint by Pershing to the Peruvian Commission that employment by them of Americans was distasteful to him because of natural inference that it indicated sympathy by the American people with Peru, would undoubtedly result in Peru sending them away. I think presence of these Americans has done more than anything else to destroy Chilean belief in our impartiality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mathieu was called to the Department today and told that I greatly regret the policy which the Chilean Government is pursuing in its newspaper campaign of vilification against the American Plebiscitary Commission. It was pointed out to him that delicate negotiations cannot be conducted through the medium of the press and that therefore this Government and the American Commission have carefully avoided any action which might render the situation more difficult and which might make more difficult Chile’s compliance with the essential requirements for the holding of a plebiscite and that it has therefore caused great surprise to the Department that Edwards’ letters to Pershing should be published at practically the same time that they are delivered to him. They are quoted verbatim in the American press. He was told that if the Chilean Government or Chilean Commission argues its case in the press this Government must
