746  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Karpov: (Reads from a text) We agree that the framework of the 
existing negotiations on NST in Geneva is the right place for negotiations 
on defense and space and the second phase of START. Thus in the future 
talks the two sides will discuss strategic stability issues which will be 
of interest to them. Each side in these future talks will be free to raise 
those questions related to strategic stability that it feels necessary to raise, 
including the relationship between offensive and defensive arms.
Bartholomew: In principle we can work with that. I propose that 
work be done by Burt, Smith, and Nazarkin.
I want to turn to the question that starts on page 2 to the top of 
page 3. This section should make clear what we are trying to do on 
heavy ICBMs. Heavy ICBMs are the greatest threat to stability, and 
their first strike potential can be enhanced through further moderniza-
tion. We are agreed that the next phase of the talks should concentrate 
on measures to enhance stability, and elimination of heavy ICBMs is 
the single most important step we can take to do that. This statement 
should make clear that we will work the problem of heavy ICBMs.
Nazarkin has made some suggestions concerning this para on 
objectives for the future negotiations that take away everything we 
are trying to say in this para. This is the place to say specifically what 
objectives we will pursue. The US proposes to set the specific objec-
tives of banning mobile MIRVed ICBMs, and eventually eliminating all 
land-­based MIRVs. This is the way to enhance stability, which we agree 
should be the focus of these talks. Mobile MIRVs can be eliminated first, 
because they are now deployed in very limited numbers. Fixed MIRVs 
will take more time, we recognize that, and that is why we characterize 
this as a longer-­term objective. Elimination of fixed MIRVs will solve 
the heavy ICBM problem as well, and we should say that.
Soviet leaders have responded to our proposals for eliminating 
mobile and fixed land-­based MIRVs by saying that is something that 
can be considered but not in the current START framework. Here we are 
talking about future negotiations, and this is the place to say that one of 
the objectives of future negotiations is to eliminate land-­based MIRVs.
Karpov: I share your view that this statement on future nego-
tiations must express a view on the objectives of those negotiations, 
but these must be objectives that we both share. When you talk about 
reducing the concentration of warheads, we agree and this can be 
recorded. Elimination of mobile MIRVs and heavies is not in the realm 
of the agreed. You will recall there was an exchange between our two 
Presidents. When the issue of mobile MIRVs was raised, we said we 
agreed that could be addressed and discussed. This is a concept we 
are ready to incorporate in the joint statement on future negotiations. 
Therefore, we are ready to mention both mobile MIRVed ICBMs and 
heavy ICBMs as issues to be discussed, but cannot say they will be 
eliminated. That is a subject for the negotiations.
