707.1161/25: Telegram
[Document 484]
The Secretary of State to the Chargé in China (Mayer)
WASHINGTON, April 30, 1925—5 p.m.
89. Your 172, April 25, 11 a.m. The following telegram, August 28, 1924, to the
Legation at Helsingfors is quoted for your guidance with regard to your relations with
Karakhan:
“There should be no difficulty in informal and courteous relations, as
between two gentlemen, with respect to the representative at the capital to
which you are accredited, of a régime not recognized by this Government. I
had no difficulty when I attended the celebration of the Centenary of
Brazilian Independence at Rio de Janeiro in 1922 in meeting and having
cordial relations with the representative of Mexico, although this
Government had not recognized the Mexican Government. Of course such
personal and private relations largely depend on the character and bearing of
others, but ordinary courtesies of a personal nature need never embarrass this
Government in maintaining its attitude of non-recognition. Hughes”
See also Department’s circular telegram August 27, 1 p.m.65
The fact that we have not recognized the Moscow regime should cause you no
embarrassment in your social relations with the members of the diplomatic corps in
Peking. While you should avoid entering into any relations with Karakhan of an official
character, this should not be interpreted as precluding those purely social and unofficial
relationships which tend to arise out of association in the diplomatic corps and the
special position of Karakhan in that body. You should receive Karakhan informally if
he should call on you, and in return for his call or for his card should send your official
card, writing on it “The Dean of the Diplomatic Body” in order to avoid any possibility
of its being made to appear that you are entering into relations with him officially in his
capacity as representing the Soviet Regime. In the course of any subsequent social
relations with him you should make use of your personal card.
Repeat to Tokyo as #53 for information.
KELLOGG
