670  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
It was suggested that this period might be followed by another 
when both the U.S. and Russia would be in a position in which neither 
country could derive a winning advantage because each country will 
possess enough multimegaton weapons and adequate means of deliv­
ery, either by conventional or more sophisticated methods, through the 
defenses then existing.
While we do not suggest that either of these periods exactly fits our 
present situation, we do emphasize that the impending advent of sub­
stantial ballistic missiles capability raises again with greater urgency 
the question.
In concluding this introduction, may I also note that the views on 
hardening and on dealing with the problem of instability and uncer­
tainty reflected in this analysis have been consistently held by your 
Science Advisory Committee and emphasized in all of its reports 
beginning with the Technological Capabilities Panel in 1955. We would 
stress again the great importance of achieving a secure—­and sure—­
retaliatory capability.
145.	 Presentation by McMillan to Eisenhower1
Washington, March 4, 1959
An Analysis of Technical Factors in the Strategic Posture of the 
United States—1956–64
What I have to present is an analysis—­illustrated with charts—­
relating to our strategic posture over the next few years.
The particular material we will see today has developed out of a 
study by the Panel of the Science Advisory Committee concerned with 
anti-­ballistic missiles, a study of the technical possibilities for defend­
ing our striking force. I think you will see, however, that what we 
have to say falls into the pattern of earlier conclusions of the Science 
Advisory Committee about the influence of continuing technological 
change upon our strategic position, and about the steps we must take 
to keep technically abreast of this change.
In looking at ways of defending the striking force, the anti-­missile 
Panel was forced to consider two related, but nevertheless distinct, 
1 Source: “An Analysis of Technical Factors in the Strategic Posture of the United 
States—1955–64.” Top Secret. 18 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, 
Additional Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technology.
