1955  117
Believe present tactic can be continued for little while longer par­
ticularly at Thursday’s meeting when Wang will have had opportunity 
receive Peiping reaction our today’s proposal. Now believe we should 
if possible avoid any prolonged recess which would require public 
explanation and inevitably return problem to public propaganda forum 
while Americans remained in prison. Therefore believe that I should 
strive as necessary keep discussion going while continuing maintain 
my present position.
In order accomplish these purposes and in light today’s dis­
cussion, request authorization propose at next meeting amendment 
first sentence numbered paragraph 1 draft “agreed announcement” 
(Mytel 463) by insertion phrase “as a result of official action taken in 
accordance with its governmental processes” following words “and 
declares that”. Same amendment to be made in paragraph one PRC 
section.
Would appreciate any other suggestions Department may have in 
this regard.
I do not anticipate Wang is going to attempt precipitate any “break” 
in discussions but rather that he will face me with statement they have 
gone as far as they can go and there is nothing further to talk about 
under item one.
At that point I perceive no alternative under our present tactic 
except to propose a recess as suggested in first paragraph Deptel 496. 
However I believe that to publicly explain the recess I should first pro­
pose to Wang we make a simple joint statement somewhat to the effect 
that two of us have decided that a recess would be helpful in resolving 
the remaining problems standing in the way of final agreement. I feel 
we should if possible avoid unilateral public statement along lines sug­
gested Deptel 496 as seems to me this would constitute a public chal­
lenge and return problem to propaganda forum.
Dept will observe Wang pressed me hard today on question raised 
last para Mytel 458 and my efforts avoid direct reply. Would appreciate 
Dept’s suggestions on what further I might usefully say if as antici­
pated he continues press me on this.
Gowen
