National Security Policy 455 32. But considering the magnitude of the problems which the regime faces, and the risks of failure in the bold programs which Khrushchev has undertaken, we believe that issues of such gravity could arise. For example, the dislocations created by his industrial reorganization pro­ gram, coming on top of an overambitious combination of programs—­ defense, heavy industry, agriculture, and housing—­might so aggravate existing problems as to produce a severe crisis. So might foreign policy moves which appeared to raise the risk of general war to a level con­ sidered foolhardy by spirits less bold and confident than Khrushchev. In such grave instances his colleagues and perhaps even his defeated opponents might muster a formidable challenge. 33. We do not regard Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin’s use of terror against political opponents as a guarantee that, under such cir­ cumstances, or perhaps even in anticipation of them, he would not seek to reinstitute police terror to achieve absolute rule. Instead, we think it probable that, if other means were exhausted, he would make such an attempt. But important elements among the elite groups would be alert to, and would probably oppose, such a development, particularly if a recourse to terror were involved. 34. Whatever developments occur within the Soviet leadership over the next five years, they are not likely to result in widespread civil violence or to involve broad sections of the population in active politics. Instead, we believe that any changes which take place will be confined within a relatively small group which will continue to monop­ olize political power, although it may exercise that power with a some­ what greater regard for public morale. Changes in Internal Policy 35. At present, despite the many problems created by the changes in internal policy, the regime’s position vis-­a-­vis the population remains basically stable. A number of elements of stability have long been evident: the regime’s monopoly of physical force and the means of communication, the vested interests which tie important groups to the existing system, the unifying effect exerted by the Party, a wide-­spread apathy towards politics and a general disbelief in the possibility of rad­ ical change. In addition, Western contacts with the Soviet population have revealed a wide-­spread sense of national pride over the USSR’s material accomplishments and its role as leader of a world bloc. 36. Nevertheless, Stalin’s successors recognized that his policies toward the Soviet population had produced so much apathy, antago­ nism, and fear that they were depriving the regime of popular support and inhibiting economic growth. Although differing among themselves on many issues, they generally agreed on the need, while maintaining as much control as possible, to find ways to narrow the rift between the
