1062 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement addition, it would be difficult to indicate our effort involving short-­ range missiles on a chart. Dr. York believed a chart showing our work on short-­range missiles would be difficult to prepare because these mis­ siles were initiated and then discarded with such great rapidity. About fifty short-­range missiles had been developed. The President said in that case he would be satisfied with the chart on long-­range missiles. Mr. Allen asked whether POLARIS would be the next missile to become operational. Dr. York answered in the affirmative, adding that POLARIS would become operational at the end of this calendar year. Mr. Gray felt that the information in Dr. York’s presentation should be made available to the public. He wondered why the chart was clas­ sified SECRET. Secretary Gates believed there was no reason for clas­ sification of this information. He added that information of this kind had appeared in speeches and testimony already. Dr. York said that an unclassified history of our missile development had been published in the Congressional Record. Mr. Stans felt that if the chart were to be made public, the dollars spent each year on the missile programs shown on the chart should be indicated. Mr. Allen asked what function TITAN and MINUTEMAN would be expected to perform. Dr. York said TITAN would display the same gross performance as ATLAS but would be a better missile because it was different in significant details, e.g. reaction time. MINUTEMAN would require less logistic support, was adaptable to firing from silos, and could be rail-­mobile. The President said he had recently been visited by a Dr. Long, whose appointment had been arranged by Dr. Kistiakowsky. Dr. Long had indicated that scientists think highly of the MINUTEMAN and believed we should be giving it a high priority. Mr. Allen asked which missile was used for the man-­in-­space pro­ gram. Dr. York replied that ATLAS was used for this program primarily because it was a year ahead of other missiles in its development and was more reliable. Secretary Gates said TITAN had the potential of car­ rying a larger warhead. Dr. York agreed that TITAN had advantages as far as payload was concerned but said that ATLAS was more reliable. Mr. Gates said he felt we had made a correct military decision when we decided to develop a smaller engine for ATLAS rather than a SATURN-­type engine. This correct military decision, however, resulted in our not having large rockets for space programs. Dr. York said the ATLAS became available for space work two years later than the com­ parable Russian rocket. This caused a big difference in U.S. and Russian space programs. The President said he thought some space work had been done with a combination of ATLAS and THOR. Dr. York said this was not the case; THOR and JUPITER with added stages had been used in space work.
