32 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —Review the unimplemented NSDM 346,5 “Security of U.S. Telecommunications” within the scope and framework of this PRM. —Develop an integrated National Telecommunications Protection Policy and propose the necessary governmental framework for its implementation. The foregoing should include, but not be limited to considerations of existing law, diplomatic factors, economics, technology social impact, executive-­legislative relations, and government-­industry relations. 2. The Secretary of State and Director of Central Intelligence should consider the diplomatic and Soviet reaction factors including: —Soviet reactions to the various options of the OTP Plan or if the U.S. were to adopt a policy of retaliation in kind through the use of such techniques as “jamming.” —U.S. denial of further Soviet requests to purchase additional U.S. property e.g., the Valeria Estate, the Mountain View apartment complex, etc. 3. The Secretary of Defense shall review the technology under research and development, in testing or procurement. Protected Radio Modulation for terrestrial microwave, methods for satellite link protection and critical mobile radio-­telephone systems shall be included as well as: —A complete review of the entire DUCKPINS project. —Existing or potential legal, management or budgetary problems with the foregoing. —Considerations of Soviet denial of U.S. intelligence “windows” in retaliation to U.S. countermeasures. 4. The Attorney General shall review Executive and Legislative authority, existing laws and National Security Council Directives including: —The Justice Department’s anti-­trust suit against AT&T. —The government’s exclusionary dealings with AT&T in planning and technology development. —Legal ramifications of continuing DUCKPINS and the MCI ­service offerings. Recommendations for implementing a countermeasure program must include considerations for an implementing or program manager. The derived assessments, conclusions, recommendations and policy should include alternative options for dealing with the issues by the SCC, which shall evaluate these and make recommendations to me. Until such time the findings and recommendations are reviewed and 5 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXV, National Security Policy, 1973–1976, Document 182.
