38
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
of an overall consistent strategy. She would like to see some sort of ra-
tional criteria developed which could be applied across the board so
you were not faced with situations where we cut aid to Argentina with
one hand, and did nothing to Iran with the other. Mrs. Benson said she
realized that development of a broad human rights policy would be
difficult, but that the Secretary was serious and would make certain the
word reached both our Ambassadors and our people at all levels at
State. We were no longer faced with a situation where the Secretary of
State was unresponsive on human rights matters.
Turning to specific actions on the security assistance program,
Rep. Fraser asked what would be happening in specific areas, such as
Argentina. Mrs. Benson replied that the study was still going on but
that State had recommended cuts in certain countries such as Uruguay,
Argentina, Ethiopia, and of course Chile. We had not cut Indonesia and
Thailand since EA had argued persuasively against this and since grant
aid was scheduled to be cut out of both these programs in 1979.
Rep. Fraser at this point indicated some unhappiness with the slow
speed of the Indonesian prisoner release program4 and stated firmly
that he would object if the Thai program included increases in either
grant or FMS. He said he felt that one of the motivations behind the
Thai military takeover from the democratic government was the mili-
tary’s feeling that this way they would get more aid. They certainly
should not be rewarded. Fraser said he knew the Korean situation was
very complicated and he was glad to hear that it was under review, as a
thorough study of all aspects of the situation was needed.
Bob Boettcher, following on from Rep. Fraser’s agreement that mil-
itary assistance cuts were not a very effective human rights weapon,
said that there was a whole range of alternatives between “quiet diplo-
macy” and aid cuts which can be more profitably used to encourage
human rights. Secretary Kissinger, however, had always insisted there
were only two alternatives: “quiet diplomacy” or cuts. Rep. Fraser
added that quiet diplomacy had proved ineffective (if it had ever been
used), and no cuts had ever been made except at the Congress’
insistence.
As an amplification of Rep. Fraser’s zero-based-budgetting ap-
proach, Boettcher suggested the Administration consider putting for-
4 In the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s February 7 evening report to Brzezinski,
Tuchman noted that the Carter administration’s emphasis on human rights had appar-
ently prompted Suharto to comment that “in view of the emphasis on human rights in
Carter’s inaugural and other statements, that the GOI’s program to resolve its political
detainee problem must be accelerated.” Tuchman concluded, “Thus, even a non-
program human rights program can have an impact.” (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening
Reports: 2–4/77)
