Chapter 6, June–December 1990  807
an approach seems particularly hard to justify in the new political 
and budgetary climate which now exists, and in view of the building 
criticism of the treaty that it is too permissive and sets levels which 
are too high.
— If we must preserve a place for the boost-­glide vehicle, and can't 
decide whether it is a heavy bomber, ASBM, ICCM or “new kind,” per-
haps as a compromise we could at least tighten the rules on future sys-
tems somewhat. For example, the sides could agree that ICCMs and 
air-­launched ballistic missiles over 5500 km range would be counted 
like ICBMs, with perhaps a regime similar to that for long-­range 
ALCMs used for ASBMs between 600 km and 5500 km.
— Another related and surprising loophole has just appeared in 
Article IV, Paragraph 12, where JCS has refused to let us ban cruise mis-
siles over 600 km range on waterborne vehicles other than submarines 
or surface ships. This has become entangled in theological arguments 
over SLCMs and “nuclear-­armed” (see below).
Nuclear vs Conventional
9. The appearance of “nuclear-­armed” in the U.S. position on new 
kinds has caused to burst into flame an issue which has been smolder-
ing unnoticed by most people for years. It is related to the question of 
what are “strategic offensive arms” noted above. Generations of U.S. 
negotiators and Washington spokesmen as well, have been asserting to 
themselves, visiting congressmen and U.S. allies that, “this treaty does 
not deal with/does not constrain conventionally-­armed systems.” This 
assertion is always made as if it is (a) self-­evident and (b) agreed with 
the Soviets. Neither is true. The argument is always laid to rest by a 
simple question—“Do you believe an SS–18 with a conventional front-­
end should be excluded from treaty constraints?” A week later, how-
ever, someone will again make the same categorical assertion.
10. The treaty contains numerous constraints on conventionally-­
armed systems. In many cases, of course, these are hypothetical sys-
tems which will never be built, but the constraint is real nevertheless. 
In some cases, we have been able to focus provisions on nuclear-­armed 
versions of systems. ALCMs and SLCMs are the prime examples, but 
even here, a long-­range conventionally-­armed ALCM indistinguish-
able from its nuclear-­armed cousin will be constrained. In other cases 
(ICBMs, SLBMs, creepy crawlers on the ocean floor) constraints are for-
mulated in terms of delivery vehicles and their launchers, and the form 
of armament is irrelevant. There is even one example of a system exclu-
sively conventional which is singled out for special constraints—­heavy 
bombers converted to carry only conventional armaments.
11. Please note that I do not mean to imply that Rick and Lint do 
not understand all this—­they have a far clearer understanding of this
