1957 1469 regret and dissatisfaction. He wants to make clear that they will take steps to make known their position in this matter. 12. Wang continued. I had just informed him of my transfer to a new post. He recalled that the present series of talks between us was started by the two of us and at one time was carried on by the Consuls General of our two governments in Geneva. Then, on the initiative of the U.S., the consular contacts were elevated to the present level of Ambassadors. He regretted that he had not been able to accomplish the tasks and hopes entrusted to us by our peoples and governments. One thing on which he wanted to be clear following my transfer whether my government is going to change nature talks at Ambassadorial rank. 13. I replied. There is no intent to change the nature of these talks. As I told him it is the desire of my government that they continue. However, compelling reasons do not make it possible for us to desig­ nate a person of Ambassadorial rank at this time for this purpose. As he knows, Mr. Martin is a senior and experienced officer of our foreign service who as he knew, except for a brief interval, has been connected with these talks from the beginning. He has the full confidence of the U.S. Government and it is the opinion of the U.S. Government that he is best able to carry them on at this time. 14. Wang replied. The purpose of his asking the question was to clarify the nature of the talks and not an expression of opinion on any individual person. With regard to my information he was not in a posi­ tion to make a reply but he had to report back to his government. He will consult with his government and when any reply was received he would let me know. 15. I suggested that Mr. Lai or Mr. Chiu could address a letter to Mr. Martin at the Consulate General here. I added that Mr. Martin is authorized to agree to a time and place for the next meeting. 16. Wang replied that in any event he will communicate to me the opinion of his government about arrangements for the next step. 17. I commented that it might delay this as I might be leaving shortly. 18. Wang replied that they could communicate with me via Mr. Martin. 19. I stated that at the close of the meeting I was no longer the U.S. representative but that it was all right to address the letter to me if he [illegible in the original] as long as Mr. Martin gets it. 20. Wang replied that the important thing is that arrangements for these talks to continue is a matter to be decided by two not one party. 21. I stated that I was not arguing that point but that Martin is our channel. 22. Wang replied. He wanted to make it clear that he was not express­ ing an opinion on a person but that these talks at Ambassadorial rank
