456  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
regime and the population. In contrast to Stalin’s harshness and mis­
trust, they apparently started from the premise that the Soviet citizen is 
a basically loyal supporter whose energy and initiative, if encouraged 
and rewarded rather than repressed, can serve the regime’s purposes. 
Most of the post-Stalin internal changes stem from this premise, of which 
Khrushchev is the prime exponent. He is, however, no less an exponent 
of the equally important principle that the Party retains unlimited rights 
to determine the pace and scope of relaxation, to reverse it at will, and to 
intervene at all levels of society.
37. In consequence, changes have been extensive but cautious. 
In the political sphere, they include the leashing of police terror, the 
destruction of the Stalin cult (but also the endorsement of much of 
Stalin’s work), and an effort to humanize the style of leadership, both 
central and local, so as to narrow the rift dividing those in authority 
from the masses. Within the Party itself, a number of special channels 
by-­passing the formal organization have been eliminated, the sem­
blance of democratic procedures has been revived, and “loyal” criticism 
from rank-­and-­file members is encouraged in an effort to restore the 
Party’s vigor and make it an effective political instrument. In economic 
matters, incentives are more widely used and a series of administrative 
reforms, culminating in a radical reorganization of industrial admin­
istration, has sought to make better use of specialist knowledge, local 
talent, and individual initiative. In the intellectual sphere, the regime 
has relaxed censorship to allow greater artistic freedom and has per­
mitted, even encouraged in some cases, wider contacts with the West 
on a variety of levels.
Impact on Popular Attitudes
38. These innovations have produced mixed results. The lessening 
of terror has won the regime a favorable reaction from all sections of the 
population. Economic responses are less clear. Probably a part of the 
gain in agricultural output is attributable to improved morale among 
the peasants, but the campaigns for increases in worker productivity 
and for the rapid introduction of new technology, both dependent upon 
broad initiative, have to date fallen short of the regime’s expectations.
39. Results in the intellectual field have also been largely dis­
agreeable to the Soviet leaders. Wider contacts with foreign countries 
have opened the USSR to disturbing influences, not only from the Free 
World but also from Eastern Europe and Communist China. Youthful 
nonconformity is an increasing problem, especially on the occasions 
when it extends beyond rebelliousness to disagreement with the offi­
cial line on matters of principle. A group of writers has arisen who, 
with bold criticism of the harsh and unpleasant aspects of Soviet life,
