Human Rights 309 rity assistance to a less developed country because of the human rights practices or policies of such country. (D) The Secretary of State shall transmit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate, by January 31 of each year, a full and complete report regarding—(1) the status of internationally recognized human rights, within the meaning of Subsection (A), in countries receiving assistance under this part; and (2) the steps the administrator has taken to alter United States programs under this part in any country because of human rights considerations. (E) Of the funds made available under this chapter for the fiscal year 1978, not less than $750,000 may be used only for studies to identify, and for openly carrying out, programs and activities which will encourage or promote increased adherence to civil and political rights, as set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in countries eligible for assistance under this chapter. None of these funds may be used, directly or indirectly, to influence the outcome of any election in any country. End quote 3. This legislation requires the Secretary of State to transmit to Congress human rights reports on all countries receiving development assistance by January 31, 1978. In accordance with the interpretation of the provision by the AID General Counsel, the Department plans to submit reports on countries receiving assistance in FY78 and proposed to receive it in FY79. This new requirement for country human rights reports on recipients of bilateral development assistance is in addition to the annual reports the Secretary of State is required to provide to Congress on countries receiving security assistance from the United States pursuant to Section 502B of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. (See 76 State 231122).3 The Department plans to submit the human rights reports on both development and security assistance countries by January 31, 1978. 4. Reports for both categories of countries will be identical in format and substance. They will be unclassified versions of part A of the human rights country evaluation plans (CEP) which most posts have either drafted or received from the Department for review and clearance. 3 In telegram 231122 to all diplomatic and consular posts, September 17, 1976, the Department provided guidance regarding the International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control Act of 1976 (see footnote 5, Document 1), which Ford signed into law on June 30, 1976. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D760353–0445)
