382  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
States but were prevented from doing so by US Government. However, 
up to present 47 of these had not left United States and this showed 
my side had failed implement agreement. I had said 402 Chinese left 
between July 11 and October 3, but I had failed provide names so they 
had no means check up on these persons. His side was going to request 
GOI as third power entrusted under agreed announcement to make 
investigation this regard.
12. Wang said in spite his dissatisfaction on return Chinese he had 
not obstructed progress of talks for that reason. On other hand, I contin­
ued entangle talks with question implementation and he bound to ask 
if my side was unwilling discuss second item agenda.
13. Regarding his two subjects Wang said my side had not expressed 
specific opinion on question of embargo. American policy of embargo 
had been major factor in leading to tension between China and US and 
in preventing economic development and trade of many countries. He 
could not understand why I not able express opinion on this question.
14. Wang asked how I could consider his subject of preparations 
for higher level negotiations was anything but practical matter. It was 
certainly practical matter which should be settled. Arranging practi­
cal and physical channel for settlement and easing of tension between 
China and US in Taiwan area was certainly practical matter. I had said 
only after we had seen what progress we could make here could we 
then talk about what to do next. Did I mean to impose a prerequisite on 
holding of higher level negotiations?
15. He said that on question missing US military personnel he had 
repeatedly pointed out his side had accounted for all Americans in 
China including military personnel my side. No justification whatso­
ever and fabrication without basis for me to demand his side account 
for US military personnel missing in Korea. I must be aware reply this 
question already given in appropriate organ in Korea.
16. Wang said he bound point out after last meeting I had violated 
agreement on privacy these talks by discussing with newspaper men 
what our side had introduced as first item of agenda, namely miss­
ing personnel. This action would compel him consider making public 
statement on this question.
17. Wang then commented extemporaneously on my statement 
regarding renunciation of force. He said he had given specific opinion 
on this question when he put forward his two subjects for discussion 
and again in subsequent meetings. Since foundation his government 
its foreign policy had always been peaceful policy. It was well known 
his government together with other governments had initiated Five 
Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. They were resolutely opposed set­
tlement disputes by force and always upheld principle peaceful nego­
tiation for settlement international disputes. In same manner they
