704 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV which will lead to problems. He suggested that the appropriate course of action would be to go with the best estimate, but recognize the degree of uncertainty we have about it. Jim McIntyre proposed that OMB and DOD take another look at the systems costs. He noted that he was not interested in signing up for another program with significantly higher costs than originally estimated, such as we had done with the program of action associated with the Panama Canal Treaty. (U) The President then said, setting aside the question of its exact cost, this basing mode looks better than those proposed previously. He suggested that the discussion turn to the question of basing mode compatibility with SALT, particularly with respect to verifiability, and system expandability if SALT breaks down. (U) Dr. Brzezinski suggested that Stan Turner and George Seignious comment on the question of verification. Admiral Turner responded by summarizing the main points on verification that he had made in the background paper he had submitted for the meeting. In making these points, Admiral Turner argued that 1) given the appropriate verification provisions, limits on the numbers of M–X type missiles in the system would be adequately verifiable by the Soviets, or by us, if they were to build the same system, [3 lines not declassified] (S) The President said that we need to understand how much notice DOD would want for opening the shelter systems for verification. He said that he wanted to avoid being at odds with DOD in future negotiations with Brezhnev. (U) Harold Brown said that the verification plugs could be pulled in a day, and that this length of time should be acceptable, if the system clearly has no cross country capability. He noted that there was the question of how many shelters should be opened simultaneously. He thought that the appropriate thing to do would be to open all the shelters in any given cluster. (U) The President then asked if the sort of thing DOD had in mind was perhaps a capability to open 10% of all the M–X shelters with 24 hours notice, and keep them open for say 48 hours? Harold Brown responded that opening a total of 5% at any given time was more what he had in mind. General Jones said that he thought it was important that we be able to simultaneously open all the shelters in any valley. The President asked if he could count on a capability to open 10% within 24 hours for a period of 48 hours. Both General Jones and Harold Brown agreed to give the system this capability. (C) Admiral Turner said that the length of time we would want the shelters open in a similar Soviet basing scheme would depend on cloud cover conditions. [2 lines not declassified] The President said that whatever we would demand from the Soviets in the way of verification provisions in this kind of system we must make sure to provide to
