Minister made it quite clear to his Government that the United States would
make no suggestion whatever to the parties litigant, but would offer no
objection to course that Argentine Ambassador had suggested.
Uruguayan Minister practically stated to his Government that Argentine
plan was preferable to his own. Mr. Grant-Smith evidently misunderstood
the Uruguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs and has reported to Department
that the Uruguayan Minister for Foreign Affairs had been informed by
Uruguayan Minister here that I had been instructed to sound out Chilean
Foreign Office in the matter. The Uruguayan Minister understands exactly
the contrary, however, and has reported in that wise to his Government. Not
in any way have I ever mentioned to Chilean Government possibility of
anything but plebiscitary solution since my report to Department on
October 28, 1925, following Department’s instruction of October 26,
1925.69
I think that our Embassy in Argentina and our Legation in Montevideo
should now be instructed; if Department desires, Embassy here could repeat
to them my No. 144 of December 17, and Department’s No. 85 of
December 22, or such portions as Department would authorize, or they
could be mailed Saturday evening, arriving Buenos Aires and Montevideo
next Tuesday.
When the Uruguayan Minister read me his despatch yesterday, I learned
incidentally, that he reported in it that a short time before my first talk with
him, President Figueroa had informally asked him and Argentine
Ambassador if their Governments would not intervene in the matter. I have
not yet ascertained whether he suggested any specific plan, but I believe
that that suggestion and suggestion of Argentine Ambassador to me are
being considered together by Uruguayan Foreign Office. [End paraphrase.]
El Diario Ilustrado has published editorial commenting on United Press
despatch reported in my number 7 of January 5th70 and strongly favors
diplomatic settlement but adds that neither Chile nor Peru will dare to take
initiative and that the United States, as the impartial nation, ought to take it.
Today same paper commenting on recent incident in Tacna71 as indicative
of impossibility of repressing popular feeling and guaranteeing orderly
