United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy  123
development. We would hope to include in the new social develop-
ment program for Latin America the Federation of the West Indies, 
which has achieved self-­government and which will soon become fully 
independent—­probably next year.
In a short time we shall be meeting with representatives of the gov-
ernments of Latin America at Bogotá in a hemispheric economic con-
ference. The discussions at Bogotá will look toward the development 
of plans for a positive and productive attack on the problems of social 
development. As I have suggested, effective plans will require strong 
actions by the Latin American governments, particularly in the field of 
domestic reform. To encourage them to take such actions, and to make 
plain that assistance to complement their actions can be anticipated, we 
need a clear and unmistakable expression of Congressional readiness 
to provide appropriations. It is for this reason that we are requesting an 
authorization at this time.
Such an authorization would provide a framework within which 
we and our friends from Latin America can develop new and more effec-
tive plans and programs for attacking the problems of social progress.
We envisage that the Conference should agree upon the basic objec-
tives of a program for social development which gives primary atten-
tion to needs in three broad areas: (1) Improvement of the conditions 
of rural living and land use; (2) Improvement of housing and commu-
nity facilities; and (3) Improvement of educational systems and training 
facilities. The program we envisage begins with the development of 
specific policies, plans and programs by each of the governments con-
cerned. We foresee that the Latin American governments will obtain 
substantial help and advice from the Inter-American Development 
Bank, and the Inter-American Economic and Social Council in pre-
paring specific projects and programs to expedite social progress, in 
examining the adequacy of existing tax systems, institutions, laws and 
policies to promote such progress and in developing more effective 
systems of mobilizing human and material resources to further these 
objectives.
We foresee that the funds which the United States would provide 
to assist in carrying out these plans and programs would be utilized for 
the most part for loans repayable in local currencies and administered 
through the Inter-American Development Bank. Nevertheless, we do 
not preclude the use of other mechanisms or means including grants 
where appropriate.
It is our idea that the total effort should be periodically reviewed 
and discussed within the Inter-American Economic and Social Council 
where the progress in each country could be assessed and plans for 
further progress could be discussed.
