52
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
while, Ala’s position is somewhat tenuous, as he has not yet received
the customary vote of confidence and there is some question as to the
legality of the declaration of martial law in the absence of a properly in-
stalled Government. There has, however, been no suggestion that mar-
tial law will not be continued.
Although the situation is potentially dangerous, disorders have
not yet developed in the AIOC strike areas and the situation elsewhere
is outwardly calm. (In Isfahan there were minor disturbances involved
in a small-scale strike of textile workers.) Iranian security forces are
considered presently able to maintain order. In view of the currently
critical internal financial position of the Government, however, Army
personnel (as well as civil servants) have in some cases gone for many
months without payment and the possible consequences of a continua-
tion of this situation cannot be overlooked.
In this tense atmosphere, and in light of the Iranian clamor for na-
tionalization, it is felt that any precipitous action on the part of the
British would bring about a very dangerous situation. We therefore re-
quested the British to take no important steps without consulting us,
and the Foreign Office agreed. In light, however, of the AIOC decision
to reduce allowances at this critical juncture and the subsequent report
that elements of the British fleet had been sent to Abadan, the matter
was again pursued with the Foreign Office in London. We were told
that the Foreign Office did not know in advance of the reduction in al-
lowances, which was pursuant to an administrative arrangement made
much earlier between the oil company and its workers, and that the
press reports concerning naval movements were grossly exaggerated.
Elements of the fleet are in fact in the Persian Gulf area “on normal
duty” but have not been dispatched to Abadan. Two sloops, regularly
assigned to the Persian Gulf, are understood to be at Bahrein. A cruiser
is at Aden. In this connection, the British have again assured us that
they will inform us before taking any important steps, but they reserve
the right in an emergency to take appropriate measures to protect the
lives and property of British citizens.3
Of great concern to us is the position of the British Government.
There have been indications that it is considering a “strong” course in
Iran which, in our view, would be extremely dangerous. Mr. McGhee is
3 Telegram 5006 from London, March 20, reported that the Foreign Office assured
Ambassador Gifford of its willingness to consult with the U.S. “prior substantive action.”
In telegram 5142 from Tehran, March 30, however, Gifford reported that “ultimate ac-
tion, if Brit lives endangered by threatened seizure oil properties wld probably be to
move Brit troops to Basra and take other mil precautions. FonOff recognizes risk in any
display of force and wld probably sanction it only as last resort. It is significant however
that FonOff does not discount possibility force may be necessary.” Both telegrams are in
National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 888.2553/3–2051.
