Afghanistan 855 pledge to Kruglov and expressed his “hope that the blockade issue would improve following a talk with his Afghan counterparts. (Ibid.) In telegram 2670 from Kabul, September 23, the Embassy reported that the Afghan Government’s barricades surrounding the Embassy were “magically” removed less than an hour after Kruglov’s departure on September 21, thus concluding the episode.(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800456–0260) No telegrams reporting on Kruglov’s subsequent treatment by Soviet authorities were found. 319. Telegram From Secretary of State Muskie’s Delegation to the Department of State1 New York, September 26, 1980, 0440Z Secto 8020. Subject: (C) Muskie-Gromyko Bilateral. 1. C—Entire text. 2. The Secretary’s bilateral meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko in New York took place the morning of September 25 at the Soviet Mission.2 Late that afternoon Ambassador Shulman provided a 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 84, USSR: 9/80. Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Priority to Moscow, Canberra, Tokyo, Wellington, USNATO, USUN, Brussels, Copenhagen, Bonn, London, Paris, Oslo, Reykjavik, Athens, Ankara, Ottawa, Rome, Luxembourg, The Hague, and Lisbon. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room. Muskie was in New York to attend the UN General Assembly meeting. 2 A summary memorandum of conversation of the meeting is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 302. In preparation for his discussion with Gromyko, Muskie exchanged memoranda with Carter concerning a range of issues affecting U.S.-Soviet relations. He wrote Carter, September 13, regarding Afghanistan: “I intend to emphasize the continuing damage the invasion is doing to the international environment and to the prospects for relieving bilateral tensions. I will stress that Moscow should be under no false illusions that we will be prepared to return to business as usual as long as the occupation continues. I will review with Gromyko our exchange of letters on Afghanistan, making clear that, for us, the central element in any satisfactory settlement must be a complete Soviet withdrawal. I will nonetheless reiterate our continued preparedness to explore the possibilities for a peaceful settlement which takes into account the legitimate concerns of all parties.” In the left margin of that memorandum, Carter wrote: “Neutral—No dealing c¯ Babrak = transitional arrangements, ok.” (Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensitive File, 1979–1983, Lot 96D262, Box 3, ES Super Sensitive 1980 (4)) In a memorandum to Muskie, September 22, Brzezinski wrote: “The President would like you to register that our objective is a neutral Afghanistan; that to achieve that end we would be prepared to consider some ‘transitional arrangements,’ designed to ensure stability as Soviet forces withdraw; and that we cannot deal with the Babrak regime since it is a regime artificially maintained by a foreign power.” (Ibid.)
