414 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI questions regarding Soviet problems with equipping specific types of missiles. Early Exchange of Data 9. During Round XI, the U.S. proposed a prompt exchange and periodic update of data for the fully agreed categories in the MOU. Subsequent to the exchange, experts would conduct reciprocal familiarization visits to learn more about the forces, operational practices, and facilities that would be subject to inspection under the treaty. At the end of Round XI, the U.S. tabled a non-­paper listing MOU categories, both fully agreed and agreed in principle, as the basis for organizing the data exchange. 10. The initial Soviet response in Round XII to the U.S. proposal was somewhat negative. While the Soviet side agreed that a data exchange was a good idea, it proposed to exchange only limited aggregate data on overall numbers of strategic systems. During the course of the round, however, the Soviets asked numerous detailed questions about the timing of a data exchange, indicating informally that they preferred to exchange data in six increments with two week intervals to permit time to study exchanged data between sessions. In this way, it became apparent that the Soviets might be considering a broader data exchange than originally suggested. 11. On December 4, the Soviets proposed a six stage data exchange. The first stage would cover aggregate data for deployed strategic offensive arms, including ALCMs and SLCMs. The second stage would cover non-­deployed systems. The four subsequent stages, although less specifically outlined, would cover facilities, locations, and technical data for strategic offensive arms, including ALCMs and SLCMs. The U.S. side presented new points on its proposed familiarization visits. 12. Washington backstopping should review the Soviet proposal and prepare guidance for a U.S. response early in Round XIII, including consideration of how the U.S. wants to handle data exchanges for systems for which U.S. and Soviet positions differ. I think that the U.S. should be prepared next round to begin the exchange process ­if/when final agreement is reached on the scope and categories of the exchange. Washington should also decide whether data provided by guidance XII–335 will be updated. 5 Reference is to telegram 375962 from the Department of State to NST Geneva, November 23. (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D891021–0302)
