“Whereas, The labors of the American Institute of International
Law will be of great service to the International Commission of
Jurists in the fulfillment of the task assigned to it.
“Be it Resolved:
“By the Governing Board of the Pan American Union to submit
to the Executive Committee of the American Institute of
International Law the desirability of holding a session of the
Institute in 1924 in order that the results of the deliberations of
the Institute may be submitted to the International Commission of
Jurists at its meeting at Rio de Janeiro in 1925.” (Am. Journal Int.
Law, 1924, Vol. 18, p. 269).
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In instructions given to the American delegates to the Conference at Rio de
Janeiro,15 the Department stated that “Codification is a clear, systematic and
authoritative statement of existing law; it does not involve the framing of
new legislation. The Delegates of the United States to the Congress of
Jurists should not, therefore, participate in the drafting of new international
legislation embodying changes in the existing systems of law of the Nations
of the Western Hemisphere.” (File No. 710 C 2/211 b).
It would appear from the foregoing that the Commission of Jurists, and
especially the American delegates, were to limit their activities to the
codifying of International Law. Of the twelve projects on Public
International Law which the Commission has recommended for
consideration,16 three are hardly to be regarded as proper subjects for
incorporation in a code of International Law. The Department has in mind
project No. V, concerning the Exchange of Publications, Project No. VI,
regarding Exchange of Professors and Students, and Project No. X having
to do with Asylum.
There is attached a memorandum in which these twelve projects have been
briefly analyzed and discussed (Appendix No. 6),17 Generally speaking,
those Articles which have not been mentioned are to be regarded as
unobjectionable. None of the projects is free in its entirety from objection.
