554  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Brooks opened the meeting by noting that Ambassador Nazarkin 
had previously indicated the Soviet side wished to discuss four 
issues—R&D boosters, suspect site inspection (SSI), throw-­weight and 
the phasing of reductions. Brooks said the U.S. side would also like to 
ask some additional questions about the proposals the Soviet side had 
made that morning2 on mobiles verification and PPCM.
Masterkov responded that their view of the meeting was that it 
should continue the morning discussion on mobile verification, in 
particular the regime for road-­mobiles. Brooks said he had discussed 
the Soviet verification proposals with his colleagues and that they had 
some questions to pose.
Horn asked, in the context of the previous Soviet proposal for 
Restricted Areas (RA) larger than 5 square kilometers, how they would 
make that entire area subject to inspection. Masterkov expressed some 
befuddlement at the question since the Soviet side has now expressed 
its willingness to agree to RAs of 5 square kilometers. Brooks clarified 
Horn’s question pointing out that under the original Soviet proposal 
for 100 square kilometer RAs, Colonel Koltunov had said the entire RA 
would have been subject to inspection. Brooks said the U.S. side didn’t 
completely understand the old Soviet approach and that some clarifi-
cation would help the U.S. side form its own ideas on how best to solve 
the mobiles verification problem.
Koltunov offered that the U.S. side was correct in indicating that 
under the previous Soviet approach the entire RA would be inspect-
able. He noted that the U.S. side had argued that when an inspection 
team arrived at an RA they must be able to confirm the number of 
launchers in the RA and in their specified fixed structures. He indicated 
that if for some reason mobile launchers were not in their structures, 
these absent launchers could be demonstrated to the other side. Curtin 
asked whether the inspectors would go out into the RA to visit the 
launchers or whether the launchers would be brought to the inspectors. 
Koltunov replied that Curtin was correct, a side would be able to visu-
ally observe where launchers were located in the RA. Brooks noted that 
the Soviet proposal of that morning suggested that, even with a large 
Deployment Area (DA) of 160,000 sq. kilometers, the Soviet side had 
indicated that all launchers would return to their RA before an inspec-
tion was concluded. He stated that launchers in their shelters would be 
easy to count, but that other launchers might be counted in one of two 
ways—­returning launchers in the field to the RA prior to the conclusion 
of the inspection or by putting inspectors in a truck, or helicopter and 
taking them to the launchers. Brooks asked whether the Soviet side had 
considered the second approach.
2 No minutes were found.
