908 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Issue #-2—If for several years to come defending our vital interests in the widely separated NATO, Persian Gulf and Far East theaters simultaneously is beyond our capabilities, which should receive priority? and Issue #-3—How can we best fill the PG/IO power vacuum? (S) Harold Brown said that some within Defense believe that anything less than enough to meet both the NATO and Persian Gulf theater requirements simultaneously is inadequate. He does not agree with this view, and he cited World World II in which we gave priority first to one theater and then another. Now we must ask what is the ratio of our interests to the risks in each theater. In Brown’s view the ratio is higher in Southwest Asia; therefore, it should receive priority in programs. (S) General Jones acknowledged Brown’s point but said that when additional requirements are placed on the military services, they impact on our European and Asian capabilities whether we like it or not. (S) Muskie said look at it the other way. If all that is necessary to seize the Persian Gulf in order to break the West’s hold in Europe, why would the Soviets attack in all three theaters at once? (S) Brown replied that they would feint in Europe while attacking in the Persian Gulf. (S) Jones said they would not attack in Europe but would mobilize in order to hold us in position in Europe. In all our present plans the priority commitment of forces is to Europe. (S) Muskie expressed surprise and asked if we are not already shifting the priority to the Persian Gulf. (S) Dr. Brzezinski explained that this is our emerging policy, not yet a fully developed one. (S) Komer explained that the paper is not referring to operational ­priority but rather budget priority to the Persian Gulf and Southwest Asia. (C) Muskie said okay, but the issue is the same. Europe won’t even live up to the three percent commitment. (C) Brown then explained that we are moving from a three-­and-­a-­half division to a six-­and-­a-­half division plan for the Persian Gulf. The additional three divisions will have to be taken from forces which now are committed to reinforce NATO. The Europeans will have to take up the slack as we reallocate them. There was a lengthy digression on the significance of this reallocation, when it actually takes place, whether it will put pressure on the Europeans to fill the gap, or whether they will respond the same way they did to the three percent goal. (S) Muskie argued that the Europeans might be right, that there will not be a simultaneous attack in both theaters. We might take a lesson from the Europeans. Brown argued that the U.S. must lead, not follow
