792 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Issue 4. The Europeans believe that a $1 billion increase in industrialized country aid to the poorest LDCs, with similar action from OPEC, is critical to the success of CIEC. The point is tactical, although the poorest countries certainly need the money. Such a commitment could, by demonstrating support for the lowest income developing nations, enable CIEC to claim a major success. By supporting this European proposal, we would be better able to convince the Europeans to support our initiatives; our failure to support the Europeans might cause a split. Our agreeing on this proposal would entail seeking in our regular FY 79 bilateral aid programs, $300 million above the FY 77 request for the poorest countries. All agencies except OMB, which prefers to wait until this can be examined in the FY 79 budget context, support this recommendation. This proposal could well be a key swing factor in ensuring a “successful” CIEC; I recommend that you approve it.5 Tab A Memorandum From the Chairman of the Economic Policy Group (Blumenthal) to President Carter6 Washington, April 9, 1977 SUBJECT North/South Economic Strategy: Major Decisions Issues The EPG has reviewed the economic aspects of North-South policy. Tab 1 summarizes the EPG’s discussions/recommendations on various elements of our overall strategy. This memorandum covers four major issues highlighted by the EPG review which require your early decision in view of pressures arising from the Summit and CIEC. In each case, if you approve our recommendations we will seek Congressional support prior to consulting with our OECD partners. Decision Issue 1—Common Fund for Buffer Stocks Issue: The developing nations have placed a great political priority on the establishment of a common fund for financing commodity buffer stocks. We are now being pressed to further specify our policy and should be prepared to take a clear position by the Summit or CIEC Ministerial. Background: The less developed countries (LDCs) are backing a $6 billion common fund which they could control. They want to establish the 5 Carter indicated his approval of this recommendation. 6 Confidential. Sent through Brzezinski who did not initial the memorandum.
