168
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
borders in any simple sense do not make much sense. Instead, one
must try to think about what borders might be recognized and what
recognition would be worth, combined with other arrangements for se-
curity that might be made. In the age of nationalism, he noted, territory
is integrally tied to the sense of nationhood. Only Germany has ac-
cepted major territorial losses, and that was in context of total defeat
and a recognition of guilt that went with the defeat. This is not the case
with the Arabs, and we cannot expect them to abandon their claims to
substantial amounts of their territory. Instead of referring to defensible
borders, we should talk of mutually accepted borders, legitimacy, and
should try to develop arrangements to support the agreements which
will provide for fool-proof security. The President has been hinting at
this. Security arrangements for Israel might include a binding US com-
mitment. Israel is not totally independent and if Israel must be de-
pendent, it might be best to make the US tie to Israel a binding one. One
way would be through treaties.
A question was then raised concerning American arms supply,
and Dr. Brzezinski said that it was difficult to be specific. He argued
against the notion that the Defense Department was deliberately ob-
structive, citing the recent case of the Chariot tank where allegations of
obstruction had not been well founded.4 On the question of the co-
production of the F–16, he declined to answer, stating that this would
have to be dealt with in the broad framework that the President has
tried to set out whereby our policy aims at gaining the confidence of Is-
raelis and Arabs, while, at the same time, trying on a global basis for
arms reductions.
Mr. Fisher remarked that he hoped the United States would ask for
more than moderation in words from the Arabs and that we would also
look for moderation in terms of their action toward Israel. Dr. Brzezin-
ski responded by acknowledging that Arab culture seems to favor
some verbal exaggeration, and that on occasion Arab leaders seem to
tell different things to different audiences. We are trying, however, to
move the Arabs to take binding public positions from which they find it
difficult to retreat. Concerning Arab intentions, Dr. Brzezinski noted
that some Arabs may still hope that Israel can ultimately be destroyed
in a second phase to follow a peace agreement. We will therefore insist
on more than verbal assurances of their intentions, and will demand
that objective barriers be created to make the second phase, if that is
4 Reference is to a front-engineered, 56-ton tank known as the Merkava or Chariot
in English. (“Israel Reports a Tank With Armor That Can Withstand Any Arab Shell,” The
New York Times, May 16, 1977, p. 10) On May 13, The New York Times indicated that the
President “reportedly approved an Israeli request to import American engine parts” to
manufacture the tank. (“Carter Pledges ‘Special Treatment’ for Israel on Advanced
Weapons,” The New York Times, p. 3)
