January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1289
there is the second point, that the PLO would have to recognize Israel’s
right to exist before it could speak. The PLO counters that Israel should
recognize the rights of the Palestinian people. Jordan’s impression is
that the President’s suggestion is to see if there is a Palestinian body
which can come out with the Palestinian position. (By this idea) Jordan
would be in touch with the PLO and others to encourage them to make
a Palestinian contribution, at least at the initial stage. After yesterday’s
meeting, the Ambassador told them that this would need to be in the
context of Camp David—with Palestinians in the Jordanian or Egyp-
tian delegation. This would be very, very difficult to convince anyone
to do now. If this could be clarified, it would be very important. He is
very anxious that there be no misunderstanding. Should we go back to
talk?
The Prime Minister said that it should be free from a specific
mandate.
The President said that his thoughts could be difficult. First, we will
continue with the Camp David process as long as it can succeed—and
he can see that the Jordanians see it as inadequate. Second, he presumes
that Jordan is not willing to join the talks—formally or informally, now.
He would like it to be different, but will not try to change their minds.
Third, the provision in the Camp David Accords is that Palestinians
could be in the Jordanian and Egyptian delegations, plus others as mu-
tually agreed. This is covered in Camp David. To get past the problem,
he hopes there could be a responsible group of residents from the West
Bank and Gaza who would meet with us, Egypt, or Israel, and present
to us and to the world the Palestinian positions: the need to hold elec-
tions, to choose their own leaders, how to take over responsibility when
Israel is out—for police, schools, highways, etc. Until now, the Pales-
tinians are either too timid or intimidated. The mayors won’t do it. He
hopes that His Majesty and other leaders of the Palestinians—even the
PLO—in Jordan will encourage the mayors, three, five, seven of them—
he doesn’t care, it is their initiative—to say that they will speak with us,
Egypt, or Israel and Jordan later—if Jordan agrees—to be sure that Pal-
estinian views are adequately considered. Now there is no effective
consultation. If the mayor of Gaza City, who knows His Majesty and
Arafat, says he will consult with Ambassador Linowitz, Secretary
Muskie, himself, Foreign Minister Ali, or the foreign or prime minister
of Israel, then we would not inadvertently not take account of the posi-
tions, desires, and interests of the residents of the West Bank and Gaza.
Also this could expedite the withdrawal of the Israeli Military Govern-
ment, turning it over step by step, giving responsibility to the Pales-
tinians. Some of this has been tried in Gaza. Dayan says he is eager to
get the Israeli Military Government out. Weizman feels the same way.
When they tried to deal with the mayor—saying you take over the
