723.2515/2228: Telegram [Document 271] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State SANTIAGO, April 30, 1926—10 a.m. [Received 2:20 p.m.] 124. Notwithstanding supposed secrecy of Senate’s session, the resolution proposed by Senator Cariola is published today unofficially but textually. There are 28 preambles most of which refer to the plebiscitary proceeding up to date. There are many statements as to the acts of the Arbitrator and his representative on the Commission with presumptions as to necessary legal consequences. Among other statements are the following: “Although the representative of the United States of America on the Commission at one time said that in his opinion conditions did not permit holding an honest and correct plebiscite, this opinion must be considered as having disappeared because he has since intervened in voting the election law to regulate the plebiscite and afterwards in fixing the dates for registering and voting and finally because on March 25 he declared his willingness to go on with the plebiscite and saw no use in delay.” No reference is made to his reservations and declarations of March 25 and April 26 although they have been published. Whether you would consider it proper to remind the Chilean Ambassador of these I do not know. It might do good if he cabled his Government immediately. Morning papers say vote will be taken at 7 o’clock tonight on three resolutions but there is first a chance of postponement. The Cariola resolution demands cessation of good offices and leaves Minister of Foreign Affairs with no freedom of negotiation. The substitute resolution of the Committee on Foreign Affairs leads to same result although approving the course of Minister of Foreign Affairs up to date. A third resolution introduced by Senator Urzua champions the fulfillment of the award but recognizes and respects the power of the President to conduct foreign negotiations. It is generally thought the committee resolution will pass, although one Senator has publicly said that on account of division of
