354 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 33. Brooks explained why the U.S.-­proposed text of the agreement did not mention Global Shield by name even though it had been mentioned in the Cheney letter: the U.S. wanted to assure the Soviet side that when we did not hold Global Shield we would at least notify the Soviet side about some exercise. The goal was not to provide less information, Brooks said, but to guarantee that the Soviet side would receive at least one notification in each year. Burt added that he was sure Secretary Baker would confirm to Minister Shevardnadze that the U.S. side intended to notify Global Shield if it was held. The only point was that if Global Shield were canceled, the U.S. side wanted to avoid problems between the sides in determining what was “the” major exercise. Similarly, the U.S. side would expect the Soviet side to notify the U.S. side of what the Soviet side judged to be its major exercise—­to avoid the problem of the U.S. side claiming it disagreed over which exercise was the major Soviet exercise. 34. Nazarkin suggested that the Russian text for Article I be left as it was; though he acknowledged it was a bit clumsy, he thought it reflected the idea correctly. The U.S. side would change the English to “a” major strategic exercise. And during the signing ceremony the U.S. side would give the same explanation Burt had just provided. Burt agreed. 35. Medas then raised a further issue: the use of the word “once” at the end of the same sentence in the agreement. Brown explained that the Russian use of “po odnomu” did not make sense if the English text had “a major exercise,” and suggested it would be preferable to say in Russian “o nachalye odnogo iz samykh krupnykh,” equivalent to the English “about the beginning of one of the largest (strategic exercises).” 36. Burt made a procedural suggestion: he thought the sides had made real progress. The U.S. side had agreed to notify Global Shield, while the Soviet side had agreed to the use of the word “A.” He proposed that the sides look at the use of the word “once” and resolve it the next day. Nazarkin agreed; he suggested that since both sides had work to do that afternoon, they wait until 5:00 p.m. to rejoin the Core Arms Control Group. Burt
