Afghanistan
327
3. One interesting detail is that Embassy officers have seen certain
Soviet units digging in on the perimeter around the city, apparently
in an effort to safeguard against any attack from the insurgents or from
hostile Afghan Army units. Armored vehicles, including tanks, have
been seen in makeshift bunkers. Although it is more likely that the
Afghan Army in the field that was fighting for Hafizullah Amin will
simply vanish into the hills, rather than take on elite units of the Soviet
Army, we cannot rule out the possibility that some army units or
individuals may attempt to vent their anti-Russian feelings by kamikaze
raids or infiltration into the city in hopes of zapping a few of the
“Russian invaders.”
4. One wrinkle on the political front is that we have no firm evidence
as yet that Babrak Karmal and his colleagues are actually in Kabul
trying to forge their new government. Babrak’s recorded statement
first heard the night of the Soviet attack continues to be played intermit-
tently, but there has been no other broadcast by him or any other
member of the new leadership.2 Under “normal” coup situations, such
as April 1978, the new leader usually broadcasts his success as soon
as that takeover is apparent. Since Kabul also has a generally function-
ing TV station, we find it curious that Babrak has not yet trumpeted
in person his accession to power.
5. On the operational front, Kabul Airport opened to a couple of
civilian flights this afternoon, including an Indian Airlines flight and
one from Ariana. We have also heard the story, from a reliable source,
that the telephone lines, which have been out since the first minutes
of the takeover due to satchel charges or grenades planted at Kabul’s
PTT, may be dead for another month.
6. Finally, we note the East German news agency statement
reported in FBIS Trends (28 December 79 USSR-Afghanistan) that the
Soviet units will be withdrawn “as soon as the causes for this action
no longer exist.” Since the Soviet action was taken to impose a different
but still Communist regime on Afghanistan, we anticipate that these
Soviet military units and their successors may be in Kabul and the rest
of Afghanistan for an extended duration.
7. A late item is that the Intercontinental Hotel is providing 200
preheated meals to Radio Afghanistan for the “old government and
the new government.” This report is sketchy, but it appears that some
officials of the Amin regime are being held next door to us, while some
2 Karmal’s statement was quoted in telegram 332986 to all diplomatic and consular
posts, December 28. In the statement, carried by Radio Kabul, Karmal pledged that his
government would guarantee “democratic rights of all classes of society and respect the
holy faith of Islam and the clergy.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790595–1188)
