Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 209 Summit. As governments conspicuously have failed to come to grips with economic and social problems—which are only partly of their making—loss of confidence has spread widely. Ironically, one of the most talented groups of European statesmen in recent memory presides over a collection of governments facing constant challenge—from both left and right. Protest voting has become almost the rule. —In several European countries, the major political parties themselves are overdue for renewal (especially in Italy and from the center to the right in France); or they are so riven with factionalism—as in Britain—that even talented leaders are unable to effect reforms that will broaden their political base. —At the same time, economic difficulty struck in the middle of a hopeful development: the progressive modernization of most European societies—searching for means of coping with post-industrial problems in labor-management relations, social organization, and cultural development. —The European Community, meanwhile, lost the economic basis of its past success, at about the point when it was seeking to build a broader European political society on its economic strength. Yet instead of stepping back to re-establish the economic strength of the Community and its member nations, they are concentrating upon enlarging the Community and holding European elections. While both are worthy objectives—which politically we must support—they are being used as a substitute for the economic strength, cooperation, and purpose that the Community’s founders and best minds have always known must be the basis of an effective Community. Communist Parties (and Internal Reform) It is against this background that the growth of West European Communist Parties is so unsettling. If West European economies were strong—and if there were strong confidence in the economic and political role of the United States on the Continent—there would be far less uneasiness about the French and Italian Communist parties (and far more optimism about dealing with them, based on democratic successes in Portugal and Spain). There would be more confidence that left-wing movements—engaged in needed transformation of societies—could in the process contain or simply pre-empt the influence of the Communists. As it is, there is too little optimism in Europe that moribund governments can cope with the discipline of the Communist parties— acting with or without support from Moscow. The French Socialists and the Italian Christian Democrats each believe they can somehow derive strength from the more energetic Communists, without succumbing to them. In normal times, the intellectual left in these coun-
