Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
209
Summit. As governments conspicuously have failed to come to grips
with economic and social problems—which are only partly of their
making—loss of confidence has spread widely. Ironically, one of the
most talented groups of European statesmen in recent memory pre-
sides over a collection of governments facing constant challenge—from
both left and right. Protest voting has become almost the rule.
—In several European countries, the major political parties them-
selves are overdue for renewal (especially in Italy and from the center
to the right in France); or they are so riven with factionalism—as in
Britain—that even talented leaders are unable to effect reforms that will
broaden their political base.
—At the same time, economic difficulty struck in the middle of a
hopeful development: the progressive modernization of most Euro-
pean societies—searching for means of coping with post-industrial
problems in labor-management relations, social organization, and cul-
tural development.
—The European Community, meanwhile, lost the economic basis
of its past success, at about the point when it was seeking to build a
broader European political society on its economic strength. Yet instead
of stepping back to re-establish the economic strength of the Commu-
nity and its member nations, they are concentrating upon enlarging the
Community and holding European elections. While both are worthy
objectives—which politically we must support—they are being used as
a substitute for the economic strength, cooperation, and purpose that
the Community’s founders and best minds have always known must
be the basis of an effective Community.
Communist Parties (and Internal Reform)
It is against this background that the growth of West European
Communist Parties is so unsettling. If West European economies were
strong—and if there were strong confidence in the economic and polit-
ical role of the United States on the Continent—there would be far less
uneasiness about the French and Italian Communist parties (and
far more optimism about dealing with them, based on democratic
successes in Portugal and Spain). There would be more confidence
that left-wing movements—engaged in needed transformation of
societies—could in the process contain or simply pre-empt the influ-
ence of the Communists.
As it is, there is too little optimism in Europe that moribund gov-
ernments can cope with the discipline of the Communist parties—
acting with or without support from Moscow. The French Socialists
and the Italian Christian Democrats each believe they can somehow de-
rive strength from the more energetic Communists, without suc-
cumbing to them. In normal times, the intellectual left in these coun-
