Options Identified
319
Ambassador McHenry said the British first called and said they
had some “minor changes,” but when he saw them later he realized
they were not minor at all. They subsequently indicated that they
could not support sanctions unless all three of the changes outlined
previously were included in the resolution.
The President thought that would be good, but it should not delay
our preparation of the second vote on sanctions. We need to get the
British and French on board.
Dr. Brzezinski wondered how sure we were of getting a favorable
second vote.
Ambassador McHenry said it would still require a Presidential
effort.
The President said he was ready for that.
Dr. Brzezinski said he was worried about the public perception.
We had planned to ask our Allies to impose sanctions even if the vote
failed at the UN. Would it not be better to go for sanctions and at the
same time to make an approach to the Iranians about the Afghan
situation. He did not think the U.S. public expected a vote immediately.
Mr. Powell disagreed. He said a vote was expected very soon and
this would be seen as a classic case of legislative impotence if we could
not deliver.
Dr. Brzezinski wondered still if we would be better off to go for
sanctions directly.
The President said he thought it was more important to get some-
thing before January. He noted that the Iranians had in any event
refused to meet with Waldheim.
Ambassador McHenry agreed and noted that a two-stage process
was a way of getting around the red herring that somehow Waldheim
could produce a solution. Waldheim had called him at midnight the
night before about a call he had received from the Pakistani Ambassa-
dor relaying a message from the Pakistani Foreign Minister in Tehran.
The Iranians had reiterated the view that they did not want to see the
Secretary General right now. The Pakistanis wanted his reaction to
a proposal that the Secretary General go to Iran with the advance
understanding that nothing would come of it. Would that help, defuse
the situation? Ambassador McHenry had told Waldheim that we would
not buy that, and Waldheim agreed that it did not sound like a
good idea.
The President said he was not embarrassed to get a positive vote
on Monday which would give Waldheim a week to arrange release of
the hostages and provided that at the end of that time the Security
Council would be committed to act on articles 39 and 41.
Mr. Powell observed that the story would still be that we did it
because we did not have the votes to win.
