El Salvador 591 Against this background of rapidly growing unrest stimulated by Cuban evangelism, we see the Salvadoran leaders—­the oligarchy of the Army, the so-­called 14 families and their gentry, and the church – ­divided among them­selves, unable to give adequate leadership to attack the fundamental causes of the unrest. President Eisenhower, the Secretary, Allen Dulles, yourself, and our Ambassadors to El Salvador have all previously indicated our concern about social conditions and communist activity in El Salvador to President Lemus, but without visible results. A very strong approach to Dr. Rochac at this time might reach both the President and the economic aristocracy. Rochac is of the middle class, with a liberal or radical background, and apparently without close ties to the gentry, so you might be preaching to the converted. However, it is well known that he is highly respected in his country and in the U. S., and this, together with his reputation for honesty and objectivity, would give great weight to any message from you he might take back to El Salvador. Recommendation That you call Dr. Rochac in for a forceful discussion along the following lines: 1. We have observed a deterioration of conditions in El Salvador which appear a serious threat to stability of the Government. Not only has the Government failed to take effective action against communist and Cuban subversion, but more important, it has failed to act to reduce the basic social and economic problems which create a climate favorable to revolutionary activity. 2. We consider that the current agitation in El Salvador is probably overdue, and should serve as a clear warning to the country’s governing groups. It is common knowledge that the campesino’s standard of living in El Salvador is almost the lowest in Latin America. It is only logical that communist and Cuban agitators realize this and concentrate their activities where the wealthy class is most vulnerable and where the chance of success is greatest. 3. We are reliably informed that agents of the Cuban government in association with communist groups are spreading the doctrine of violent social revolution in El Salvador and among other countries, and are directly interfering in the domestic political scene. Several of these same countries have urged that the U.S. act against the Cuban government unilaterally or through the OAS, apparently without being prepared to recognize that the interventionist extremism of the present Cuban government constitutes an even more imminent danger to them than to the U.S. We consider that those who are thus threatened by Fidelismo and Cuban subversive activities should feel no hesitance in bearing their share of responsibility for any collective action which
