Non-Proliferation
881
rience that has been so noticeably lacking in previous proliferation
talks.
This memorandum raises some issues not treated in the intera-
gency paper, summarizes the views of the five lead agencies—State,
Defense, ERDA, ACDA, and Schlesinger—and sets forth the options
available to you.
OPTIONS AND ARGUMENTS
Option 1: Permit reprocessing at Tokai on a provisional, experimental,
multinational basis involving IAEA participation to test safeguards.
As you know, Tokai cannot operate commercially without a prior
finding of safeguardability by the U.S. We wish to avoid such a finding
since our policy is based on the premise that reprocessing by its very
nature cannot be adequately safeguarded. This option assumes that
Tokai could be allowed to operate experimentally without the finding of
safeguardability. However there is some question as to whether that
could in fact be done without opening the USG to legal challenge. State
and ERDA both believe that Option 1 should be authorized as a fallback
option available to the U.S. delegation should Option 3 and 2 prove
non-negotiable. ACDA and Defense disagree. Schlesinger believes that it
could be seen as inconsistent with domestic policies.
We expect that the Japanese will table some version of this option.
Option 2: Explore through expert consultation the feasibility of alter-
ing Tokai so that it could operate to test both reprocessing and partial
coprocessing.
As you know, partial coprocessing produces a mixed product of
uranium and plutonium “spiked” with highly radioactive waste prod-
ucts which make the mixture dangerous and expensive to handle.
State believes that this should be the second allowed position.
ERDA agrees. ACDA on the other hand feels that in some respects Op-
tion 2 is the least preferable option, in that—unlike Option 3—it estab-
lishes a precedent for reprocessing. Nor does it have the advantage of
Option 1 of avoiding discrimination of treatment between the Japanese
and FRG (which also has an experimental reprocessing plant).3
Option 3: Explore the possibility of operating Tokai only with a modified
process that does not produce pure separated plutonium (i.e., some form of par-
tial coprocessing).
All agencies agree that some version of this option is most pre-
ferable but they differ in their expectations of its acceptability to the
Japanese. Defense and ACDA believe that only this option should be au-
3 With the appointment of Spurgeon Keeny, who was the director of the Ford/
Mitre study, [on nuclear power and issues] ACDA now has a strong expertise on this
issue. ACDA’s comments, which raise several important points, are attached at Tab B for
your information. [Footnote is in the original.] Tab B is not attached.
