806
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
an oilless economy and had advocated such an economy in his conver-
sation with [name not declassified]. If Baqai intended to oppose a solution
to the oil problem and the exploitation by Iran of its oil, he was in my
opinion one of the most dangerous enemies of Iran. Iran could not af-
ford to have dangerous internal enemies at the present time and if Bat-
manqilich was following a policy of strengthening and collaborating
with an Iranian who favored an “oilless economy” he was doing his
country great disservice. An oilless economy would mean the doom of
Iran.
Batmanqilich was somewhat taken aback. He asked if I could not
arrange to meet him, General Deihimi and Baqai secretly. I said the
American Ambassador met no one surreptitiously. If Baqai would care
to call on me I would be glad to meet him. If Baqai would like to invite
me to his house I would go there. There would, however, be nothing se-
cret about such a meeting. The General asked if I would be willing to
speak to the Shah about the matter. He was afraid to arrange for me to
meet Baqai without the consent of the Shah. I said I would be glad to
discuss the whole matter with the Shah.
It is my intention when I next see the Shah to talk with him frankly
about the situation in General Staff. I have already touched on the
matter during previous conversations with the Shah, who on each occa-
sion changed the subject. During my last talk with the Shah on October
14, I mentioned the danger to the country from the direction of Baqai.
The Shah minimized this danger. He said that an opposition was a
good thing and in his opinion it was better for Baqai, who was loyal to
the regime, to be leader of an opposition than someone who was op-
posed to the regime. It was clear that the Shah in referring to the regime
meant himself. It would seem that the Shah is endeavoring to placate
Baqai at a time when Baqai is undermining Zahedi.
The Shah did make the concession in talking with me that it might
be a good thing to send Baqai out of the country for a time. He thought
Baqai might be a good man to serve as a contact with Iranian students
in Europe and America. Baqai was a learned man and could probably
be useful in convincing Iranian youth abroad that the Iranian Govern-
ment was after all progressive. When I suggested to the Shah that
Baqai’s particular type of “socialism” might not be a good thing with
which to infect the students, the Shah reminded me that he personally
thought that socialism might be good for Iran. He repeated that he was
rather sympathetic to socialism and in his opinion the future of Iran lay
in a marriage between socialism and capitalism.
I have been so busy during the last week with the Congressmen
and am at present so much occupied with Mr. Hoover that I fear that I
am unable to keep the Department currently informed to the extent
