Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 71 these efficiencies will not result in any decrease in planned investment in NATO defense—and these plans involve some growth. Before I left Washington, President Carter emphasized to me his deep concern about NATO’s defense. He told me that he is prepared to consider increased U.S. investment in NATO’s defense. In turn, we look to America’s allies to join with us in improving NATO’s defense forces to the limit of individual abilities, to provide a defense fully adequate to our needs. Of course, economic and social problems make a strong claim on our resources—no less so in the United States than in Europe. And in a time of de´tente, it is easy to lose sight of the need for adequate defense. But this need is inescapable. It demands continuing efforts in common. The alliance as a whole must take into account the growth in Soviet military power and together agree on the appropriate response. In improving our defense forces, we must redouble our efforts to standardize weapons, rationalize our military posture, increase efficiency, and improve reinforcement capability. We must place greater emphasis on improved force readiness. And as an alliance, we cannot accept reductions in NATO defense capabilities except through negotiations with the Warsaw Pact—negotiations fully securing allied interests and leading to a more stable military balance. Negotiations on force levels in Europe—MBFR [mutual and balanced force reductions]—must move forward with the closest attention paid to the interests of each member state and as a clear expression of common and agreed positions. Furthermore, President Carter is committed to an early resumption of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, looking toward another step this year in the effort to end the strategic arms race with the Soviet Union. He has publicly stated that three basic principles will guide him in this effort: —He will pursue arms control agreements in the best interests of the United States, the alliance, and world peace; —He will insist on no less than equivalent advantage for the West in any agreement; and —He will strengthen consultations and cooperation with America’s natural friends and allies throughout the negotiating process. The President has asked me today to affirm again his intention to consult closely with our NATO allies before the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks are resumed. He also looks forward to working in closest cooperation with you on MBFR. And while the new Administration is undertaking a careful review of these negotiations, we anticipate no early change in U.S. proposals to our allies concerning the allied position at the force reduction talks.
