Human Rights 509 Thus the arguments for keeping the heat on are strong. Similar cases can be made elsewhere. Nonetheless we believe that the human rights policy, and American interests in general, ultimately will benefit if we do not seem to be using economic pressure to bring down a particular government. Repressive governments will be more likely to improve their performance if they believe something short of suicide will bring a lifting of economic sanctions. Other IFI donors will be more likely to join our efforts if we do not seem bent on using those institutions not just to work for an end to torture and arbitrary arrest worldwide, but to topple a particular government of which we most strongly disapprove. And in this country, a sense that the human rights policy was hurting American exports (and jobs) could begin seriously to undercut support for the policy itself. The strongest argument seems to us to be one of principle. To deny a country access to international financial support in order to try to force political change on it is not qualitatively different from the Nixon Administration’s efforts to “destabilize” the Allende government. We have not been as successful in cutting off Pinochet’s financial sources as Nixon was in doing the same to Allende, and our efforts have not included jawboning commercial banks. But the difference is of degree rather than of kind. In practice of course we cannot suddenly resume economic business as usual with Chile. Chile is an emotional issue and our attitude toward it is, rightly or wrongly, a symbol to many of our human rights commitment. Moreover, present sanctions are also aimed at getting Letelier’s alleged murderers extradited.5 But if the Letelier issue is satisfactorily resolved and there is no regression on rights of the person, we should begin phasing in some ExIm and CCC financing and supporting bhn loans to Chile in the IFIs, carefully explain both to the Chileans and to human rights activists in this country what we are doing and why, and test the political waters for the feasibility of beginning to support some non-bhn loans. Promoting Political Rights Our position is only tenable, however, if we can also demonstrate that we are working to promote political rights by other means. 5 Reference is to the September 21, 1976, murder of former Chilean Ambassador to the United States Dr. Orlando Letelier, who, at the time, was a senior policy official at the Institute for Policy Studies in Washington. A plastic bomb detonated in Letelier’s car, killing him and his assistant Ronni Moffitt, and injuring Moffitt’s husband. See David Binder, “Opponent of Chilean Junta Slain in Washington by Bomb in His Auto,” The New York Times, September 22, 1976, pp. 1 and 9 and Stephen J. Lynton and Lawrence Meyer, “Ex-Chilean Ambassador Killed by Bomb Blast,” The Washington Post, September 22, 1976, pp. A–1 and A–9.
