1956  699
82. Wang said I had just stated it hard understand why nobody 
among the great number of Chinese nationals in US had written Indian 
Embassy. This situation quite understandable to them. Situation is result 
of series of harassments and pressures taken by US Govt toward these 
people in past. Many people been detained prison, punished with fines, 
intercepted on way home by US Govt. All this has left deep impression 
minds Chinese in US. Particularly, after conclusion agreement return 
civilians, US Govt went so far as to require Chinese civilians residing 
US to procure entry permits Taiwan. This serious pressure on Chinese 
residents in US.
83. Wang said I had repeatedly advanced claims concerning 13 
American prisoners China. These, as I knew, had committed offenses 
against Chinese laws. And cases known everybody.
84. Wang said the eighteen Chinese whose names given me previ­
ous meetings and this morning represent only fraction Chinese in US 
who have long wanted return but unable do so. These cases of eighteen 
show plight Chinese in US find themselves in.
85. Wang said, they ask US expeditiously make an account and 
give specific reply these cases of Chinese whose names he has given me.
86. Wang said and they ask US Govt should cease threats and 
pressures against Chinese students. US should adopt measures accord­
ing with agreed announcement so as to enable these Chinese return 
expeditiously.
87. I said I did not say no Chinese in US had communicated with 
Indian Embassy. I did not know whether he familiar with press release 
of Indian Embassy Dec 20 which said that it been receiving enquiries 
and applications from Chinese in US. That press release said that some 
these had raised technical matters which Embassy was taking up with 
Indian Govt, and some had financial questions.
88. I said I did not know what these technical issues were. My 
only point was that Indian Embassy clearly was in touch with many 
­Chinese in US. At least thus far, not in single case has Embassy of India, 
in spite fact in touch many Chinese in US, called attention my govt to 
any respect in which it violated agreed announcement or where Indian 
Embassy feels US obstructing departure of any these Chinese.
89. Wang said, as he had said if US Govt would not revoke those 
unreasonable measures against Chinese, the pressures against their 
free choice would always be present. They continued ask that US adopt 
measures in accordance with agreed announcement. He specifically 
had raised number cases with me, and he awaits my answer to these 
representations.
90. I said I had nothing more.
91. Wang said he also had nothing more.
