780
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Strange, to say the least, is an approach when despite earlier agree-
ments the US evades joint efforts with the USSR to ensure a compre-
hensive settlement in the Middle East and then we are even asked to
support separate deals.
And indeed, the fact is that provisions of principle regarding fu-
ture course of action in the Middle East were agreed between the USSR
and the US already when you, Mr. President, were in office. A Joint
Soviet-US statement on this score was worked out and published on
October 1, 1977.3 Shortly after that, however, it was nonchalantly
dropped by the US side. This not only dealt a blow at the efforts aimed
at achieving a Middle East settlement but in general was indicative of
how Washington sometimes treats achieved agreements.
In the light of the present US position a situation emerges where
we follow completely different roads in the Middle East and it would
be more than unjustified to count on our support of what is schemed
with regard to that region. Now we do not see how the positions of the
USSR and the US can be bridged. We tried to do it more than once but
each time the US side destroyed those bridges. Such are the facts.
In this connection I wish also to tell you beforehand that we shall
strongly object to having now the UN Security Council or the General
Assembly—which, by the way, is not competent at all to decide such
questions—involved in all that business in order to sanctify, so to say,
the separate deal between Israel and Egypt by the authority of these in-
ternational bodies.
Finally, I wish to draw your attention, Mr. President, to one more
question fraught with very serious consequences. According to the in-
coming information, attributed also to US officials, efforts are now
made to establish a new system of military relationship in the Middle
East under the US auspices, to introduce in fact permanent military
presence of the United States there. I must say that if the question really
were of the presence of the US armed forces in the Middle East region it
would only further complicate the situation. And in general the in-
crease of the US military presence in that and adjacent areas would seri-
ously destabilize the international situation on the whole.
I express these considerations in all candor, Mr. President, being
guided by both the interests of ensuring really lasting and just peace in
the Middle East and the interests of the Soviet-US relations in a broad
sense. I had more than one occasion to give my views on the questions
of Soviet-US relations. Now I would like only to note that there is a
number of issues the solution of which requires our joint efforts. On our
3 For the text of the joint communique´ issued by the United States and the Soviet
Union on the situation in the Middle East, October 1, 1977, see Quandt, Camp David, pp.
343–344.
