Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 387 that Gorbachev so intensely wants and needs START (because of his difficulties) that we have very strong leverage. There are risks with this strategy. At some point the Soviets will catch on, probably quite soon since neither Gorbachev nor Shevardnadze are patsies. In fact, what we are hearing in Geneva is that they think this is already the game we are playing. Gorbachev cannot appear to be making all the concessions. You would feel this directly in your encounters with Shevardnadze, who will not want to bear the entire burden to make these meetings successful. And it would not be in anyone’s interest if one of the pre-­summit Ministerials fails. The final irony is that hanging back now leads to a high risk that at the end of the day we will be confronted with a choice between no agreement or a settlement on worse terms than we could have negotiated. In other words, by trying to force Gorbachev to make all the early concessions, he gets to structure the outcome according to his priorities. And leaving key issues for resolution at the last moment opens us to criticism for compromising under pressure of deadlines. Instead, we need to move now to an approach that recognizes that the major issues can involve discrete trade-­offs and can be settled one-­ by-­one, using Ministerials and the Summit as decision points in the process. Our strategic programs are moving forward so we can now engage with the Soviets. An orderly process of careful analysis of trade-­offs, determination of what we need and where we can be flexible, and steady engagement with the Soviets can serve our interests better than leaving everything to what would be portrayed as frenzied end-­game deal cutting. You will need to develop a consensus starting with the President and with Scowcroft and Cheney to take this approach. The more immediate steps are: — Implement the line proposed in my memo on the Bush- Gorbachev meeting, i.e., agreement to resolve all the major START isues by the 1990 Summit. — Fill the gaps in the US position so we have a full proposal on the table before your next meeting with Shevardnadze. A complete proposal is essential for moving on track. — Aim to solve the mobile ICBM and ALCM issues at the next Ministerial. This means knowing in advance what we need and what tradeoffs we can accept. — Work with Scowcroft to energize the interagency process to achieve these objectives.
