obtain the opportunity of conversing with yourself and the President
regarding the future policy of his Government as well as its relations with
the Government of the United States. It is in particular the desire of General
Vasquez to reach an agreement with the Department of State looking
towards the refunding of the foreign debt of the Republic through the
flotation of a loan in the United States. The satisfactory carrying out of this
operation which of course by reason of the convention 19075 requires the
consent of the Government of the United States would make it possible for
the Dominican Government to obtain the use of a larger portion of the
customs revenues for current expenses and at the same time obtain
additional funds to be used in the carrying out of the complete program of
public works. This operation in my opinion is essential if the Republic is
really to progress. Futhermore it is the desire of General Vasquez to discuss
the possibility of negotiating a new commercial treaty with the United
States.
In this connection I desire to refer to my telegram of March 27, 3 p.m., and
to the Department’s reply thereto of April 1, 5 p.m. I appreciate of course
that under ordinary circumstances it is not desirable for the Government of
the United States to invite the Presidents-elect of Latin American Republics
to visit the United States before they assume office. The approaching
evacuation of this Republic by the American Forces of [Occupation?] after
eight years of Military Government and the installation of a Constitutional
Government in the Dominican Republic friendly disposed to American
interests create an exceptional case. Even if the Department does not desire
to invite General Vasquez to be the guest of the nation during his brief stay
in Washington, I trust that in view of these special circumstances the
attempt will be made to accord him an official reception and to facilitate the
accomplishment of the objective which he is seeking.
The situation here is in general entirely satisfactory. My information leads
us to believe that the program of evacuation will be carried through
speedily and without delay. I consider that it would be highly desirable for
me to be in Washington during the time of General Vasquez’s visit there and
for this reason I request your permission to return to Washington without
delay. I am also exceedingly desirous of laying before you certain
considerations of the utmost importance regarding conditions in Central
