3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 801 with the Soviets can sometimes be as important as what you do about their behavior, and (c) that Secretary Muskie2 does not intend to perpetuate the grave errors in style that Vance was guilty of in his handling of Dobrynin, this memo proposes: —that an Under Secretary of State, preferably Matt Nimetz, be designated to handle not only arms control and security matters, but Soviet relations as well; —that a new bureau of Soviet and East European affairs be formed in the State Department, preferably headed by someone who has a clear association with you, such as Sam Huntington or Madeleine Albright; and —that new rules of conduct on how to handle the Soviets be agreed upon and that Vance’s deplorable practice of having long one-on-one subsequently largely unreported conversations with Dobrynin be stopped. (C) The Nature of the Problem. Critics of the Administration (including Reagan, Bush and Kennedy) have repeatedly charged, and continue to charge, that one of its great weaknesses has been an inability to deal consistently with the Soviets and have cited the well-publicized Vance-Brzezinski differences on strategy and tactics as evidence of the gulf which divides the NSC and the State Department on the subject. Turning this perception around would be of obvious help to the President and to our entire diplomatic effort around the world. Were we able to convince others that we now view Soviet policy consistently and realistically and that we have achieved a widely shared consensus within the government on the Soviet threat which faces us, it would not only help domestically, but it would markedly undercut Soviet efforts to drive a wedge between us and the allies. (C) Given the problems that face us in Afghanistan and Iran as well as with the West Europeans, it is important to demonstrate that Senator Muskie regards US-Soviet relations as central to our foreign policy and that he is moving vigorously to come to grips with the problem. It would also demonstrate both domestically and to the allies that the President is continuing to give the creative resolution of US-Soviet difficulties the priority it deserves. (C) The three recommendations enumerated below are based on the assumption that Marshall Shulman, in line with his personal desires, will be going back to Columbia no later than this summer. The University wants him to do so and now that Vance has departed there is no logical justification for the senior man on Soviet affairs at the State Department to be a lame duck, particularly at a time when US-Soviet bilateral relations have ground down to almost zero. Once Marshall has left 2 Vance resigned, effective April 28. He was replaced by Edmund Muskie, who entered duty as Secretary of State on May 8.
