106  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Sam Huntington noted that our high level of readiness would tend 
to increase the Soviet perception that we might fire on warning. Secre-
tary Brown agreed with this, noting that the current low state of read-
iness of Soviet strategic forces indicated that they are going to count 
on strategic warning. David Aaron indicated that there would be more 
value in putting our resources in better attack assessment capability or 
in command and control rather than put any more dollars into a force 
that is increasing in vulnerability.
Secretary Brown said that we could fill out the Minuteman II force 
with Minuteman IIIs and in 10 years probably do as well as the Sovi-
ets in terms of counterforce capability—­but we are not going that way. 
George Brown noted that the M–X gave us advantage of not only an 
improvement in throw weight but also an improvement in accuracy.
Dr. Brzezinski indicated that we should look closer at the con-
straints that are currently in existence on US targeting. General Brown 
said that we are looking at 242 and the supporting documents, and that 
in his view the command and control side needed more emphasis. This 
is being done through WMCCS (Worldwide Military Command and 
Control System) and that we are making some progress in improving 
command and control—­but that it is a very ambitious five-­year plan 
that existed. Secretary Brown noted that the strategic part was only a 
piece of this.
General Brown indicated that WMCCS does provide some SIOP 
support, but that on the warning side, we did need to do more; specif-
ically, we needed to look thoroughly at development of a capability to 
see at night from space.
Spurgeon Keeny said that the Soviet hard-­target capability clearly 
is disturbing, although somewhat exaggerated. He said that hard-­target 
capability does not buy us as much from an arms control or strategic 
standpoint and, that although this was a troublesome direction which 
Soviet forces were taking, it may be a manageable situation. In the con-
text of the study, he tended to favor Substrategy 2 to be achieved with 
an augmented Dyad in which we would keep the fixed Minuteman 
sites but put future expenditures into our submarine-­launched and air-
borne capability; in particular, ALCMs on aircraft and general improve-
ments in the SLBM force. He noted that within the existing Minuteman 
force, we had available all the hard-­target capability we would need 
for unforeseen contingencies and that we had the NS–20 and/or even 
the AIRS if we needed it. This would give us a substantial hard-­target 
capability but not enough to wipe out the Soviet ICBM force.
Secretary Brown asked what we do when the Minuteman became 
11 years old—­whether we would then reopen the Minuteman line. 
Spurgeon Keeny responded that it would be better to reopen the Min-
uteman III line as opposed to building the M–X. He argued that to the
