156 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX any diversion of US grain to the USSR or substitution of US grain for domestic products shipped to the USSR would lead to extension of the embargo. —We would not suspend Export-Import Bank financing for Eastern Europe. (In any event US and European private banks which make up 70pct of the debt exposure would drastically cut back on new loans and we would encourage them to limit their activities to roll-over of outstanding debt. Similarly, US business interest in large projects in Eastern Europe would decline.) —Against the background of the overall policy approach, there follows a country-by-country discussion of policies toward each Eastern European Government. Poland —Here we face the most serious dilemma. The Polish Government is likely to become heavily involved in any intervention scenario, and Kania or his successor will be pursuing a repressive policy. Yet neither the US Government nor the US people—Polonia in particular—will want to punish the Polish people for being invaded. Poland’s already disastrous economy will decline still more precipitously in the face of passive resistance by an angry populace. We want the Soviets to pick up the bill, and we don’t want US grain to feed a Soviet army of occupation. Yet the Poles will need food, and a number of Americans will want to provide it. —American labor will probably take matters into its own hands if the past is any guide. Dock workers boycotted ships bound for Poland during the August strikes, and they will do no less if Solidarity is crushed and its leaders imprisoned. The US Government would hardly want to argue against such action, or against similar boycotts of Polish airliners. Yet we would recommend against an embargo on grain sales which would be unpopular, superfluous and difficult to lift in the future. —CCC is another matter. Our very sizeable exposure in Poland has been a political gesture, tied to our support for conciliatory Polish policies toward the workers. On financial and economic grounds, we would want to cut back our exposure. This would also force the Soviets to supply hard currency for new grain purchases. This points to a policy of no new CCC credits, but continued grain sales (assuming no diversion to the USSR) and eventual lifting of a longshoreman’s boycott, on a cash-and-carry basis. —On other economic measures, we suggest a formal turn-down of the Polish request for further concessional economic assistance. We presume our allies would react similarly, and that this combined with the shrinkage of private credit would force Poland to default and to
