1088 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prince Saud said yes, you do affect public opinion in Israel. On settlements the biggest change in Israeli public opinion came when the President said that settlements were illegal and stopped some deliveries of some economic and military equipment. In the same way you could influence the Palestinian question. If the Israelis feel that regardless of their policy they could count on unhindered aid from the United States, they will not change their policy. Who will argue with Begin if he succeeds. Dr. Brzezinski said that he was uncomfortable in dealing with this since Ambassador Linowitz had been here only recently and he was better informed about the nature of the overall process. The question of course is how to choose the right moment and what issue to press. Both sides are forming their own view of home rule. At some point a positive intervention may move the situation forward. We do not intend to maintain a status quo. We know it is not tolerable. It is not even just. Prince Saud said that the status quo would be a stumbling block. Mr. Christopher recalled that Prince Fahd had said that Arafat was here and that it would be a service to his reputation if he was able to help with the hostage situation. He recalled that a year ago we had a close call in getting the PLO to accept Resolution 242. We came within an eyelash of getting that acceptance. Now that has slipped away. Is there a way to return to that? Prince Saud said this is a representation problem. Keeping the PLO away from the negotiations does not result in security. Rather it is an unnecessary complication which the Israelis wanted to add to the talks. The Saudis had tried to get recognition of the 242 by the Palestinians at the time of Geneva,7 when there was a general Arab position to negotiate. They hoped to get the Palestinians into that negotiating team. Since that time many things have changed; the PLO is interested in US recognition and would be of benefit to the negotiations. How that would happen, I don’t know. Ambassador Linowitz asked the same question. If the US in some way takes the position of solving the Palestinian question on the basis of self-determination, it could make them take the plunge. This issue is very important to them since it is one of the key negotiating cards which they would bring to the negotiating table. Mr. Christopher noted that acceptance of Resolution 242 was not frivolous or pure formality since it involved the acceptance of the future viability of Israel. This would be a major contribution. Prince Saud said yes, for US public opinion; but for the Palestinians resolution 242 involves the recognition of Israel without dealing with
