678 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Turner: Let’s try to get these calculations in line with the NIE before we present them to the President. Brown: The President should understand the picture of possible threats and our response options. We should not pretend we can depict future threats with certainty. Turner: But we have agreed threat estimates within the government. Perry: We can adjust my calculations for the official NIE numbers. The results will be the same: we can, at a minimum, present a shelter array that would exhaust the Soviet ICBM arsenal. Turner: That’s true if you keep running up the number of shelters. Brown: Of course. I can run up the shelter numbers as easily or more easily than he can run up the weapon numbers. (Nautical anecdote about anchors and hurricanes followed.) Perry: The great benefit of SALT II is that it assuredly delays the development of the worst kinds of threats to this system. We need SALT II to prevent them from exploiting their throw-­weight and getting the jump on M–X deployment. Turner: We ought to look at the threat of early Soviet abrogation of SALT II in order rapidly and early to expand their RV threat to M–X. Perry: Going into M–X without SALT II would be a real problem. There is a physical limit on suitable land. At 7000 foot spacing, we could build 10,000 shelters; at 3500 foot spacing, 20,000. Brown: This is a ridiculous extreme. Brzezinski: But there is another angle to Stan’s point. The Soviets have an incentive to abrogate SALT II on account of M–X. If they showed us a credible threat or preparation to do so, would we want to go ahead with M–X? We should examine this gambit as a Soviet means of deterring us from proceeding with M–X. Brown: This is a good question. Facing that kind of threat, we would be credibly interested in options beyond expanding the number of shelters, e.g., providing for ABM defense of M–X. To deter the Soviets from trying the abrogation threat, we have to have a credible ABM program. We also have to convey willingness to abrogate the ABM agreement or be willing to regard Soviet abrogation of SALT II as tantamount to total abrogation of SALT. Perry: We could also sharply accelerate other programs, e.g., increase our buy of ALCM. In terms of numbers of weapons added to the force over time, we could match a Soviet ICBM escalation with an escalation in the procurement of ALCMs. This in addition, possibly, to the ABM defense would be an adequate response to and deterrent of the Soviet SALT II abrogation threat.
