Summary of Print Volume III XXIX estimates tended to overstate Soviet progress in the missile field, by early 1960 the notion of future “missile gap” developed, which Con­ gress sought to explore. Eisenhower and General Nathan F. Twining, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, believed that if such a gap developed by 1961, new U.S. missile systems would be ready by 1962 to close it. (82) (They proved more than correct in this judgment for Soviet ICBM deployments lagged behind those of the United States until the late 1960s.) While Eisenhower was willing to approve modest increases in defense spending and to expedite certain important programs such as the development of reconnaissance satellites, he opposed any programs “on a crash basis until scientific analysis demonstrates real promise of success.” (102, 129) And despite political and demagogic attacks on his administration’s defense programs, he believed there was little public uneasiness about them. (93) The NSC also discussed the status of U.S. continental defense pol­ icy. Following a January 30, 1958, briefing on ballistic missile programs (6), the NSC drafted a new position paper on continental defense pol­ icy, NSC 5802, which updated and superseded NSC 5408. While NSC 5802 called for “an anti-ICBM weapons system as a matter of the high­ est national priority,” it still emphasized the importance of defensive measures against a hypothetical Soviet bomber attack. (8) Because of rapid advances in missile development, however, by 1960 discussion about continental defense focused more on the desirability and extent of an anti-­missile missile program. The Joint Chiefs of Staff argued for a firm administration commitment to accelerate the development of an extensive Nike–Zeus anti-­missile missile system, but Defense Secre­ taries McElroy and Gates and the scientific community believed such a program would be too expensive adequately to defend missile sites and useless to defend the population. Eisenhower was also skeptical, noting that it was questionable whether an effective anti-ICBM system could be developed in the 1960s. (82, 83, 132, 133) The divisions pre­ saged a similar split during the Kennedy administration, with Presi­ dent Kennedy basically more sympathetic to Secretary of Defense McNamara’s and the scientists’ opposition to deployment of a missile defense system than to the Joint Chiefs’ position. (See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, Volume VIII.) In the area of “passive” defense, the NSC considered the initiation of a nationwide fallout shelter plan. Although the Gaither Panel and the Federal Civil Defense Administration supported fallout shelters, others raised objections. Eisenhower, for example, “expressed a certain degree of skepticism as to the wisdom of expending billions of dollars on a shelter program as opposed to spending the money on additional meas­ ures of active defense.” He also worried that the U.S. shelter program “would insure neutralism in Europe.” (8) Secretary of State John Foster
