Chapter 6, June–December 1990 919 security. Regardless of improved U.S.-Soviet relations and potential arms control agreements, the Soviet’s physical ability to initiate strategic nuclear warfare against the United States will persist and a crisis or political change in the Soviet Union could occur faster than we could build neglected strategic forces. A START agreement will allow us to adjust how we respond to the requirements of deterrence, but tending to those requirements remains the first priority of U.S. defense strategy. Intelligence assessments of Soviet strategic ballistic missile capabilities and force deployments under START remain one essential element in the calculus of evaluating the military sufficiency of a START treaty, and how well the national security is protected under that treaty. But our information concerning the Soviet ballistic missile threat will never be perfect. The critical question is how much information we need, and whether that information can be obtained even in the absence of U.S. access to fully interpretable ballistic missile telemetry. Military assessments of the post-START Soviet threat have assumed that Soviet ballistic missiles would become increasingly accurate and lethal through the 1990s. A refined knowledge of potential range, accuracy, footprint capability, time-­on-target control, navigation updates and maneuvers, and so forth adds little to the fundamental conclusion that the Soviets are negotiating a START treaty which allows them to achieve their most important targeting goals. [less than 2 lines not declassified] On the other hand, if the Soviets had full access to U.S. ballistic missile telemetry data for developmental or operational tests, assessments of the sufficiency of START—­the ability of the U.S. to deploy and operate nuclear forces sufficient to carry out Presidential guidance— could be dramatically affected. Since the first U.S. strategic ballistic missile went on operational alert in 1959, there have been a number of instances in which tests have revealed system or engineering problems which degraded the operational status or potential performance of U.S. ballistic missiles. The problem often is not one of visibly catastrophic failure, but of subtle malfunctions or problems which only are detected through exploitation of telemetry data. Denying the Soviets full access to ballistic missile telemetry has given the U.S. time to analyze and fix such problems in the past, without endangering national security. It also is instructive to keep in mind that knowledge of problems affecting an entire class of ballistic missile systems favors the side which has the larger number of systems and which has an employment strategy which includes real options for first use (preemptive or otherwise) of strategic nuclear weapons. Another aspect of the military equation affected by U.S. knowledge of Soviet ballistic missile capabilities is the prospect for strategic defense. [less than 6 lines not declassified]
