1074 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement said this should have read purchase for cash. (Afterwards, however, he told Mr. Poole that he should have said purchase on three-­years credit.)5 18 B–26’s—These would be used unarmed for training, thus releasing for active duty the Peruvian Air Force’s present armed B-26’s which were now being used for training. These too, General Van Oordt said, were nearly obsolete in the U.S. and available. He estimated the total cost at $140,000. (He told Mr. Poole that these were to be purchased for cash as stated in the Aide Memoire of June 9.) Six C–46’s—(General Van Oordt did not mention the earlier request for six C–46’s in his talk with Mr. Rubottom, but he confirmed to Mr. Poole afterwards that this request was postponed although not cancelled.6 He explained that there was considerable pressure from the commercial airlines for these transports to be taken off of commercial runs, although, on the other hand, the routes they were now running were not covered by commercial lines and some would not be economical to run on a commercial basis.) General Van Oordt argued that, practically speaking, there were only seven planes flying on active duty in the Peruvian Air Force. In answer to Mr. Rubottom’s query about the British planes in the Peruvian Air Force, the General said that these Hawker Hunters are to all intents and purposes grounded for lack of parts. It was not only a question of acquiring replacement parts but of making some 50-­odd alterations which had been developed in this model subsequently, and for which the planes would have to be sent to England. He said that these planes had not fired a shot nor dropped a bomb. General Van Oordt then explained that he was a great protagonist of the principle of hemispheric defense, of arms standardization in the hemisphere, and of purchases in the United States. He said that he opposed the purchase of the British planes. He would like to continue making purchases in the U.S., but said that the Air Ministry is nevertheless studying the possible purchase of British, French or Canadian planes in case they were unobtainable in the United States. He hoped that the Ministry would not have to do this. General Van Oordt asked that all these factors be carefully considered in studying the Peruvian Government’s aircraft request. 5 The Peruvian Embassy reduced this request from eight to six F–86-F’s in an aide-­ mémoire of May 11, 1960 to the Department of State. (723.5622/5–1160) 6 Ambassador Berckemeyer requested the six C-46 aircraft in an aide-­mémoire of March 30 to the Acting Secretary of State. (723.5622/3–3059) In a conversation with Berckemeyer on May 20, Assistant Secretary Rubottom asked that Peru consider this request “in the context of many other, more burdensome Peruvian military expenditures.” (723.5622/5–2059) Berckemeyer told Rubottom on June 9 that Peru had decided to postpone the request for the C–46’s and to ask for the aircraft listed above. (723.5622/6–959)
