1957 1405 change this obstructive behaviour so that all Chinese who desire to do so can return without encountering any obstruction. 24. I replied that he had made to me the statement that American residents in China are free to return. As I recalled it, this was precisely the same statement he had made to me on August 2, 1955. We then discussed the question of Americans in prison. I had entered into the agreed announcement with a clear understanding that that would have an effect on their situation and enable them expeditiously to return. As token and confirmation of my understanding, on the same day as the agreed announcement, he announced to me the names of ten persons who were released. Since December 1955 not a one has been able to return prior to the full completion of his sentence. 25. I went on to say that I had asked him this morning and again asked him in what way had the agreed announcement been applied to or in any way affected the ability to return of those persons since December 1955 or those six who still remained. I found not the slightest evidence of what the effect had been, except apparently for the worse. 26. Wang replied that the action we had taken on this question of civilians wholly conformed with what they had said in public. Nobody can ever point out an incident in which an American resident in China has been obstructed in returning. This even extends to those former prisoners of war who refused repatriation at the end of the Korean war. Whenever any one of this group indicated he had changed his mind and wanted to return, they did everything they could to help him real­ ize his wish. 27. Wang continued. Nobody could ever cite any evidence that they had either in the past or at present called the American criminal offenders in prisons ordinary civilian residents in China. There had been no change whatsoever in their policy or practice with regard to this group of criminal offenders. Any allegations or charges which did not conform to reality are not acceptable to his side. 28. Wang continued. In dealing with such an issue thought must be given to the situation existing on both sides. Under circumstances in which Chinese residents in the United States continue to meet obstruc­ tion in departing one could not demand anything extraordinary on his side’s part. He had consistently been concerned with the question of improving the situation of residents abroad. 29. I replied that he would recall that when we were negotiating the agreed announcement he first asked for the inclusion of an excep­ tion for persons in prison. However, I had opposed this and finally we had agreed upon the elimination of any such reference. I had asked him and I again asked him in what way the agreed announcement had in the slightest affected American citizens in China as compared with the situation before its existence.
