800.51 W 89Yugoslavia/56 [Document 127] The Minister in the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (Dodge) to the Secretary of State BELGRADE, February 11, 1925. [Received March 7.] No. 2572 SIR: Referring to Mr. Paddock’s Despatch No. 2494 of November 20th last,86 relative to his further efforts to obtain the confirmation desired by the World War Foreign Debt Commission of certain assurances given by the Yugoslav Debt Mission to the effect that no action would be taken by the Yugoslav Government with respect to any of its indebtedness heretofore or hereafter incurred which would result in placing the United States in a less favorable position as a creditor than that which it now occupies, I have the honor to inform you that I have not failed to keep this matter in mind and to inquire from time to time about it in my conversations with the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and of Finance. To-day in the course of a conversation with Dr. Stojadinovitch, the Minister of Finance, I again drew his attention to my note of May 15th last, which embodied your telegram No. 14 of May 13, 6 p.m., and to the many assurances which I had received from him and his predecessor, Dr. Mehmed Spaho, as well as from Dr. Nintchitch, the Foreign Minister, and his predecessor, Mr. Voja Marinkovitch. Dr. Stojadinovitch excused himself for not having replied sooner, referring to his numerous absences and to the recent elections, and stated that he had lately been considering his reply. He would now immediately study the question with Dr. Nedelkovitch, the former member of the Yugoslav Debt Mission who was now in Belgrade, and would send me a reply within a few days. I then inquired as to whether his Government might be expected soon to make some definite proposals to my Government looking to the refunding of the indebtedness of the Yugoslav Government to the Government of the United States. In this connection I referred to the statements made to me by Mr. Marinkovitch, the Foreign Minister in the preceding Cabinet, Despatch No. 2463 of September 26th last,86 to the effect that such proposals would soon be presented. Dr. Stojadinovitch replied that he had also given attention to this matter and that his Government desired to make a definite proposal as soon as possible and that he expected to do so during May or June next. I then inquired why his Government required so long a time in view of the long delay which had
