908  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
220.	 Memorandum From JCS to Commander in Chief, Atlantic1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Instructions for Expenditure of Nuclear Weapons in [text not declassified] (S)
1. The President has authorized certain [text not declassified] to 
expend nuclear weapons in defense of the United States, its Territories, 
possessions and forces when the urgency of time and circumstances 
clearly does not permit a [text not declassified].
2. [text not declassified]
3. You have been designated by the President as [text not declassi­
fied] in the Enclosure hereto.
4. In regard to the air defense of the United States, its Territories 
and possessions, the instructions contained herein do not change the 
authority [text not declassified] pursuant to the “Authorization for the 
Expenditure of Atomic Weapons in Air Defense” approved by  the 
President 19 April 1956 and the “Policy Statement on Interception 
and Engagement of Hostile Aircraft” approved 24 September 1952. 
This authority was implemented ii accordance with the revised 
“Interception and Engagement Instructions and Procedures”, dated 
7 ­December 1956.
[NOTE: Pge 2 of source text denied in full.]
3. OPERATIONAL LIMITATIONS. Because of the serious interna­
tional implications of the use of nuclear weapons by U.S. military forces, 
it is essential that particularly strict command control and supervision 
be exercised, and that the use of nuclear weapons be limited to circum­
stances of grave necessity. [text not declassified] In the expenditure of 
nuclear weapons pursuant to these instructions, the following limita­
tions will be observed.
a. You may expend nuclear weapons [text not declassified].
b. Under this authorization, you may not expend nuclear weapons 
for [text not declassified].
c. Any expenditure of nuclear weapons pursuant to these instruc­
tions [text not declassified].
1 Source: Instructions for use of nuclear weapons. Top Secret. 11 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, White House Office Files, Records of the Special Assistant to the President for 
National Security Affairs, NSC Series, Atomic Weapons, Corr. And Background for Pres­
idential Approval.
