982 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 298. Letter From President Carter to Yugoslav President Mijatovic1 Washington, August 13, 1980 Dear Mr. President: During my visit to Belgrade in June we agreed that it would be useful to continue the practice President Tito and I had of writing to one another on subjects of common concern. I would like to start the exchange with you by raising two issues of great importance for the further development of East-West relations: Afghanistan, and the deployment of long-range theater nuclear forces (LRTNF) in Europe. Both of these issues affect the interests not only of the countries directly involved, but of every country in the world. Mr. President, I know of your own deep concern over the Afghan situation, and I appreciate Yugoslavia’s independent efforts among the nonaligned nations and hope they will continue. We support the diplomatic efforts of the Islamic Conference Committee on Afghanistan as the most productive approach to pursue at the moment, and will be urging our friends and allies to exert continued pressure on Moscow during this critical post-Olympic period. I see little ground for optimism about the situation in Afghanistan. The June 22 announcement of limited Soviet troop withdrawals appears to have been simply an attempt to mislead. The Soviets redeployed across their border a relatively small number of troops unsuited to the type of military operations now being conducted in Afghanistan. The overall effect of these troop movements has been to increase the effectiveness of the Soviet combat presence in Afghanistan. The reorganized Soviet forces are being used ruthlessly to put down the Afghan national resistance. Meanwhile, the Soviets continue to block any efforts to discuss a political settlement by insisting on preconditions that would legitimize the invasion and the present regime in Kabul and that would leave open the central question of withdrawal. This Soviet recalcitrance is 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 22, Yugoslavia: President Cvijetin Mijatovic, 5–9/80. No classification marking. Brzezinski forwarded the letter, based on a draft provided by the Department of State, to Carter on August 8. (Ibid.) According to the log sheet, Carter signed the letter on August 20. The Department instructed the Embassy in Belgrade to deliver the text of the letter to the Office of the President as early as possible. (Telegram 225967 to Belgrade, August 25; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800405–1287) Eagleburger delivered the letter to Acting Foreign Minister Pesic on August 27. (Telegram 6709 from Belgrade, August 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800409–0651)
