International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1145
“There are, however, political issues at the conference that could
lead to confrontation if moderate forces do not rally to prevent this.
Cuba is attempting to include language which links Zionism with rac-
ism, apartheid, colonialism and other evils in proposed G–77 amend-
ments to the Action program for the conference. There are also G–77
draft submissions which blame women’s inequality on neo-colonialism
and an unjust world economic order. Our Delegation is working hard,
with support from the conference leadership, to remove such objection-
able issues from Action program drafts. Our Delegation is not author-
ized to threaten withdrawal from the conference if our concerns are not
met unless authorized to do so from Washington. If these unacceptable
political issues threaten to disrupt permanently the work of the confer-
ence, you might then want to consider recommending to the President
that our Delegation withdraw. Thus far there has been no challenge to
the credentials of the DK (Pol Pot) Kampuchean delegation at the con-
ference. There have been reports that a rival PRK (Heng Samrin) dele-
gation might attempt this.” (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the
Secretary—Subject Files of Edmund S. Muskie, 1963–1981, Box 3, Pres
Bkfasts Jul, Aug, Sept 1980)
Ultimately the U.S. delegation was unsuccessful in its attempt to
remove what it considered inflammatory language antithetical to U.S.
foreign policy from the draft Program of Action. During the first week
of the conference, the Indian delegation proposed an amendment, ulti-
mately supported by the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO), to
the Program of Action designed to channel financial assistance to Pales-
tinian women through the auspices of the PLO. (Telegram 4763 from
Copenhagen, July 18; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800345–0563) Telegram 189457 to Copenhagen and the U.S. Mis-
sion to the United Nations, July 18, termed the language proposed by
the Indian delegation “unacceptable” and instructed the U.S. delega-
tion to “oppose any mention of the PLO as a conduit for assistance to
Palestinian women.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D800346–0418)
In telegram 4960/USDEL 74 from Copenhagen, July 24, Wed-
dington reported that the Indian delegation had presented a revised
amendment that deleted reference to the channeling of financial assist-
ance through the PLO and substituted language that called for funds to
be disbursed in “consultation and cooperation with the PLO, the repre-
sentative of the Palestinian people.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P870058–0371) The Department instructed the dele-
gation “not to accept any language calling for assistance to or through
PLO,” adding, “Nor can we agree to any language referring to PLO or
implying that PLO is the representative of Palestinians.” (Telegram
196775 to Copenhagen, July 25; National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
