602  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
handling these Americans. One factor is behavior of individual and 
nature of case. Other is manner in which relations between our two 
countries improve. He might ask whether there has been any signifi­
cant improvement in relations between two countries since issuance of 
­September 10 announcement.
66. Wang said as to question whether there are Chinese held in 
US prisons, I had answered I did not know of such cases. This did not 
mean that there is no such case. I had said even if there were such cases, 
Chinese held in U.S. prisons would be free communicate with Indian 
Embassy and request latter make investigation in such cases. This was 
answer I had provided. He wanted to point out that investigation into 
facts such cases and ability these persons effect return are two sepa­
rate matters. He wished assure me Chinese Government handling cases 
Americans who breach law in China in exactly this manner.
67. Wang said concerning 38 of 103 Chinese who had been pre­
vented from returning and have not yet effected return, I had suggested 
these persons may have changed their mind. He considered there was 
no ground for such conclusion. It incredible that individuals who had 
dared demand return under circumstances of being subjected to threats 
would not wish to return after issuance agreed announcement.
68. Wang said in regard to INS requirement Chinese students 
obtain entry permit Taiwan within given time limit, my explanation 
was not convincing. He might cite case of American nationals in China 
to explain his point. As I was aware, Mrs. Huizer was holding Dutch 
passport and as rule would be considered Dutch national. However, 
I had requested she be returned as American national. It was good will 
on PRC side that case was handled as that of American national. In 
explaining my point I had stated every alien national should be allowed 
proceed destination of his choice. How would I explain matter con­
cerning Chinese nationals in U.S.? Why did U.S. side not take steps so 
Chinese would obtain entry permits to China instead of insisting they 
obtain entry permits Taiwan. By contrasting manner in which PRC side 
handled case of Mrs. Huzer and manner in which U.S. side handled 
requirement Chinese students obtain entry permits Taiwan, clear pic­
ture emerges of unfriendly attitude U.S. side. This also open violation 
September 10 agreement.
69. Wang said I had spoken of necessity ensuring understand­
ing and confidence both sides in solution problems before us. On this 
he was in full agreement. He regarded present talks as concrete step 
toward promotion understanding and confidence our two sides. After 
forty days discussion, we able agree on September 10 agreement, the 
first between us. This represented further increase confidence and 
understanding between our two sides.
