1977  63
viewed as a commendable sign of improvement in SU–US relations. 
A bilateral approach does not, however, necessarily override the disad-
vantages inherent in particular no-­first-­use postures.
B1. A bilateral general no-­first-­use posture would still pose virtu-
ally all the problems for the US of a unilateral statement in terms of 
deterrent credibility, reassurance of allies, and nuclear proliferation. It 
would in fact be and would be viewed as a highly asymmetrical conces-
sion on the part of the US.
B2. A bilateral no-­first-­use of strategic weapons would be impos-
sible to negotiate given the difficulties of defining what a strategic 
weapon is.
B3. A bilateral no-­first-­use except to defend self and allies would 
not have serious disadvantages from the US point of view, but it might 
give the Soviets the occasion to extend nuclear protection to other coun-
tries (e.g., Cuba, Mozambique, Iraq, Libya) thereby raising the possi-
bility of a Soviet escalatory response if these countries were subject to 
conventional attack by the US or by other powers.
B4. A bilateral no-­first-­use against non-­nuclear weapons states 
would be generally harmless and could represent a significant joint 
effort by the US and the SU to reduce incentives towards nuclear 
proliferation.
Recommendation: That only options A3, A4, and B4 above be seri-
ously considered as possible alternatives to current US constructive 
­reticence on this subject.
19.	
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Some Additional Observations On The B–1 Production Decision
In the analysis of the B–1 production decision that I sent you last 
week,2 I sketched out what I see as the most important issues bear-
ing on your decision. Since then, my staff has developed some 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 6, B–1: 6/11–30/1977. Top Secret; Sensitive. Printed from an uninitialed copy.
2 See Document 17.
