which Japan appears insanely jealous. In consequence of the Department’s
stand as expressed in section 2 of the experts’ recommendations7 and
specifically in the Department’s telegram 128, June 28, 6 p.m., 1923,8
rejecting consortium idea, this Legation has categorically stated that
independent radio communication was insisted upon by the American
Government.
4. Proposed wireless consortium appears to be substantially the same as the
combination contemplated in the Viviani resolution9 and experts’ Heads of
Arrangements10 with which the Department refused to associate itself.
Legation was informed by Schwerin February 12th, 1923, of telegram from
the Radio Corporation reporting formation of combination of British, French,
Japanese radio interests endorsed by Danish and British cable companies
with Telefuhken Company invited to join for wireless operations in China. I
suggest present Japanese proposal thinly veiled attempt on behalf of this
group to induce the American Government to withdraw objection to
American participation.
5. While the Japanese Government’s proposal provides for exclusive control
of the contemplated facilities by the Chinese Government it is evident that as
a financial safeguard control the stations until paid for would of necessity
have to vest in the associated lenders. Under those circumstances I am of the
opinion that terms satisfactory to the lenders would never be accepted by the
Chinese Government and the sole result of the consortium plan would be to
prevent creation of the Federal stations and leave the Mitsui Peking station in
sole possession. Japanese allusion to the banking consortium is significant in
view of its failure to accomplish anything constructive in four years’
existence.
6. Even if satisfactory consortium arrangement were made it would seem
possible for Japan to evade consortium restrictions through stations in South
Manchuria Railway Zone or Leased Territory. I believe that by reason of
contiguity of territory she would somehow manage to secure independent
communication.
7. The Federal Telegraph Company has vested rights as to its contract which
the Department probably desires to consult and possibly decision as to the
Japanese proposal should be left to the company. From the standpoint of
Chinese-American relations I consider acceptance of this proposal would
mean advantage for Japan but loss of prestige for the United States in the
Orient and in loss also [of] much [of] the closer union with China anticipated
from the Federal plan. It would be difficult to explain abandonment of the
independent execution of the Federal contract after the unprecedented
