798
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Accordingly, your foreign policy, by combining the ability to work
with the new forces in the world with an emphasis on American
strength, is more likely to generate a condition of global peace and
gradual accommodation of regional or ideological disputes.
All of the foregoing enables you to state confidently and very af-
firmatively that “tyranny is everywhere on the defensive”; that “free-
dom is the genuine inevitability of our times”; that “American prin-
ciples and values are relevant to our times.” These optimistic themes
regarding the future follow logically from your broad approach to the
world.
In contrast, Reagan’s foreign policy can be defined as:
1. Dominated by a nostalgia for the past;
2. Preoccupied one-dimensionally with weaponry.
The nostalgia for the conditions of the fifties, a time of unique
American military and economic preponderance, shows the degree to
which Reagan has no sense of history and particularly no vision for the
future. Neither our relations with the Third World nor our relations
with the Soviet Union can be shaped in the eighties on the basis of what
existed thirty years ago. Any effort to do so is simply likely to produce
America’s isolation in a hostile world. At the same time, Reagan’s one-
dimensional preoccupation with weaponry is likely to precipitate an
arms race while giving the Soviets no incentive to exercise any re-
straint, be it in the Persian Gulf area or in regard to Poland. It is likely to
generate more intense confrontations and thus threaten world peace.
In connection with the foregoing, it might be also possible to reg-
ister subtly the relevance of Reagan’s advanced age to our concerns
with the future. The decade of the eighties cannot be managed by an
America led by an aged President, dominated by nostalgia for the past.
America must convey a vital message to the world, 80% of whose pop-
ulation is composed of politically awakened Third World peoples,
most of them quite young. A world of change and youth requires a vital
and forward-looking America.
To conclude, the three themes which you should have very clearly
in your mind as you speak are:
1. That your foreign policy reflects an optimistic recognition of the
nature of change in the world and America’s ability to convey a mor-
ally relevant sense of direction to that world;
2. That under your stewardship American strength has been in-
creased, our Allies have been strengthened, and our strategic position
in the world has also improved;
3. That the proper response to complex global change is not nos-
talgia for the fifties.
