Afghanistan
259
Pakistani Visit
Pakistani Foreign Affairs Adviser Agha Shahi has postponed his
visit to Kabul until 30–31 December, ostensibly because of bad flying
weather. The excuse may have some validity, but the decision to delay
a week because of Shahi’s other commitments may reflect a lack of
enthusiasm for the trip stemming from the poor prospects for any sig-
nificant improvement in relations between Kabul and Islamabad. [less
than 1 line, classification marking, and handling restriction not declassified]
[Omitted here is a map.]
93.
Intelligence Summary Cable Prepared in the Department of
Defense1
No. JSI–7
December 25, 1979, 0900Z
[less than 1 line not declassified] Please pass to SecDef eyes only for
the Secretary of Defense JSI–7 25 Dec 79
Current Intelligence Summary for the [less than 1 line not declassified]
(Supplement). (U). Ref: [less than 1 line not declassified].2 Current Intelli-
gence Summary Nr Six. (U)
A. (S [codeword not declassified]) USSR-Afghanistan Update: Since
the referenced message was transmitted several developments have
occurred in the Soviet-Afghanistan situation.
—[1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (7 lines) not declassified]
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, 15 Dec–2 Jan. Top
Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. Sent for immediate night delivery
eyes only for the Secretary of Defense. Drafted by [text not declassified].
2 The referenced message was not found. An Alert Memorandum prepared in the
Central Intelligence Agency, December 25, from Carlucci to Vance, Brown, Jones, and
Brzezinski reads: “As you know, we have been closely monitoring Soviet military activi-
ties in Afghanistan and in the USSR itself in the last few days. On 19 December we
issued an alert memorandum warning that the USSR appeared to be building up for a
major move into Afghanistan. Intelligence received in the last 12 hours convinces me
that [preparations?] for that operation have essentially been completed and that it proba-
bly has begun. If so, it will mark the first significant use of Soviet ground forces outside
the USSR and Eastern Europe since the end of World War II.” (Central Intelligence
Agency, National Intelligence Council Files, Job 81B00080R, Box 11, NI IIM 79–10017,
[additional memorandum number not declassified] Alert Memo USSR-Afghanistan (27 Decem-
ber 1979)) For the December 19 Alert Memorandum, see Document 89.
