546  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
I know that we already have a great deal of work before us but 
I am convinced that conditions may never be better to begin to improve 
stability and eliminate these most threatening systems.3
Sincerely,
George Bush
3 Scowcroft transmitted the letter to Matlock via privacy channels in a backchannel 
message of March 21, 0001Z, which began: “Please pass the following message to President 
Gorbachev from President Bush. Obviously the text of the message is very sensitive. 
Jim Baker and Larry Eagleburger are the only two people in State aware of its contents. 
Secretary Baker discussed the same proposal with Shevardnadze during their meeting in 
Namibia.” In a backchannel message sent via privacy channels on March 21 at 1107Z, Joyce 
wrote Scowcroft: “Jack Matlock will be returning from Central Asia on March 23. In his 
absence I delivered the President’s letter to Gorbachev to First Deputy Foreign Minister 
Bessmertnykh at 10:30 local March 21. Though I handed the letter in a sealed envelope 
I told him that it contained important proposals on START. He undertook to transmit the 
letter to Gorbachev immediately.” Scowcroft responded to Joyce via privacy channels in a 
backchannel message of March 21, 1924Z: “If I had wanted the letter to Gorbachev to go 
through the foreign ministry, we would not have sent it back channel and asked for deliv-
ery personally to Gorbachev. I suggest that in the future when communications are handled 
in a manner out of the ordinary that you consult before deciding on a different course of 
action.” (George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft Collection, 
Special Separate USSR Notes Files, Gorbachev Files, For the President).
91.	
Letter From Soviet President Gorbachev to President Bush1
Moscow, April 2, 1990
Dear Mr. President,
Your letter of March 21, 19902 prompts serious reflections on the 
emerging—and possibly unique—prospects of the evolution of the 
Soviet–US strategic relationship.
Indeed, now that we have come within reach of completing pains-
taking work on a whole package of arms reduction agreements the time 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft 
Collection, Special Separate USSR Notes Files, Gorbachev Files, OA/ID 91126–004, 
Gorbachev (Dobrynin) Sensitive 1989–June 1990 [4]. No classification marking. Printed 
from a copy marked: “Unofficial translation.”
2 Reference is to Document 90.
