426
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
148.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near
Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Byroade) to the
Deputy Under Secretary of State (Matthews)1
Washington, November 26, 1952.
SUBJECT
Proposal to Organize a Coup d’e´tat in Iran
Problem:
The British Foreign Office has informed us that it would be dis-
posed to attempt to bring about a coup d’e´tat in Iran, replacing the Mo-
sadeq Government by one which would be more “reliable”, if the
American Government agreed to cooperate. British and American in-
telligence agencies have had very tentative and preliminary discus-
sions regarding the practicability of such a move but cannot go further
unless the State Department is prepared seriously to consider it as a
matter of policy. The intelligence representatives have requested a defi-
nite statement on this point.2
Background:
You will recall that the British Embassy on October 8 gave us a
paper which outlined possible ways of meeting the threat of Commu-
nism in Iran. Pursuant to your instructions, Jack Jernegan and others
from the Department and CIA have had three meetings on it with
British Embassy and Intelligence representatives. (The first of these was
summarized in Jernegan’s memorandum of October 23).3 Among the
possible lines of action mentioned in the British paper was the organi-
zation of a coup d’e´tat, but the paper itself dismissed this as an imprac-
ticable course because of the lack of a suitable Iranian leader. At a
meeting held yesterday, however, the British Embassy said that further
consideration has led the British Government to conclude that a coup
d’e´tat might well be within our capabilities and is probably our best
chance to save Iran.
While the Embassy representative (Bernard Burrows) did not give
details of the British reasoning, it appears that the Foreign Office has
come to this conclusion because (a) British intelligence has reported
that an organization which could handle the job exists in Iran, and (b)
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/11–2652. Top
Secret; Special Handling. There is no drafting information on the memorandum, which
was concurred in by Nitze, Berry, Beale, and Henderson.
2 Document 133.
3 Document 134.
