January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1311 Attachment Alert Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency5 Washington, July 11, 1980 SYRIA There is a growing likelihood that Syrian President Assad will be assassinated or ousted by a coup. Assad’s departure could signal the return of an era of chaotic instability and regional isolation that typified Syria’s first quarter century of independence. Virtually any successor regime would be initially more nationalistic and hardline, unable to propose or respond effectively to major foreign policy initiatives, particularly negotiations with Israel, until it felt confident of its hold on power. A new regime might also withdraw from Lebanon, raising the prospect of renewed civil war; seek to rally domestic support through limited clashes with Israel; and seek support from the USSR to help offset internal threats. The recent assassination attempt against Syrian President Assad underscores his growing vulnerability and is likely to encourage further assassination attempts and increased terrorist attacks against Assad’s minority Alawite regime. Although the beleaguered Syrian President may be able to hold power for many months, his removal by a coup or assassination—with little or no warning—is becoming increasingly likely. [handling restriction not declassified] In the event of Assad’s violent death or overthrow, Syria could easily revert to the pattern of chaotic instability that existed before his assumption of power in 1970. Alawites are in the best position to oust Assad but the absence of an obvious successor could soon generate a power struggle until a new leader consolidated his position. In any event, a new regime—whether Alawite or Sunni—would be dominated by the military. A Sunni regime might be able to strengthen its position by attaining an accommodation with Muslim Brotherhood extremists. [handling restriction not declassified] At the outset, virtually any successor would be more unpredictable, nationalistic, and probably more radical than Assad. This sit- 5 Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A notation on the first page reads: “The Alert Memorandum is an interagency publication issued by the Director of Central Intelligence on behalf of the Intelligence Community. Its purpose is to ensure that senior policymakers are aware of potential developments that may have serious implications for US interests. It is not a prediction that these developments will occur. This memorandum has been coordinated at the working level with CIA, DIA, NSA, and State/INR.”
