488 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement DR–12. Telegram from the Chargé in the Dominican Republic (Dearborn) to be Department of State1  Ciudad Trujillo, February 9, 1960, midnight. 431. Today I accompanied Senator Smathers2 to remarkable interview with Generalissimo. Also present were President Hector Trujillo, Vice President Balaguer, Secretary De Moya, William D. Pawley, and three members Smathers’ party. Senator initiated substance conversation by expressing appreciation for Generalissimo’s support in United Nations generally and particularly against international Communism. Said he recognized Trujillo had long been friend of United States. Generalissimo thanked Senator and remarked he would appreciate a little help now and then in his fight against Communists. Senator continued he well knew Generalissimo had done great deal for his country in many ways and compared progress now evident in Dominican Republic with situation here prior to Trujillo’s time. Senator remarked that bearing in mind friendship which he had for Trujillo and former’s respect for accomplishments already made, Senator would like see him rise to even greater eminence. Said it seemed to him Trujillo had opportunity rise to heights and fame unparalleled by any past or present Latin American Dictator. This opportunity was to arrange while still alive for transition to moderate democratic government. Senator noted all men had to die sometime for one reason or another and this would have to happen to Generalissimo eventually. What Smathers feared was that when that event occurred enemies of United States and Dominican Republic would rush in during confusion as occurred in Cuba and that Castro type government which neither United States nor Generalissimo would like would take over. Generalissimo’s comment was he did not believe his people so stupid as to accept such government. He noted there was President and Vice President and line of succession was therefore fully arranged. Commented he not even in line. Not allowing subject become diverted Smathers and Pawley both urged Generalissimo to begin promptly steps toward democratic government by holding free municipal elections. Generalissimo said there would first have be constitutional reforms but he would hold such elections within one year. Smathers asked if he might say this to press on leaving interview and Trujillo gave his assent. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 739.00/2–960. Confidential; Priority. This telegram was sent in two sections. 2 George K. Smathers (D-Fla.) visited the Dominican Republic.
