Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
567
113.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 24, 1979
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #89
I. Opinion
Foreign Policy: Tone and Orchestration
You confront a paradox: everyone who has met with you, whether
it be mass media dinner guests or participants in the Congressional for-
eign policy briefings, afterwards invariably say how immensely im-
pressed they were by your mastery of foreign policy, by your knowl-
edge of details, and by your ability to relate that knowledge to a broad
vision. Just last night I was told that Mrs. Reston2 commented after a
dinner with you that she cannot recall any President who could match
you in that regard. After one of the Congressional briefings, Tip O’Neill
said that no one can have the slightest doubt that you are not only fully
in charge of foreign policy but that you have a clear and coherent pic-
ture as to where this country ought to be heading.3
Yet at the same time, it is a fact that both abroad and increasingly at
home the United States is seen as indecisive, vacillating, and pursuing a
policy of acquiescence. We are perceived as neither responding effec-
tively to Soviet assertiveness and as unable to generate a broad strategy
that is relevant to the times.
Why this incongruity?
Part of the answer, I suppose, is to be found in what you said at the
State Department the other day: we live in a complex age, and com-
plexity does not lend itself to simple explanations.4 We can no longer
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National Security Report: 1–2/79. Secret.
The President initialed the top right-hand corner of the memorandum.
2 Reference is to journalist Sally Reston, married to syndicated columnist James
“Scotty” Reston.
3 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, the President wrote “good idea”
and drew an arrow pointing downward from the comment.
4 On February 22, the President took part in a foreign policy conference at the De-
partment of State for editors and broadcasters. In his opening remarks the President as-
serted: “Looking back over the last several years, particularly the last 2 years, I’ve been
struck by the increasing complexity, however, of international affairs. I’m encouraged by
what I judge to be a willingness on behalf of the American people to attempt to under-
stand complex issues, not to oversimplify them, and to support policies and decisions
that basically and openly address these complex issues responsibly and realistically.”
(Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, p. 310)
