If the last day of the period is a dies non in the country where protection is claimed, the period shall be extended until the next working day. (d) Any person desiring to take advantage of the priority of a previous application must make a declaration giving particulars as to the date of such application and the country in which it was made. Each country will determine for itself the latest date at which such declaration must be made. The particulars referred to shall be stated in the publications issued by the competent authority, and in particular in the patents issued and the specifications relating thereto. The contracting countries may require any person making a declaration of priority to produce a copy of the application (with the specification, drawings, etc.) previously made. The copy, certified as correct by the authority receiving this demand, shall not require any legal authentication, and in any circumstances can be filed at any time within the period of three months from the lodging of the last application. They may also require that the declaration shall be accompanied by a certificate by the proper authority showing the date of application, and also by a translation. No other formalities may be required for the declaration of priority at the time of application. Each of the contracting countries shall decide for itself what consequences shall follow the omission of the formalities prescribed by the present article, but such consequence shall in no case be more serious than the loss of the right of priority. At later stages, further proof in support of the application may be required. (e) Where an application is filed in a country for the registration of an industrial design or model by virtue of a right of priority based on the registration of a utility model, the period of priority shall not exceed that fixed for industrial designs and models. Furthermore, it is allowable to deposit in a country a utility model by virtue of rights of priority based on a patent application, and vice versa. (f)If an application for a patent contains claims for multiple priority, or if examination discloses that the application contains more than one invention, the competent authorities must at least allow the applicant to divide it, subject to the conditions of internal legislation,! reserving as date of each divisional application the date of the initial application and, if there is occasion for it, the benefits of the right of priority. ARTICLE 4 BIS Patents applied for in the various contracting countries by nationals of the Union shall be independent of the patents obtained for the same invention in other countries, whether such countries be or be not parties to the Union.
