possible the financial burden of the last war. Otherwise we would face a
crisis with a part of our capital resources already expended.
The amount and kind of our military equipment is preeminently a question
for the decision of the Congress, after giving due consideration to the
advice of military experts and the available public revenue. Nothing is more
laudable than the cooperation of the agricultural and industrial resources of
the country for the purpose of supplying the needs of national defense. In
time of peril the people employed in these interests volunteered in a most
self-sacrificing way, often at the nominal charge of a dollar a year. But the
Army and Navy are not supported for the benefit of supply concerns;
supply concerns are supported for the benefit of the Army and Navy. The
distribution of orders on what is needed from different concerns for the
purpose of keeping up equipment and organization is perfectly justified, but
any attempt to prevail upon the Government to purchase beyond its needs
ought not to be tolerated. It is eminently fair that those who deal with the
Government should do so at a reasonable profit. However, public money is
expended not that some one may profit by it, but in order to serve a public
purpose.
While our policy of national defense will proceed in order that we may be
independent and self-sufficient, I am opposed to engaging in any attempt at
competitive armaments. No matter how much or how little some other
country may feel constrained to provide, we can well afford to set the
example, not of being dictated to by others, but of adopting our own
standards. We are strong enough to pursue that method, which will be a
most wholesome model for the rest of the world. We are eminently
peaceful, but we are by no means weak. While we submit our differences
with others, not to the adjudication of force, but of reason, it is not because
we are unable to defend our rights. While we are doing our best to eliminate
all resort to war for the purpose of settling disputes, we can not but
remember that the peace we now enjoy had to be won by the sword and that
if the rights of our country are to be defended we can not rely for that
purpose upon anyone but ourselves. We can not shirk the responsibility,
which is the first requisite of all government, of preserving its own integrity
and maintaining the rights of its own citizens. It is only in accordance with
