Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 341 dispersed. The proposed element was designed to give confidence that, after dispersal, the situation had returned to what existed prior to dispersal. Nazarkin asked whether inspection and enhanced NTM would be applied to the same area or to different areas. Brooks replied that both methods could be applied to the same area, but this was not required. After one dispersal, enhanced NTM might be applied to one area and inspection to another. After another dispersal, both methods could be applied to the same area. It was up to the inspecting side. Nazarkin suggested that the issue be returned to at the next meeting. Burt, taking up the issue of data denial, said he welcomed Soviet readiness to enter into an agreement on this subject. He noted that the Soviet side had earlier asked about practices other than encryption that could deny full access to the data and asked Mr. Foley to provide a response. Foley pointed out that encryption meant encoding data in a way that could not be decoded by the other side. But other means of data denial existed. One such method was to retrieve measurements by means other than the broadcast of the data, including on-­board recording of measurements for later retrieval—­commonly referred to as encapsulation of telemetry. Another method involved deliberate interference with the other side’s NTM, including by jamming—­that is, broadcasting signals on or near the frequency on which data was transmitted. In general, the U.S. proposal would ban the deliberate intent to mask signal characteristics of data transmitted from a missile in flight. Khromov asked if it was alright to conduct external trajectory measurements. Foley said he was not sure he understood. If Khromov meant ground tracking of missiles, such as by radars, that was not included. Khromov asked about optical, thermal, and other external means. Foley reiterated that only transmission of data from missiles in flight was included, not ground stations. Khromov asked whether passive information, such as thermal, came from on board. Foley replied that, if thermal measurements were made from a ground station, then they would not be covered by the agreement. However, if a side broadcast from the ground at or near the frequency of the data transmitted from the missile, then that would be data denial. Khromov said that, by means of bipolar reflectors, a side could hide the number of warheads.
