Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II pressure) this briefing should be used to demonstrate what the US policy has accomplished. With press in attendance, it can be used to kickoff an Administration effort to take more credit where credit is due, and possibly (if desired) to tactfully draw attention to unwise statutory requirements which have recently been enacted. 171. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to the Senior Deputy Assistant of State for Economic and Business Affairs (Hormats)1 Washington, November 21, 1978 SUBJECT Human Rights and A.I.D. This Administration’s commitment to working for human rights improvements is founded upon the established premise that as the richest nation in the world, the United States should use its vast resources to promote the economic and social rights of all people. Toward this end the USG has provided sizeable amounts of assistance to their nations. However, when considered as a proportion of our national wealth, our contributions lag far behind those of many governments. To insure that the U.S. comes closer to meeting its responsibility for promoting a more equitable international economic order, the Carter Administration has undertaken to increase international and bilateral economic assistance to poor countries. The Secretary articulated the administration’s aid policy when, in a 1977 address, he told the American Bar Association: “The United States looks to the use of economic assistance—whether bilateral or through international financial institutions—as a means to foster basic human rights”. In my own efforts to promote human rights, I have consistently and publicly endorsed the President’s stated commitment to 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Chron and Official Records of the Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Lot 85D366, AID. No classification marking. Drafted by Bova. Hanson’s initials are on the memorandum. Bova subsequently sent a copy of the memorandum to Derian under cover of a November 30 memorandum, referencing Derian’s upcoming meeting with Vance regarding the OMB decision to cut the FY 1980 Agency for International Development budget. (Ibid.)
