994 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI agreement one could increase the verification quota to verify the number on SLBMs. Now in addition to this, your side is prepared to agree to the criterion throwweight on the new type of missiles. The Soviet side has already accommodated the US position on the 10% criteria. It’s also ready to take certain steps on the following—­taking into account the US position. We accept the PPCM problem for mobile ICBM production facilities and with regard to the Soviet Union, there are two production facilities as regard to the SS–24 and one for the SS–25. And here the INF verification range would apply. On the US side the rule applied to where the MX is produced—­even if in the future we decide to use the Midgetman, it could be produced and the relevant production facility would be governed by the PPCM requirement. We regard this as a major step and we expect some reciprocation from the Soviets. Obukhov: Okay, we will look at that. We do have another question on the expert discussion that was held today on a compromise on throwweight.2 Nazarkin: The main result was that to meet the US concern without affecting our position in what we’re trying to do. We did agree, but we did discuss the possibility of including a throwweight criterion in the new type definition. Burt: I understand that there may be a compromise. Obukhov: We are in favor of including throwweight as a criterion in this definition of the new type, but the concerns of the US side were discussed and we’ve tried to satisfy your concerns in this framework. Bartholomew: I think you’ve established a hypothetical case. Baker: I like to try to bring us back into focus. I want to know, I want us to respond in general, but I also want us to summarize where we are—Rick could you do that? Burt: Well, we are very close on the B–1 and the B–2 and also very close on the PPCM. On downloading, the Soviet side is listing the idea that we had heard in Houston from the Soviet side. It seems to have supposed that we agreed to an outline in Houston. We listened, but never agreed to it. On throwweight, they still seek to include that and the new types. They’ve given on the B–1 and B–2, PPCM and they want us to give on downloading and the SS–N–18. There are two types that did not apply to SS–N–18 because they have already downloaded on the SS–N–18, at least that’s their position. But they’ve given us assurances that they have no longer seven warheads on the front end of the SS–N–18. They now only have three warheads on the front end and they will give us a need to go out and inspect and ensure that that’s the case, that there are no SS–N–18s with seven warheads on the front end. 2 No memorandum of conversation was found.
