806 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II ularly the Cubans and the Chinese. The Tanzanian delegation enthusiastically wanted to push a strong action resolution through the Conference. To allow further study, they softened their position. They persuaded the African Group to sponsor, and the Conference to support, a consensus declaration asking the FAO Director-General to study the proposal and report to the 74th FAO Council in November 1978.4 To examine the proposal within the U.S. Government, IO formed a Study Group with representation from AID, Peace Corps/ACTION, Agriculture, and USUN.5 The White House, OMB, and a number of congressional staffers also participated. This memorandum only addresses the central premise behind the Food Corps proposal. The actual structure of the Food Corps and its international acceptability will only emerge after an evaluation being conducted by the FAO and proposed consultations with interested governments. A. The Need for a Food Corps The inter-agency Study Group concluded that the Food Corps idea is viable. Under certain conditions, it can help reduce world hunger if enough attention is paid to the lessons of the past, both of existing volunteer organizations and of food and agriculture efforts in poor countries. This conclusion was based on the following: —Village level impact: Local as well as international volunteers working together can promote better nutrition and higher incomes at the village level by ensuring the delivery and adaptation of technical assistance and by involving villagers. —Effectiveness of extant volunteer programs: Existing programs are involved in various anti-hunger efforts. Unfortunately, the number of volunteers is too few and the efforts are too fragmented and seldom coordinated with local volunteer programs. —Cost effectiveness: AID estimates that the annual cost to support a development technician exceeds $60,000. Full-time volunteers would complement and extend the work of such technicians. (Peace Corps estimates that total agency cost per volunteer is $15,000.) 4 In telegram 19687 from Rome, November 30, 1977, the Embassy transmitted the text of the consensus declaration, adding: “We believe this successfully launches the international Food Corps idea.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770444–0385) 5 In an October 18, 1977, memorandum to Gilligan and Samuel Brown, Christopher indicated that the review of Morgenthau’s proposal would focus upon the general merits of a food corps, taking into account budgetary and programmatic issues, in addition to the program’s relevancy in light of other bilateral and multilateral development programs. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 8, Memos/Letters FM WC to Agencies)
