592 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement not discussed or raised question of other Americans who may be in your country. N. There is nothing in agreed announcement which in any way places any obligation on my government supply, either to Indian Embassy or to your government, list of all Chinese in U.S. Even if it would be possible to compile such list it could have no relation to abil­ ity of Chinese in U.S. return to your country. Tests of performance of obligations assumed under agreed announcement are very simple. O. First test is whether there is in fact any obstruction to return of individuals who decide do so, and whether individuals are there­ fore able expeditiously exercise their right to return. As I have contin­ ually pointed out since beginning of these talks, my government has removed all measures which would obstruct any Chinese in U.S. who desires return from doing so. P. The second test is whether any individual who believes that, contrary to this declared policy, he is encountering obstruction in departure, can freely communicate with representative of third coun­ try. I have repeatedly and unconditionally stated that any Chinese in U.S. is entirely free communicate with Indian Embassy in this regard. Indian Embassy is in position fully confirm this to your government. Q. Next test is whether representative of third country is able investigate facts in any such case. Again I have fully and uncondition­ ally assured you that Indian Embassy is able do this. And, again, Indian Embassy is in position confirm this to your government. R. Next test is willingness of government concerned receive and promptly act upon representations from representative of third coun­ try concerning any specific case. I have repeatedly assured you here and Indian Embassy has been assured of willingness of my government to act in this manner. However, as I have pointed out, I do not have knowledge of single case in which Indian Embassy has felt it necessary make representations, nor do I know of any complaint of any kind from Indian Embassy regarding willingness of my government fully assist and cooperate with it in carrying out its functions. S. Without spending further time on this, I believe that facts with regard to manner and extent to which our respective governments have met these tests of performance under agreed announcement speak for themselves. T. Your second question related to assistance to Indian Embassy in determining what you termed status of all Chinese in U.S. This is very vague term and I am not sure exactly what you may mean by it. There is certainly nothing in our agreed announcement with regard to investiga­ tion of status of all Chinese in U.S. Sole question between our two govern­ ments with regard to Chinese in U.S. under terms of July 25 statement by our governments, agreed agenda, as well as our agreed announcement,
