Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks There is a substantial risk that Congress will not await the formulation of the Administration’s specific arms transfer policies, or the studies and reports it has requested, but will instead seek to attach a variety of amendments to the FY 1978 security assistance authorization bill. A number of amendments to the legislation presently governing arms transfers have already been introduced. These amendments would impose new restrictions on your authority and would further complicate the Congressional review procedures for Executive Branch decisions. Present Situation We have begun a broad-ranging consultation to inform members of Congress of the restraint-oriented objectives you have already stated, to explain to them our current efforts to achieve better control and greater restraint with respect to arms transfers, and to elicit their ideas. In the course of these consultations, we are urging members to refrain from pressing for substantial changes in existing law until the Administration has had an opportunity to develop and begin to implement its policies. Most members are sympathetic but cannot assure us that Congress will not try to preempt your decisions. The FY 1978 security assistance authorization bill must be considered within a very brief time span. The Administration’s request will have to be submitted early in March and the bill must be reported out of committee by May 15. This schedule will not permit a considered examination of existing law and a thoughtful statutory revision that will complement your policies. Either the Congress will confine itself to authorizing necessary appropriations and enacting only needed statutory authority or it will attach to the bill a number of hastily considered piecemeal modifications of existing authorities and procedures. A Plan for Avoiding Harmful Legislation The content of the FY 1978 authorization bill will be determined to a considerable extent by how Congress perceives the Administration’s commitment to reducing the proliferation of conventional arms, and how it perceives the Administration’s willingness to involve Congress in the process. Our ongoing consultations are a step in the right direction, but are not likely to be sufficient, in themselves, in gaining the time we need for constructive legislative revision. We may, however, be able to achieve the cooperation of Congress by offering it a significant participatory role in framing the legislation that will be needed after you have decided on the options that will be presented to you in response to PRM/ NSC–12. Specifically, I suggest that you authorize me to explore with Congressional leaders the possibility of convening a joint Executive/Legis-
