716 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 Attachment In your discretion, if it seems appropriate, you may indicate to Zahedi that it might be advisable for him to continue negotiations with Soviets or at least not make first move to break them off. Such an attitude would be in line nationalist policies expected of Zahedi and would, if Soviets refuse pay gold or make concessions, be another black mark against Russians in Iran. However, Zahedi should not obtain impression American public would be unconcerned if his Govt made any considerable concessions to Soviets. 299. Draft Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nash) to the Chairman of the Planning Board of the National Security Council (Cutler)1 Washington, undated. SUBJECT Course of Action with Respect to Iran 1. Recent events in Iran have at least temporarily halted the dangerous drift toward eventual communist control which was taking place under Mossadegh. However, the situation is far from stable and it is recommended that the U.S. initiate prompt action to insure the permanency of the Shah–Zahedi regime. Otherwise, we can expect increasing trouble from the Tudeh party which, you will recall, recently assembled over 100,000 supporters for a public demonstration in Tehran alone. 2. Doubtless Ambassador Henderson, based on his intimate knowledge of the situation, will submit proposals for U.S. action. Without wishing to anticipate or prejudge his recommendations, the following suggestions are forwarded as a possible course of action 1 Source: National Archives, RG 330, Records of the Department of Defense, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Office of Military Assistance, Project Decimal Files, 1953, Box 35, 091.452.1 Iran. Secret; Security Information. Attached is a handwritten note from Black to General Stewart, August 24, that reads: “This was prepared as a matter of urgency in accordance with Mr. Nash’s instructions to draft a letter which would take advantage of the recent Iranian developments. Col. Bonesteel would like your views on the attached before the Planning Board meeting at 2:30 PM today.”
