Yugoslavia
947
F. Nonaligned Movement
1. Suggested Points
—We understand and appreciate the significance of Yugoslavia’s
role in the Nonaligned Movement. In our frank discussions on issues
of concern to the Nonaligned Movement, we have felt free both to
express our concerns and to offer our advice. We would like to encour-
age the continued development of this practice;
—We admired the efforts of Yugoslavia to organize nonaligned
condemnation of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. This has been
a restraining factor on Soviet behavior at this crucial time.
289.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 6, 1980
SUBJECT
Meeting with Yugoslav Ambassador Loncar May 6, 1980 at 3:00 P.M.
You are scheduled to meet briefly with Yugoslav Ambassador
Loncar to express personally your condolences, and those of the Ameri-
can people, on Tito’s death.2 Loncar will not bring the condolence book
with him.3 (C)
Such a meeting will be seen as an important political gesture by
the Yugoslavs and will underscore our support for the new Yugoslav
leadership. Brezhnev signed the condolence book at the Yugoslav
Embassy in Moscow this morning and will be going to the funeral.
We want to make an equally strong impression. (C)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 87, Yugoslavia: 3–5/80. Drafted by Larrabee. Brzezinski hand-carried the memo-
randum to the President on May 6 at 2:14 p.m.
2 Tito’s condition deteriorated rapidly due to complications from gangrene, and he
slipped into a coma. He died on May 4, three days before his 88th birthday.
3 In a May 5 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski recommended that the President
visit the Yugoslav Embassy and sign the condolence book. Brzezinski wrote that “such
a gesture would underscore our support for Yugoslavia at a critical moment and empha-
size your respect and esteem for President Tito.” Carter disapproved the recommendation
telling his appointments secretary, Phil Wise, “no way!” (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68,
Yugoslavia: 1–11/80)
