Afghanistan 255 public stance and a series of concrete actions in order to deal with this situation. I recommend that we consider taking at least some of the following specific steps: 1. Use all the means at our disposal to publicize what the Soviets are doing in Afghanistan. Major themes in this campaign should be as follows: a. This is the first use by the Soviets of their armed forces in a combat situation outside the Soviet bloc since the Second World War. b. Afghanistan has been a buffer state—in fact, the classic buffer state—for the past 150 years. The Soviets have no legitimate national interest in taking such action. c. The United States has never made a commitment to the military defense of Afghanistan, which has been outside our defense perimeter for the past 25 years. d. Nevertheless, we are extremely concerned at this unjustifiable Soviet action, especially in that it might become an unwelcome precedent in other areas. What are the limits to the Brezhnev Doctrine?2 e. We are also extremely concerned at the human toll which this Soviet-supported combat is taking. There are 300,000 refugees now in Pakistan, and we would not be surprised to see that number rise to half a million in the near future. f. Thus, as in Cambodia and in so many other countries since World War II, the Soviets are creating another enormous refugee problem, this time in South Asia and among an overwhelmingly Muslim population. g. The United States is prepared to do its utmost to assist the Afghan refugees with humanitarian aid. h. The Soviet Union is atheistic by doctrine and has published enormous amounts of anti-religious and anti-Muslim literature. (The exhibition at the Museum of Religion and Atheism in Leningrad, for example, would strike any Muslim as the epitome of sacrilege.) The US, on the other hand, firmly believes in religious freedom, and enshrines it in our Constitution. Three million Muslims practice their religion freely in the US. In Soviet Azerbaijan, on the other hand, there are only 24 officially recognized Mosques now operating, whereas before the revolution of 1917 there were several thousand in operation. 2 In a speech in November 1968, Brezhnev declared that a threat to socialist rule in any state constituted a theat to all and therefore “must engage the attention of all the socialist states,” including the use of military force.
