634
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
grams.33 This Administration should not let this term end without rati-
fication of the genocide and other human rights conventions.34
Chris might also want to initiate a review of the two years of expe-
rience that we have had in applying our human rights objectives to in-
dividual cases in order to derive a body of operating principles.35
I. Eastern Mediterranean: Turkey ticks away as an issue which could
explode. Considerable Congressional and public lobbying will be
needed to keep our assistance levels high enough to pursue this impor-
tant relationship. Chris and Matt to handle.36
J. India/Pakistan: Apart from our nuclear proliferation concerns, the
strategic and political stakes in the subcontinent are becoming more
critical. Chris and Constable to handle.37
K. Poland: Here the serious economic/financial situation, coupled
with a call for Western assistance, give us a unique opportunity for in-
fluence with a key Eastern European government. We may have oppor-
tunities, through the international financial institutions, to help shape
this socialist economy, including the level of Polish military spending.
However, attempts to politicize our assistance, or put an anti-Soviet
twist on it, will have to be resisted. Matt could manage.38
L. Foreign Assistance: You might want to have Chris, Tony, Doug
and Brian put together a strategy for our next foreign assistance sub-
missions in what promises to be an extremely difficult political and re-
source climate.39
III. Issues Deserving More Attention
A. Public Statements and Appearances: We are concerned that one re-
sult of the SALT debate and the political campaigns may be to narrow
the focus of public discussions of foreign policy towards a preoccupa-
33 Vance placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this sentence and
wrote “yes.” The committee reference is to the Interagency Group on Human Rights and
Foreign Assistance, colloquially known as the “Christopher Group” or “Christopher
Committee.” Documentation on the establishment of the committee is printed in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.
34 Vance underlined “genocide” and “other human rights conventions.” In the
right-hand margin, he wrote “I agree.”
35 Vance placed a vertical line in the right-hand margin next to this sentence and
wrote “yes.”
36 Vance underlined this sentence and wrote “ok” in the right-hand margin next
to it.
37 Vance underlined this sentence and, in the right-hand margin next to it, wrote:
“Dave [Newsom] should be included.” Reference is to Peter Constable.
38 Vance underlined this sentence and, in the right-hand margin next to it, inserted
a comma and added “with George [Vest].”
39 Vance underlined “have Chris, Tony, Doug and Brian put together a strategy”
and wrote “yes, priority” in the left-hand margin. References are to Christopher, Lake,
Bennet, and Atwood.
