Afghanistan
365
4. With Broader Groups. Provide a context and rationale for broader
groups, such as the NAM, Moslem states, and the United Nations, to
take as much action as they are willing.
If the United States is clearly understood to be providing this
leadership, you will not only get the backing of our allies and many non-
aligned states, but you will also find an emerging domestic consensus
behind you that will support essential legislative and budgetary meas-
ures. Anything less will cause vacillation and accommodation by our
allies and by states within the Persian Gulf region.
This is not a crisis to be dealt with in a few weeks and with a series
of short-term measures. It is a test of the balance of power between
East and West. Many states will be forced to adjust their foreign policy
to the way in which you exercise the leadership of the West. The major
political problem for world affairs in the 1980s is the projection of
Soviet military power. Our sensitive intelligence indicates that many
political leaders in the world have come to see this clearly. If it appears
that the United States cannot stem Soviet power effectively through
diplomacy, alliances, and military means, then they will continue
accommodating to Moscow.
Afghanistan is not only the first country outside the Soviet bloc
which the Soviet armed forces have invaded since 1945. It is also the
seventh state since 1975 in which communist parties have come to power
with Soviet guns and tanks, with Soviet military advisors and assistance
(Vietnam, Angola, Laos, South Yemen, Cambodia, Ethiopia, and Afghan-
istan). Four of these takeovers have occurred since January 1977. We can
expect the number to rise considerably above the present seven unless
the U.S. can galvanize effective resistance.
The basic decision for you is whether to jeopardize a number of
your present policies (arms transfers, nuclear proliferation, and arms
control) and make a comprehensive and long-term response to check
Soviet power or to treat the Afghanistan affair as a minor episode in
the competitive-cooperative mix of U.S. Soviet Union relations, chastise
the Soviets, take several symbolic measures in retribution, and then
begin adjusting to the reality of Soviet power in Afghanistan and the
destabilization of the Persian Gulf region it portends. I strongly urge
you to make this a turning point at which you begin a sustained
and comprehensive strategy for preventing the expansion of Soviet
power projection.
The context for a major strategic turn is four classes of actions
involving three interrelated regions. The regions are the Persian
Gulf, Europe, and East Asia. We have an alliance system and military
deployments in two of these regions. We are only beginning to
create a significant military posture in the third, the Persian Gulf.
Actions in response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan should be
