and publishes such data there would be no serious objection to this provision unless it
meant, in effect, that the United States would be the only country to supply this
information to the Central Bureau.
It is felt that this Article should further be amended to provide for a more frequent
publication of statistics by the Central Bureau, which might well be done quarterly
rather than annually.
Further it should be provided that the High Contracting Parties may submit to the
Central Bureau information which they receive as to infractions of the Convention for
circulation by the Central Bureau to the High Contracting Parties. It is doubtful,
however, whether the Central International Office should undertake to pass upon the
information so furnished. It should rather act merely as a channel of transmission and
of publicity.
Finally it would be desirable to provide in Article 8 that the cost of the maintenance of
the Central Bureau should be apportioned equitably among the High Contracting
Parties. Possibly the best basis for computing the cost would be according to the Trade
of each country as reported to the Central International Office.
III. THE QUESTION OF THE PROHIBITED AREAS AND THE CONTROL TO BE EXERCISED THEREIN
ARTICLES NINE TO TWENTY-FOUR, INCLUSIVE
As already indicated, it is not felt that this section of the proposed Convention vitally
concerns the United States Government, which has no territorial possessions, colonies,
dependencies or mandates within the zones contemplated as prohibited areas.
The only question which would appear to arise, so far as this Government is concerned,
with respect to the Articles in question is whether it could consent that its nationals and
their trade should be subject to the supervision proposed. As far as the provision for
land surveillance is concerned, it seems clear that this Government could not object to
any reasonable measure of control exercised in territory under the sovereign or
mandatory control of other Powers. It would, of course, insist that such control should
not result in discrimination, denial of the principle of equality of opportunity, or undue
interference with legitimate trade. Subject, however, to these reservations, the
Department would not be disposed to object to any agreement which might be reached
among the interested Powers for a uniformity of control in the matter of importation of
arms into the so-called “prohibited zone” if the zone is under the authority of the
several Contracting Powers.
This Government would not, however, consent to third Powers exercising any form of
control over its trade with other sovereign countries, subject of course to the rules
applicable in time of war to contraband or blockade.
