526  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Tab 4
Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks 
in Geneva to the Department of State7
Geneva, March 8, 1990, 1459Z
SUBJECT
Shevardnadze Views on START
1. Mr. Secretary:
I met this morning with my Soviet counterpart, Nazarkin, who 
just returned from Moscow where he was briefing the Soviet People’s 
Congress. While in Moscow, Nazarkin met with Shevardnadze and was 
instructed to pass along the following comments.
2. Nazarkin said that Shevardnadze has decided to make a major 
effort to finish all the major outstanding issues in START at the April 
ministerial. Nazarkin added that he would discuss with me a list of 
such issues within the next few days. He commented that this desire to 
resolve the major issues at the ministerial reflected a high-­level Soviet 
decision to get as much as possible accomplished in START at the June 
summit. This includes, according to Nazarkin, the issuing of a joint 
statement of intent on follow-­on negotiations—START II. (Comment: 
The Soviet desire to release a statement of intent on future negotiations 
at the June summit, whether or not START is ready for signature, is a 
change in their position. Previously, the Soviets said the sides should 
release such a statement at the time of START signature. End Comment)
3. Nazarkin said that in order to finish all major issues, the Soviets 
would be “flexible and forthcoming”, but with one major exception—­
heavy missiles. U.S. insistence on further limits on heavy missiles 
would create big political problems for Gorbachev and Shevardnadze, 
especially with the military. Nazarkin said he was instructed to tell me 
that if the U.S. pushes for further reductions or limits on heavy missiles, 
the Soviets “will not to move one inch”.
4. Nazarkin added that his own contacts had confirmed that the 
Supreme Soviet would not ratify a START Treaty which contained any 
further limits on SS–18’s. Nazarkin argued that the sides should agree 
to defer heavy missiles to START II and, in that context, that the Soviets 
might be able to agree to include further limits on heavies in a joint 
statement on a declaration of intent on START II.
7 Secret.
