1955 273 Concluded by saying he hoped we would return to original agreement regarding press releases. 2. I replied I was glad he mentioned subject as I had also intended to do so. At close of last meeting he informed me he intended making statement to press regarding two questions raised at meeting. I did not understand he intended reveal substance his remarks on two points he had introduced. Frankly what I thought he said was that we had dis­ cussed items one and two of agenda. However, when I learned of his statement after meeting it seemed to me very definitely to go into sub­ stance his remarks and this necessitated my also releasing statement going into substance our position. I did this in press release which I made as brief and non-­controversial as possible. I was not alleging he did not inform me but simply that I did not understand his intent. I regretted he considered it necessary make a second statement to press. I had made no response and hoped I would not have to do so. I was glad to know he shared my feeling that our practice in past of not issuing press releases on substance of talks here was right. Our ability keep these matters private has been beneficial both parties and to progress our talks. I would be entirely willing and hoped he would agree to pro­ ceed on same basis we have in past and not discuss substance our meet­ ings with press by unilateral public statements. 3. Wang replied he could not agree my explanation this regard. At last meeting we agreed on release, his statement had been clear and there could have been no misunderstanding. His statement had been in conformity with our agreement and he had made prior notification. What he said to press did not go beyond scope of what he told me in meeting he would say. But my statement was not in conformity with agreement. If US still desired keep situ­ ation as it was before, then he hoped there would be no recurrence such action. Hoped in future we would adhere to agreement regarding releases to press. 4. I said I could not agree my statement had been in violation our agreement on private nature of talks. I told him I did not understand his intention and, if I had, then I would have objected because his release went into substance his remarks and I would have to make reply. Fur­ thermore, I reminded him that when I had proposed private nature of talks I had also suggested that prior notice of unilateral statements should be reasonable in time, for example a day or two before release. I would give him such advance notice if I made a statement. I did not believe useful purpose served pursue this subject further and hoped he agreed abide by understanding in future as I intended so to do. 5. Wang said he had nothing more to say except that facts spoke for themselves and could not be refuted. He then suggested we discuss item two and said he would be happy to hear my comments on two
