148
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
50.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
[paper number not declassified]
Washington, April 12, 1979
[Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.]
AFGHANISTAN: Prospects for the Insurgents
The widespread insurgencies in Afghanistan continue to erode the loyalty
of the armed forces—the main prop for President Taraki’s regime. Tribal rebels
lack the strength and organization to confront the Soviet-supported Army
outside their home areas, however, and by themselves have little prospect of
overthrowing the government. Unrest in the cities and more settled areas may
pose a more difficult problem for the regime. ([classification marking not
declassified])
Muslim tribesmen along the Pakistani border took up arms almost
immediately after the military coup a year ago that brought the Marxists
to power in Kabul. Since then, many additional tribal groups, motivated
mainly by religious sentiments, have instigated rebellions in their native
areas. A government crackdown last winter against Muslim clergymen
critical of the regime gave new impetus to the unrest. ([classification
marking not declassified])
The insurgencies seem to be gaining momentum, and the govern-
ment’s authority is now being contested to some degree in nearly every
province. Along much of the eastern border with Pakistan, government
control is limited to major towns and main roads. Rebel sources report
that two towns in this region—Chiga Serai and Asmar—are surrounded
and will soon fall. Farther west, rebels this week seized control of
Arjestan and killed the district governor. Fighting continues near
Mazar-i-Sharif in the north-central region and also in the northwest,
where rebels control one large area along the Soviet border. ([classifica-
tion marking and handling restriction not declassified])
The Afghan Government has been forced to redeploy most of its
available troops from the capital toward the Pakistani border. More
than two-thirds of the Army’s infantry regiments are in the east, leaving
few units available for deploying elsewhere. [2 lines, classification mark-
ing, and handling restriction not declassified]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–81),
Box 6, Afghan Crisis—Pubs Pre-Invasion Reporting. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. Prepared by [text not declassified].
