National Security Policy 707 by the Council when we saw the outcome of the upcoming interna­ tional conferences. The Acting Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Scribner, emphasized the difficulties encountered by the Treasury Department in implementing the Port Security Program. He said thus far three exceptions had been made as to entry of Soviet Bloc vessels. He noted that the Treasury Department presently had two programs in effect in the Port Security area; the first involved boarding and searching of vessels, the second involved the checking of such vessels after they tied up at the dock for the purpose of processing suspect materials or suspect persons. He indicated that the proposal before the Council did not envisage doing away with the sec­ ond program pertaining to the processing of persons and materials. Mr. Scribner concurred in the view that it was unlikely that the Bloc would utilize vessels for the introduction of nuclear weapons when it would be more logical to introduce them by aircraft. Mr. Scribner asked that the Treasury Department not be given the difficult task of determining, from a foreign policy standpoint, whether a particular ship should be granted or denied entry. He did not feel that the Treasury Department was either prepared or qualified to fulfill such an assignment. He said it was the Treasury Department’s view that the present Port Security Program should continue until the fall, at which time it should be re-­examined. Secretary Herter noted that it was present policy to step up exchanges with the Bloc; that the Russians were planning to send larger groups to the U.S.; and that Soviet or other Bloc vessels might be used to bring such groups to this country. Accordingly, the Department of State felt that some additional flexibility should be exercised in arriving at decisions to permit or deny entry to such vessels. The President thought that the Department of State was asking the Treasury Department to take on a heavy responsibility which it seemed to the President should continue to be the responsibility of the Department of State. Secretary Herter commented that under existing arrangements, the Secretary of the Treasury was responsible for determining which vessels would be permitted to enter by way of exception to the Port Security Policy, but that the Department of State would be happy to take on as much responsibility in this area as the President wished to assign. Mr. Scribner, in response to the President’s inquiry, explained the consultative procedure which is now in effect whereby the Secretary of the Treasury, after consultation with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the Director of Central Intelligence, determines the cir­ cumstances justifying the granting or denial of entry of suspect vessels. The President observed that it must be most difficult to search effec­ tively a ship for the purpose of determining whether it was carrying
