502
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and current account targets are not being fulfilled, your government
will take the additional measures needed to this end.
The fulfillment of our mutual Summit commitments will be vital to
the success of the May 1979 Tokyo Summit. I have this very much in
mind as I review the steps needed to fulfill the commitments that I
made at Bonn.
My primary goal is to reduce the rate of U.S. inflation, both for do-
mestic reasons and because this is a major cause of the foreign ex-
change disorders that concern us both. We are beginning to see some
progress, as reflected in the decline of U.S. wholesale prices last month.
But further measures are needed. I have a three-point program in mind:
First: I intend to carry out the tight fiscal policy that I described at
Bonn. I am now looking for opportunities to reduce expenditures, in
order to curtail the FY 1977 budget deficit. In January I will present to
the new Congress an FY 1980 budget which should bring the deficit
down still lower, to somewhere in the thirties of billions of dollars. This
is causing a good deal of pain in the government departments con-
cerned, but I will hold to this policy. In so doing, I expect to work
closely with the Congress, which is sensitive to growing pressure by
the voters for a reduction in government spending.
Second: We are considering how to strengthen U.S. Government ef-
forts to restrain wage and price increases. Intensive staff work is now
going on about possible new steps. I hope that we will soon be able to
announce them.
Third: We will seek to ensure that U.S. Governmental actions do
not contribute to inflation.
On the energy front, I have been working hard to persuade the
Congress to pass key parts of the energy bill, especially the provision
for phased de-regulation of natural gas, which would account for the
largest part of the energy savings I pledged at Bonn. I cut short my va-
cation to resume this effort.6 By the time the Congress adjourns in Oc-
tober, we will see how successful the effort has been and what the im-
plications are for future policy. I take the energy pledges that I made at
the Summit seriously, and mean to fulfill them.
Progress on both the inflation and energy fronts should strengthen
the dollar and thus help to meet the concerns that you have expressed
to Ambassador Mansfield.7
6 Carter vacationed in Georgia, Idaho, and Wyoming August 18–30. (Carter Li-
brary, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
7 Possibly a reference to an August 16 discussion in which Fukuda told Mansfield
that “he was particularly worried about the declining value of the dollar. As a key cur-
rency, if the dollar’s credibility were to be lost, it would become virtually impossible for
other economies to maintain orderly and stable management.” Fukuda asked Mansfield
