Agriculture has lagged behind industry in achieving that unity of effort
which modern economic life demands. The cooperative movement, which
is gradually building the needed organization, is in harmony with public
interest and therefore merits public encouragement.
THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATES
Important phases of public policy related to agriculture lie within the sphere
of the States. While successive reductions in Federal taxes have relieved
most farmers of direct taxes to the National Government, State and local
levies have become a serious burden. This problem needs immediate and
thorough study with a view to correction at the earliest possible moment. It
will have to be made largely by the States themselves.
COMMERCE
It is desirable that the Government continue its helpful attitude toward
American business. The activities of the Department of Commerce have
contributed largely to the present satisfactory position in our international
trade, which has reached about $9,000,000,000 annually. There should be
no slackening of effort in that direction. It is also important that the
department’s assistance to domestic commerce be continued. There is
probably no way in which the Government can aid sound economic
progress more effectively than by cooperating with our business men to
reduce wastes in distribution.
COMMERCIAL AERONAUTICS
Continued progress in civil aviation is most gratifying. Demands for
airplanes and motors have taxed both the industry and the licensing and
inspection service of the Department of Commerce to their capacity. While
the compulsory licensing provisions of the air commerce act apply only to
equipment and personnel engaged in interstate and foreign commerce, a
Federal license may be procured by anyone possessing the necessary
qualifications. State legislation, local airport regulations, and insurance
requirements make such a license practically indispensable. This results in
uniformity of regulation and increased safety in operation, which are
essential to aeronautical development. Over 17,000 young men and women
