196
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
sible, but not likely, that Brezhnev would handle himself as gruffly as
he did in Paris, but the gamble seems worth taking.2
2. SALT: It seems desirable to consider what measures could be
taken before September to encourage the Russians to consider more ac-
tively possible areas of movement on their part, without ourselves ap-
pearing over-eager. One such measure might be to use the exploratory
channel of non-governmental scientists who have been involved in the
joint study group on arms control with the Soviet Academy of Sciences
for the past 14 years. They have an invitation from the Soviet Academy,
which could be used to arrange a meeting in August, primarily for the
purpose of eliciting responses from the Soviet side. The group could in-
clude such men as Paul Doty, Herbert York, Wolfgang Panofsky,
Franklin Long, Sidney Drell—all responsible men who have served in
government, know the issues, and who could have access to such offi-
cials as Korniyenko, as well as the Academy scientists.3
3. Technology: This is a subject of preeminent interest to the Soviet
leadership, and the possibility of some movement in this field would be
a stabilizing incentive. Two illustrative possibilities:
A. Vladimir Kirillin, Deputy Prime Minister and head of the State
Committee on Science and Technology, is coming to Washington in
July. For him to be received by the President would be of more than
symbolic importance. (We could also use the occasion to stress our in-
terest in having Brezhnev receive Ambassador Toon, and it would be
more effective to make the point in this way than to make it as a
pre-condition.) Kirillin is a good man, a cryogenics scientist of repute,
sober, reasonable, and influential.4
B. Frank Press has developed some ideas on how the Soviet Union
could be given remote access to the Cyber 76 computer for use in its
weather observation system. This would by-pass the security objec-
tions to having the computer on Soviet territory, and would yield re-
sults of considerable benefit to us.
4. Steps to Increase Soviet Involvement in Global and North-South
Issues: This is a large subject, which needs more detailed examination
than is possible in this memorandum, but it is worth consideration as
an expression of our long-term interest in drawing the Soviet Union
into more responsible and constructive participation in international
2 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, the President wrote: “I agree. If B.
is incompetent to negotiate, a mtg w Gromyko may be advisable.” Brezhnev embarked
on a 3-day state visit to France on June 20; see Jim Hogland, “Brezhnev in Paris, Focuses
on De´tente,” The Washington Post, June 21, 1977, p. A–14.
3 In the left-hand margin near this paragraph, the President wrote: “They could be
briefed, but not speak for me.”
4 In the left-hand margin next to this point, the President wrote: “I’m rather ada-
mant re B. seeing Toon. He’s acting like an ass.”
