150
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
dence and trigger a capital outflow, might the French require financial
support from other nations? If so, should we begin to plan now for such
an eventuality? When might it be announced for maximum political
impact, or would premature announcement merely lead to the panic
we hope to avoid?
Are there any other ways we should consider bringing the Arab
OPEC nations into a more active financing role, either directly or
indirectly?
—Trade. Protectionist pressure is growing. The latest evidence of
concern about “sensitive industries” and hint of consideration of pro-
tectionist measures was reflected in the London meeting of the “Euro-
pean Council” (the nine EC heads of state and government), which ex-
pressed its concern at the unemployment situation in certain sectors
that are adversely affected by structural changes in the economy. And
it invited the EC commission to study “all factors involved”. Callaghan
afterwards explained that “we are all aware that there are sensitive
areas in our economies where strict application of an open and liberal
commercial policy can produce results which were really not antici-
pated in a period of world recession”. We should express our strong
concern about any movement toward protectionism in these areas.
Further, the US and Germany need to work together, as the two
countries most interested in progress in the Multilateral Trade Negotia-
tions and in avoiding protectionism, to reverse what appears to be a
gradual slide toward protectionism and to achieve progress in the
MTN. We want Germany to use its influence in the EC in support of a
forthcoming position in the MTN and attainment of the Summit objec-
tive of substantive progress this year in key areas such as: a tariff reduc-
tion plan; codes, agreements and other measures that will facilitate a
significant reduction of non-tariff barriers; and a mutually acceptable
approach for agriculture. For our part, we have worked out a compre-
hensive approach to the MTN which avoids threatening European eco-
nomic institutions, which is flexible, and which suggests objectives on
which the EC and US can agree on to ensure a more open and well-
managed international trading system. Bob Strauss will shortly present
our position to the EC Commission. We should also stress that we are
doing everything possible to avoid an outcome to the Zenith and US
Steel Customs Court cases which disrupts trade; that we are hopeful of
winning a reversal of the Zenith decision;7 and that if not, we will
assess other options, including that of seeking new legislation.
7 On April 12, the United States Customs Court ruled in favor of the Zenith Radio
Corporation’s contention that the Secretary of the Treasury was required to levy counter-
vailing duties on imported Japanese consumer electronics exempted from taxes normally
imposed within Japan. (Robert Cole, “Court Orders Duties on Electronic Goods Coming
from Japan,” The New York Times, April 13, 1977, p. D1)
