758  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
174.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 16, 1980
SUBJECT
Defense Production Priorities (U)
Deputy Secretary Claytor has requested (Tab B) that you designate 
the XM–1 tank and the MX and PERSHING II missiles as “Programs of 
Highest National Priority” to ensure that they are given priority over 
other DOD and all commercial programs in the competition for compo-
nents, materials and other resources.2 (U)
I support Claytor’s request:
—Essentially all DOD programs already enjoy priority over all 
commercial programs by virtue of the Defense Production Act of 1950; 
the action Claytor recommends simply realigns priorities among the 
various defense programs. (U)
—DOD, DOE, Commerce and the Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency (FEMA) have surveyed each of the affected prime and 
sub-­contractors and suppliers and found that the action will not 
adversely affect any member of the production community, and that it 
will, indeed, help prevent production slippages. (U)
—DOD, DOE, Commerce and FEMA also assure me that the action 
will have no adverse impact on the economy. (U)
—And I feel that the signals you would send to the Congress, the 
public and our NATO allies by the action would have a positive polit-
ical impact. (C)
There are currently ten other DOD programs on the “Highest 
National Priority” list: three sensitive programs concerning space 
reconnaissance, anti-­submarine warfare and airframe design; the 
Cruise Missile; TRIDENT; the Fleet Ballistic Missile program; two anti-­
ballistic missile programs; MINUTEMAN III; and the M–60 tank.3 DOD 
is reviewing the list (especially the last five programs, above) and will 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, 
Box 6, Defense Department: 2/80. Secret. Sent for action. At the top of the memorandum 
Carter wrote: “Zbig. J.” Stebbins and Welch sent the memorandum to Brzezinski for his 
signature under cover of a February 15 memorandum in which they noted: “The package 
was delayed while we sought interagency advice on the DOD request, since it had the 
potential to affect the programs of other agencies.” (Ibid.)
2 Carter underlined “XM–1 tank,” “MX,” and “Pershing II missiles” in this sentence.
3 Carter underlined “space reconnaissance,” “anti-­submarine warfare,” “Cruise 
Missile,” and “TRIDENT” in this sentence.
