Human Rights 405 119. Presidential Directive/NSC–301 Washington, February 17, 1978 TO The Vice President The Secretary of State The Secretary of Defense ALSO The Secretary of the Treasury The Attorney General The Secretary of Commerce The Director, Office of Management and Budget The United States Representative to the United Nations The Administrator, Agency for International Development The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff The Director of Central Intelligence The Director, United States Information Agency SUBJECT Human Rights 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues— Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 41, Presidential Determinations, Directives, and Review Memoranda: [II]: 1/77–5/80. Confidential. On February 15, Tuchman had sent Brzezinski and Huntington a redrafted version of the PD, an explanation and comment sheet, and an earlier draft of the PD containing the President’s handwritten comments (see attachment, Document 113). Tuchman explained that the redrafted version integrated the President’s comments. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security—Huntington, Box 38, Human Rights: 2–8/78) Another copy of the explanation and comments sheet contains Bartholomew’s handwritten comments and Brzezinski’s decisions regarding the various additions and deletions made to the draft PD. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Human Rights: Presidential Review Memorandum–28 and Presidential Directive–30, 5/77–2/78) An undated covering memorandum from Brzezinski to the President indicates that Brzezinski planned to send Carter a copy of the revised PD—one that reflected Brzezinski’s approved changes as indicated on the comment and decision sheet—to allow Carter to accept or reject alternative language proposed in two paragraphs. According to a handwritten notation on the memorandum, the memorandum and the PD did not go forward to the President. (Ibid.) Brzezinski transmitted the final version of PD/NSC–30 to the President under a February 17 covering memorandum, requesting that the President sign the PD. Brzezinski also attached a copy of the Human Rights Foundation proposal (see Document 114), indicating that the Department had reviewed the proposal and agreed with “the general idea.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780040–0745) In an undated, handwritten note to Brzezinski, Carter wrote: “Zbig—Hold memo on Foundation. J.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 94, Human Rights: 1978) The Department transmitted the text of PD–30 to all diplomatic and consular posts in telegram 45685, February 22. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780083–0397)
