XXXII  Summary of Print Volume III
mainly because Eisenhower worried about the budgetary implications 
of large increases in conventional forces. He also continued to be “never 
very eager to talk about limited war and disliked the subject.” (124) Per­
haps because of this disinterest no BNSP was devised for 1960.
Arms Control and Disarmament
This compilation begins with the three disarmament proposals of 
Harold Stassen, President Eisenhower’s Disarmament Adviser. ­Stassen’s 
initiatives, which were to mark the beginning of serious U.S.-Soviet 
negotiations on the cessation of nuclear testing, consisted of agreement 
on installation of 8–12 test monitoring inspection sites in both the United 
States and the Soviet Union followed by a 2-­year ban on nuclear test­
ing, creation of an inspection zone in Central and Eastern Europe against 
surprise attack, and another inspection zone covering Eastern Siberia, 
the Arctic, the Northwestern United States, and ­Western Canada. The 
Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), the Department of Defense (DOD), and the 
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) agreed that because a test cessation 
agreement in its simplest form would limit the development of smaller, 
“clean” weapons, it was a detriment to U.S. national security. They 
claimed that there were no airtight methods to confirm that the Soviets 
were not testing and that the cessation of testing would actually result in 
both nations building more, not fewer, weapons to compensate for the 
reduction in technical advancement. (136)
Stassen and Henry Cabot Lodge, Ambassador to the United 
Nations, both of whom worried that the United States was becom­
ing morally isolated by its slow reactions on the disarmament issue, 
argued that a new, fresh U.S. proposal was required to regain world 
support for the U.S. position. (136, 137) The Eisenhower administra­
tion, while acknowledging the potential significance of these views, 
had not developed a new position by March 27, 1958, when the Soviet 
Union announced a test cessation. The Soviets’ test suspension put the 
United States in the position of having to choose between continued 
nuclear weapons testing to improve the nation’s defense capabilities, 
which would look warlike and immoral in world opinion, or stopping 
testing. The Eisenhower administration agreed that the Soviet initiative 
required a “new and more flexible position.” (145)
Secretary of State John Foster Dulles believed that the Soviets’ test 
ban initiative was its latest propaganda move designed to undermine 
the U.S. reputation in world opinion. Over the coming months, he 
argued against the rationale of the Defense Department and the Atomic 
Energy Commission that an immediate test cessation would hurt U.S. 
defense capabilities and would be giving the closed Soviet society an 
unfair advantage to improve their nuclear arsenal through espionage 
and secret testing. He commented that “unless we take a radical step
