March 27–December 31, 1979
903
situation.6 You may be able to draw on that exchange, we hope, to per-
suade Sarkis that we are really working hard, but wait for our review of
Viet’s report. End FYI.
Vance
6 In a July 25 meeting with Viets, Weizman “indicated he would seriously consider”
a moratorium on Israeli air attacks in Lebanon and “probed possibility of speaking di-
rectly to Lebanese leadership.” (Telegram 16046 from Tel Aviv, July 26; National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790351–0310)
279.
Presidential Determination No. 79–131
Washington, August 3, 1979
SUBJECT
Presidential Determination under Section 4 of the Arms Export Control Act—
Egypt
Pursuant to the authority vested in me by Section 4 of the Arms Ex-
port Control Act,2 as amended, I hereby determine that the financing
under the Arms Export Control Act of the sale of F–4 aircraft and as-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 50, Presidential Determinations: 8/79–5/80. No classification marking. The attached
Justification for the Presidential Determination, states, “Only the resolution of the
Arab-Israeli conflict in its broadest context can assure stability in the Middle East. Until
there is stability in the region at large, the concerns of Arabs and Israelis for their security,
independence, and territorial integrity cannot be completely allayed. The Egypt-Israel
Peace Treaty is to be the cornerstone of peace between Israel and all its neighbors. Egypt
is leading the way toward the comprehensive peace that the Middle East so badly needs.
Consequently, it is in the U.S. national interest to assist Egypt in meeting its legitimate se-
curity requirements, thereby bolstering Egypt’s resolve to continue to seek a permanent
peace. The Egyptian Armed Forces are beginning a modernization program by replacing
their Soviet-made equipment. The FMS financing will support some of the highest pri-
ority items in the Egyptian multi-year modernization program, and is in accord with the
findings of Department of Defense fact-finding teams that have visited Egypt this year.”
(Ibid.)
2 In his July 14 memorandum to Carter, Vance summarized Section 4 of the Arms
Export Control Act: it “prohibits the use of funds appropriated under the Act in order ‘to
guarantee, or extend credit, or participate in an extension of credit’ in connection with the
purchase by an underdeveloped country of sophisticated weapons systems, unless the
President determines that such financing is important to the national security of the
United States, and so reports to the Congress.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 50, Presidential Determinations: 8/79–5/80)
