International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
387
chological factors, it is difficult to measure the impact of the falling
dollar on the US position abroad. Nonetheless, a plausible case can be
made that the falling dollar and our perceived inability to take ade-
quate corrective measures is contributing to the development of an atti-
tude toward the United States that could undermine our credibility
abroad.
General
Our ability to influence events in the world in order to protect our
vital interests depends, in large measure, on military and economic
power and foreign perceptions of our capacity to bring this power to
bear in a controlled fashion on foreign situations. Thus, foreign atti-
tudes about our determination and skill are almost as important as our
strength.
Although the weakened dollar has undermined neither our mili-
tary power nor the basic health of our economy, foreigners may have
begun to question our willingness to use our strength in pursuit of our
interests and to doubt our ability to grant and withdraw benefits. Our
perceived inability or unwillingness to take corrective action may be
changing foreign attitudes about our persistence in pursuit of our aims.
If we are seen as not having the resolve and expertness to take the
steps necessary to strengthen the dollar, some foreigners may well be
asking themselves whether we have the resoluteness and mastery to
shape even more complex and hazardous situations. Some foreigners
may pose the question to themselves this way: Can a country that has
not been able to prevent its currency from tumbling be relied on to act
decisively and effectively to influence events far from its shores?
Foreign assessments of the strength and determination of the US
are based on many factors in addition to the fall of the dollar. Their ap-
praisal of how the US might act in any given situation depends on their
perception of the totality of these factors; and any one factor probably is
not decisive.
Also the impact on foreign attitudes of the decline of the dollar and
our reaction to it will be heightened if the crisis continues for an indefi-
nite period. On the other hand, if the dollar stabilizes within a short
time, it is probable that the damage to our perceived strength and re-
solve will not be permanent.
The Industrialized Democracies
Our friends and allies fear that we either are indifferent to the fall
of the dollar or are actively encouraging the depreciation of the dollar
to stimulate US exports. In the former case, they fault us for lack of con-
cern for their welfare. In the latter case, they accuse us of “malign ne-
glect”. In either case, they worry that their interests will suffer—that
