618
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
251.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
Washington, May 28, 1980, 2510Z
140484. Subject: CTB—UK Response to US Approach on NSS
Numbers. Reference: State 119590.2
1. Secret—Entire text.
2. In response to May 2 approach by PM Director Bartholomew on
UK NSS numbers, UK Embassy provided following “speaking notes”
to Department on May 23.
3. Begin text.
Ministers have noted the President’s decision that it would not be
appropriate for the US to fund equipment for additional UK NSS and
have given careful consideration to his hope that we would nonetheless
be able to agree to three stations in the Southern Hemisphere.
We agree that we should continue to pursue a CTB: That the joint
UK/US negotiating position should be as defensible as possible: and
that a key objective should be to clinch Soviet acceptance of 10 NSS on
their territory. However we are mindful of the President’s earlier deci-
sion that the CTB negotiations should continue ‘at a slow pace’,3 re-
flecting the view, with which we agree, that there is now no prospect of
bringing the CTB to fruition this year. This leads us to a different con-
clusion about the desirability of our agreeing to accept three additional
NSS at this juncture:
(A) Our overall conclusion in the technical study we handed to the
US team in London on 10 January4 was that the gains in verification ca-
pability of NSS in dependent territory sites in the Southern Hemisphere
would be marginal, whether for monitoring NWS or NNWS.
(B) In addition to the technical objections there are political, secu-
rity and logistical difficulties in finding suitable sites. The Falkland
Islands, which appears to be technically the best site, would present US
with a serious political problem with Argentina. There would be no site
in the Indian Ocean if Diego Garcia is ruled out on security grounds.
This would leave only Pitcairn in the Pacific and islands in the South
Eastern Atlantic.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800263–0732. Se-
cret; Priority; Exdis. Sent for information to the Mission in Geneva and Moscow. Drafted
by Steven Steiner (PM/DCA); cleared by Robert Einhorn (ACDA), John Marcum (NSC),
Neil Michaud (EUR/NE), and William Butcher (S/S–O); and approved by Palmer.
2 See Document 250.
3 Not found.
4 Not found.
