Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
587
hold promise as new sources of food and income. These will be major
agricultural priorities of the institute for scientific and technological co-
operation. Other government agencies will also increase their support
for such research.
We must also do more to prevent the tragic loss of 10–20% of the
food which is produced each year in the developing countries. More
food is lost to rodents, insects, and spoilage in the developing world
than all the food aid to the developing world combined. We are already
a major contributor to the Food and Agriculture Organization’s post-
harvest loss fund, and both AID and the new institute will be devoting
increasing resources to finding better ways to assure that what people
toil to produce is available to sustain them.
Finally, we intend to channel our food and development assistance
increasingly to countries which are seeking to adopt domestic policies
which encourage their own food production and equitable distribution
and promote better use of water and land resources. We intend to par-
ticipate actively in the upcoming World Conference on Agrarian Re-
form and Rural Development which will be addressing these essential
questions.19
Conclusion
Programs such as those I have mentioned today are no cure-all.
But they come to grips with the most pressing problems of the de-
veloping countries, and they will make a difference where it counts
most—in the daily lives of people. They will insure that more people in
the developing countries will have enough food to eat, that fewer chil-
dren will die in infancy, that there is sufficient energy to power more
irrigation pumps and to bring more heat and light to distant villages.
The resources we can bring to bear may seem small in comparison
to the magnitude of the problems which must be solved. But let us re-
member that development is a long-term process. Our hopes for the
coming decades are lifted by the fact that people are better off in most
developing countries today than they were two decades ago.
Life expectancy in the developing world in the past two decades
has jumped from 42 to over 50, an increase which took the industrial
nations a century to accomplish. Adult literacy in the developing world
has jumped from one-third in 1950 to over one-half. In the past quarter
of a century, per capita income in the developing countries grew on the
average of almost 3% a year. This is about 50% better than historical
growth rates in Western nations during their industrialization.
19 The FAO World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development
(WCARRD) was scheduled to take place in Rome July 12–20, 1979.
