3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
627
efit of both sides. He would note in particular that it would then be-
come possible jointly to work out long-term programs of cooperation,
similar to those that the Soviet Union had established with the Federal
Republic of Germany, France, Canada and a number of other countries.
There was a solid and realistic basis for that. The Soviet Union had an
enormous market, and in turn could offer much that would be of in-
terest to American firms.
Brezhnev noted that unfortunately artificial obstacles had been
created that stood in the way of developing such relations as maritime
shipping, air travel and others. Ridiculous accusations had been le-
velled at the Soviet Union in terms of allegations that the Soviet Mer-
chant Marine intended to seize American shipping markets. Some civil
aviation had been suspended, too. Brezhnev asked for what purpose
this was done. To be honest, he found it hard indeed to understand the
meaning of such actions by the U.S. side.
In Brezhnev’s view, our relations in science and technology and ac-
tive cooperation between Soviet and American scientists in a wide va-
riety of fields were proceeding rather well, including such areas as en-
ergy, environment, medicine and agriculture. As he understood it,
concrete results had been achieved in many areas and the prospects for
continued cooperation were good, provided no artificial obstacles were
put in its way. Some attempts had been made to exploit scientific coop-
eration for political purposes, reducing the levels of delegations, can-
celling visas, etc. Here, too, he failed to see any sense in such artificial
obstacles.
Brezhnev asked the President not to be offended by these com-
ments. They were aimed at developing good relations with the United
States on a stable and long-term basis. He very much hoped that the
President would understand and share this view.
In conclusion, Brezhnev wanted to say that he was satisfied and
highly gratified by the opportunity to have made the President’s per-
sonal acquaintance and to have had useful and meaningful conversa-
tions with him. He was certain that this would help both of them in
their future work aimed at improving Soviet-American relations for the
sake of peace and to the benefit of our two nations.
The President noted that their time for this meeting was almost up,
and said he would not respond to each of the points made by Brezhnev.
He would, however, investigate the problems mentioned by Brezhnev
like, for example, air travel, and would respond through Secretary
Vance. He hoped that it will be possible to alleviate the obstacles
standing in the way of better cooperation between our countries. If in
the future we see any problems in the actions or policies of the Soviet
