714 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Baker: No, what we’re doing with Britain only relates to transfers to existing patterns of our cooperation, and we have furnished you with a statement describing our cooperation to explain that that pattern of cooperation would not be transformed. Maybe after you have taken a closer look at that statement, then it would be okay. Shevardnadze: Well, that’s why I responded as I did. Personally, I think there is some serious work to be done to study your answer and maybe your statement can be made more definitive. Baker: In any case, non-­circumvention still remains to be done. Now, as for the question of heavies and our requirement that some sort of restriction on flight testing, this too is an issue that still needs to be resolved. You’ll note that we abandoned our suggestion that you cease production in 1993 and we are suggesting simply to a limitation on flight testing. I understood you to say that you have done all you are going to do on heavies in this agreement. And I’m saying for us that this is still an issue because we do want to see some agreement on limits on flight testing. As for the question of limits on mobiles, that, too, is still unresolved, so you say you have some flexibility on numbers. Regarding the Backfire Bomber, what I understood you to say is that there wouldn’t be any assurances on the Backfire. I would like you to reexamine that position because it’s a major stumbling block to a treaty. We need to be able to point to the fact that this aircraft is going to be dealt with someplace—­if not in START, then CFE. I think our request is quite reasonable. We ask only that you tell us that you’re not going to transform it into an intercontinental bomber and that you’ll agree to handle it in CFE. On joint statements, I understand they will proceed to work them out in Geneva and then we will exchange texts. And as you say duration is resolved. Another issue that is not resolved is verification of road mobiles—­that one is still open. There was an agreement ad referendum in Geneva, but you are not able to agree to it now I gather. Somehow we’re going to have to find an answer to this important issue. I hope you will please add this to your list. The other issue that come to my mind is a preliminary point of monitoring, but that is a very technical issue and I think that ought to be worked on by experts. Maybe some other START issues are still out there, but they will have to be evaluated. On Vienna, I’d like to have an honest discussion with you. We see time going by and we brought forthcoming proposals and even pushed our allies to go along with the proposals that we brought. Our allies are very sensitive to the fact that we might be negotiating something bilaterally when CFE is not a bilateral issue. In any case, we did bring something and maybe you just need more time to digest what we brought. But I must say that the feeling on our part and on the part of our allies
