198
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
respond promptly to events. Non-violent shows of force, limited mili-
tary actions, and rescue operations give us options to up the ante or
seize the initiative when conditions are ripe.5
5 In his December 2 memorandum, Sick argued that “a direct military strike against
Iran will work against us.” He suggested a show of force such as sonic booms over Qom
in the middle of the night, and escalating military actions starting with mining Bandar
Abbas. He urged that the United States not give up on a rescue operation as it is “the
most effective and most readily accepted military action we could take.” (Ibid.)
79.
Paper Prepared by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near
Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders)1
Washington, undated
THE INTERNAL OPTIONS IN IRAN
The small group chaired by David Aaron has considered essentially
two strategies toward the evolution of the internal Iranian political
leadership.
Before one gets to either one, there is a debate over (1) whether
we decide now that we can not live with Khomeini and should set as
our objective his downfall or (2) whether we should assume that we
cannot have much effect on this symbol of the revolution and concen-
trate on bolstering constructive forces which might emerge when it
becomes apparent that Khomeini himself is incapable of running a
country and has to be eased aside from decisions on managing
Iran’s affairs.
In our meetings, two different approaches have been laid out:
1. One is referred to as the “southern strategy.” This approach
involves providing support for certain expatriates like Bakhtiar and
Gen. Djam, who might work with ethnic minorities in Iran and eventu-
ally try to set up a rival Iranian Government in one of those minority
areas. The objective would not be the disintegration of Iran, because
its integrity remains the best defense against the USSR. The objective
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File,
Box 32, Iran Update 12/15/79–12/31/79. Secret. Attached to a December 3 memorandum
from Saunders to Vance.
