Guatemala 667 constitution tutelage. The U.S. never aspired to nor had tutelage over any people. Conclusions Guatemalans felt that the period of Communist-­dominated rule entitles them to a special position. They frankly express their hope for a continuation of U.S. aid at approximately the same levels. The study presented in Guatemala appeared to be well coordinated and integrated and concisely presented. The program was presented as whole at a meeting with the Cabinet rather than in a series of separate requests. It was evident that in Guatemala as in some other Central American countries, there was considerable confusion as to the purpose and policies of the various lending organizations in the U.S. as well as a lack of understanding of the potential of private investment. No mention was made of attracting home large amounts of Guatemalan private capital held abroad. While perhaps more mention was made of the possible benefits of tourism in Guatemala than in other Central American countries, nevertheless it did not appear that the full potential that might be derived from the industry was realized. Considerably more seemed to have been done in Guatemala than in the other countries of the area towards evaluating properly the potentials of Guatemala in all fields. The effects of the Klein-Saks mission in the field of advising the Government on public administration was evident.5 The Government of Guatemala has very ambitious plans for the development of the country, and evidently feels that large-­scale U.S. assistance will continue (no grant aid is being requested for Guatemala in the Mutual Security Appropriation Bill for FY 1959). It has the largest population of any country in the area, and its potentialities are great (land, timber, possible petroleum, agriculture, light industry, some minerals, etc.). This appears to have made the size of the requests for assistance considerably greater than elsewhere encountered during the mission. Because of Guatemala’s past association with Communist-­type policies, and the Government’s tendency to try to regulate non-­ agricultural enterprises more and more, some many possible private investors may have been discouraged from placing their money in Guatemala, although the country’s official policy is to private investment, both foreign and domestic.
