Foreign Economic Policy
International Monetary and Trade Policy
1.
Message From Vice President-Elect Mondale to
President-Elect Carter1
Togov 136
Washington, January 18, 1977
SUBJECT
Visit to Europe and Japan
The reaction from the leaders of Western Europe and Japan to your
announcement of my overseas mission has been positive and enthusi-
astic.2 They welcome this early initiative to improve consultations and
strengthen cooperation. They view it as a positive signal that you will
exercise leadership on the economic, political and defense problems
they share in common with the United States.
The January 23–February 1 mission will include discussions in
Brussels with the North Atlantic Council, the Commission of the Euro-
pean Communities, Belgian and Dutch leaders; talks in Bonn with
Chancellor Schmidt; a brief visit to Berlin; talks in Rome with President
Leone and Prime Minister Andreotti; an audience with Pope Paul VI;
talks in London with Prime Minister Callaghan, in Paris with President
Giscard d’Estaing and in Tokyo with Prime Minister Fukuda. The pri-
mary focus of the trip will be on the personal discussions with Schmidt,
Callaghan, Giscard and Fukuda.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 67, Transition Messages: To Governor #115–141: 1/8–19/77. Secret; Eyes Only. Mon-
dale did not initial the message, which incorrectly identifies Carter and Mondale as the
President and Vice President, respectively.
2 Carter announced on January 8 that Mondale would travel to Western Europe and
Japan for consultations with U.S. allies. (Charles Mohr, “Mondale to Explain Carter Aims
on Visit to Europe and Japan,” The New York Times, January 9, 1977, p. 1) In message
Togov 102 to Carter, January 5, Brzezinski proposed the trip as a way “to underline your
commitment to prompt action on international economic issues through close consulta-
tions with our principal allies, as well as to reduce pressures for early separate summits.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 66, Tran-
sition Messages: To Governor #87–114: 12/31/76–1/7/77)
1
