Covert and Overt Operations 811 nity in support of the rescue operation. He noted that he would skip much of the detail and leave that, and any other questions the Panel might have, for them to address after he finished his opening remarks or to be followed up by the General Wilson-DDCI/John McMahon channel. He then categorized our intelligence support into five distinct areas: —Positive intelligence —Training in the US —Planning and preparation assistance —Execution of the operation —Effect of secrecy [portion marking not declassified] 3. The Director then proceeded to describe our role in each of these five categories in more detail. a. Positive intelligence (1) He opened by saying that this was an undertaking shared in by the entire Community (State, NSA, CIA, DIA). (2) He stated that our primary requirement had been to provide information on where the hostages were. —He noted that we had high confidence that the hostages were, in fact, in the embassy.2 [5 lines not declassified] Prior to this windfall information we did have good confidence in the knowledge that the hostages were in the embassy, though there was always some question as to exactly how many hostages were in which specific building. The Director noted that the embassy compound was a very hard target to penetrate. (3) We also had a requirement to provide intelligence on the compound and its environs. —We were very good here. [4½ lines not declassified] —[6 lines not declassified] —[1½ lines not declassified] we were able to obtain the great amount of detail regarding the physical layout and conditions of the embassy, the stadium and other areas of interest to the planners of the operation. (4) NSA support. —He commented that NSA did a fine job of getting all the necessary information with regard to the Iranian radar and communications networks. —[4½ lines not declassified] —[3½ lines not declassified] (5) CIA/DIA military reporting. —He mentioned that a lot of collection, analysis and reporting had been done on the status of the Iranian military. 2 See footnote 2, Document 264.
