Venezuela 1259 was an integral part of his plans. President Betancourt, expanding on this idea of small industry, gave particular attention to the resuscitation in Venezuela of handicraft industries and spoke of the desirability of decentralizing industries of this or any other and throughout the country and away from Caracas, The President spoke also of his plans for agrarian reform, irrigation, and low-­cost housing. He referred again as he had in an earlier conversation (on March 10) to the Government’s program directed toward facilitating and encouraging the return of many of the ranchito dwellers in the various centers of population to agricultural areas. The President spoke of the necessity for local financing, particularly in the field of housing, and of his desire to broaden the base of this financing by instituting a system of popular investment in government housing bonds. In terms of a basic source for such investments, the President spoke particularly of the higher paid workers of the country, specifically in the oil industry but also in certain other fields, and of the necessity of encouraging these workers to save their money and to make it available through investments of this kind for the development of the country. He said he is thinking seriously of a plan under which up to 50% of year-­end utilidades in the petroleum and other industries would be invested by the workers in Government bond issues for low-­cost housing. The President throughout the conversation demonstrated full confidence and conviction that he would be able to carry through his program with complete success. He recognized the activities of the Communists but expressed his opinion that by 1964, the next election, the Communists will be able to account for no more than 60,000 votes. The President, and Minister Pérez Alfonso (who arrived some five minutes late) spoke with obvious preoccupation of the various labor disputes and strikes with which they have had to deal in the last two or three weeks. The President said that it has taken a great deal of his time since he has had to deal personally with all of them. He spoke particularly of the illegal LAV pilots’ strike and the hunger strike of the imprisoned military officers. Pérez Alfonso mentioned and then the President discussed a bit further the Orinoco Mining Comp any strike. The reaction of the President and Pérez Alfonso seemed to be that the company has been inclined to be overly legalistic in its dealings with the workers. There was no protracted discussion of this subject however, except that the President’s preoccupation was obvious, as was his apparent determination to endeavor to contribute to a solution of the strike. The President made a very quick reference to the news from the United States concerning the decision of the Immigration and Naturalization Service respecting the continued stay in the United States of Pérez Jiménez; in this connection he referred smilingly to LA ESFERA’s editorial of this morning (this editorial suggested that now
