192  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Others believe that the current proposal neither protects sensitive 
U.S. programs nor deters Soviet cheating, since the U.S. will be under 
pressure to accede to Soviet requests while the Soviets will reject U.S. 
requests if they are cheating. They believe we need to take a compre-
hensive look at mobile verification to see if there are new approaches to 
the issue. Among the possibilities to be examined are: 1) a combination 
of the more comprehensive PPM approach and SSI lists (see above), 
and mandatory SSI at suspected solid rocket motor production plants 
(at the challenged party’s option, this SSI may consist only of sampling 
air, water, and soil outside of buildings; right to request satisfaction of 
other concerns, but no explicit right to demand inspection); and 2) a 
mandatory SSI approach which would provide for exclusions based on 
function, e.g., buildings or rooms containing intelligence equipment.
Options—Right-­of-Refusal SSI. Two options exist:
— Option 1—Maintain the current approach to permit SSI at loca-
tions not on the list, subject to a right-­of-­refusal; if a request is refused, 
the refusing party is required to make a “good faith” effort to resolve 
the concern by other means.
— Option 2—Inform the Soviets that we are unprepared to discuss 
our Right-­of-Refusal SSI proposal pending a review of our position.
A third issue is whether to permit SSI at facilities subject to PPM, 
but where the monitoring side decides not to establish a PPM system. 
The current U.S. position specifies that such facilities would be subject 
to either mandatory SSI or right-­of-­refusal SSI. Prior to entry into force, 
a list of facilities subject to mandatory SSI would be agreed between the 
sides. However, procedures for determining which category such facil-
ities would be placed after entry into force have not been developed.
Some believe that it is desirable to have the right to mandatory 
inspection of Soviet facilities we have chosen not to PPM, and that the 
security risk of such Soviet inspections of U.S. facilities is acceptable. 
They believe that since the Soviets have more facilities that may be sub-
ject to PPM and since the Soviets will insist on equal numbers of PPM 
sites in the U.S. and Soviet Union, this mandatory SSI right would be 
to our advantage.
Others believe that it makes little sense to offer the Soviets the right 
to either type of SSI in lieu of PPM since, in this view, we will require 
continuous monitoring to count Soviet production. They believe the 
right to SSI would not provide a cost saving to us or aid to verifica-
tion, but would give the Soviets access to our production techniques 
for strategic missiles and large space/SDI boosters, should they choose 
to exercise the SSI option. They further believe that subjecting such 
facilities to right-­of-­refusal SSI would severely undermine our ability to 
prevent covert production, since it is likely that the Soviets would reject 
requests to inspect plants at which they were cheating.
