818 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 150. Memorandum of Conversation1 Irkutsk, August 1, 1990, 10:30 a.m.–2:30 p.m. PARTICIPANTS US: The Secretary

Dennis B. Ross, Notetaker

Interpreter USSR: Eduard Shevardnadze

Sergey Tarasenko, Notetaker

Interpreter Baker: I think that we might think about doing regional issues today and maybe some economic issues, and tomorrow we can focus on arms control. Shevardnadze: Okay, but I’ve kind of been thinking about doing it the other way around. I have to really answer a couple of the questions that you posed to me before. Baker: Okay, but I need to hear from Washington on one question that you posed in your letter to me and that’s why I was hoping that we might wait a little longer, especially because I think you did make some proposals on aircraft and ground forces in CFE that I want to be able to respond to. So, maybe we can spend a bit of time on the schedule first and then sort out how we want to proceed for today. Shevardnadze: Yes, I think that’s a good way to do it. Baker: I do want to talk about Cambodia, Kashmir, Angola, and Central America. Those are some of the regions I want to get into to. Shevardnadze: That’s fine. But first, let’s take a look at our work schedules. And also, I think we should address the question of whether or not as a result of this meeting we should try to have a communique or some document. We can, of course, report separately to the press. We certainly wouldn’t have to prepare anything big. We’ve prepared a draft that could be useful. Baker: We’ve done well in the past by reporting separately to the press. But let’s take a look at your draft, and we’ll see what we want to do. Shevardnadze: Okay. That’s fine. Also, with regard to the press, maybe we should discuss whether we should have a full-­fledged press 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Executive Secretariat, Lot 96D277, Baker Subject Files 1990–1994, No Folder Title. Secret; Nodis. The complete memorandum of conversation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts. Baker arrived in Irkutsk in the early hours of August 1, after spending July 29–31 in Singapore for the Second Asia- Pacific Economic Cooperation Meeting. On August 2, he flew to Ulaanbaatar, and then to Moscow on August 3, where he and Shevardnadze issued a joint statement on the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
