240  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Domestic Affairs—
Productivity—Chile’s basic problem is increasingly high cost of 
production. Wages and social security benefits should be related to pro-
ductivity. Freer competition will encourage productivity. Agricultural 
production should be stimulated.
Government Finance—Government should decrease expenditures, 
take smaller share of business profits, and withdraw from fields more 
suitable to private enterprise. Administrative reform is essential. Tax 
revision and codification is urgent. When copper prices are high, part 
of copper tax proceeds should be reserved for periods when prices are 
low.
Credit Policy—Dislikes credit restriction as the main tool of infla-
tion control since it tends to curb production.
Exchange Rate—Favors realistic exchange rate, but has not commit-
ted himself to freeing rate.
Housing—Wants a national housing program with centralized 
authority.
COMMENT: In summarizing Alessandri’s economic objectives, 
Embassy Santiago suggests that some over-­enthusiastic U.S. press 
reports of his election may lead people to believe that he will follow a 
policy of austerity and will effect profound and favorable changes in 
the foreign investment climate. The Embassy believes that Alessandri, 
in view of his expressed resentment over credit controls, is more likely 
to loosen rather than tighten monetary controls. The strength of the left-
ist vote in the presidential election would also indicate that Alessandri 
may experience considerable difficulty in achieving many of his eco-
nomic objectives, including the encouragement of foreign investment.
While Alessandri’s job will not be an easy one, we are somewhat 
more optimistic than the Embassy with regard to his chances of suc-
cess in the fields of monetary policy and foreign investment. The IMF 
believes, and we concur, that the primary objective in attempting to 
control Chile’s inflation is the reduction of governmental expenditures. 
If Alessandri can make headway on this, there may be room for more 
relaxation of credit to the private sector. The restoration of financial sta-
bility in Chile, if Alessandri can achieve it (and his record as Finance 
Minister indicates that he is fully aware of the perils of inflation), would 
do more than anything else to restore the economy and to improve the 
climate for foreign private investment. How Alessandri will get along 
with Congress remains to be seen.2
2 A handwritten marginal notation by Siracusa reads: “As far as stability is con-
cerned, assuming he can do what he wants, Alessandri seems almost too good to be true. 
But I wonder if such a program can win political support and mass popularity.”
