1496 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 3. The administrator shall be responsible in accordance with the provisions of Article VI, paragraph 2, for the appointment, organiza­ tion and functioning of the international staff of the organization. He shall be responsible for including in the staff such qualified scientific, technical and other personnel as may be required to fulfill the purpose of the organization. 4. When the administrator is unable to identify as a natural occur­ rence an event which has been detected by the system and which could be suspected of being a nuclear explosion in accordance with the terms of this treaty and its annexes, he shall so notify the Commission; and after 24 hours have elapsed he shall proceed forthwith to have an inspection of the locality of the event carried out (unless he is otherwise directed pursuant to Article VI, paragraph 7) in order to determine the actual nature of the event. 5. The administrator shall have authority to order special aircraft missions under procedures approved by the Commission in accordance with the criteria set forth in this treaty and its annexes. 6. The administrator shall determine, subject to the approval of the Commission, specific sites for land control posts, radiochemical laboratories, aircraft sampling stations, (satellite tracking stations), and regional offices and locate ships in accordance with the general prin­ ciples set forth in this treaty and its annexes. The administrator shall, subject to the approval of the Commission, determine the specific flight patterns for routine sampling flights, and orbits of satellites. 7. The administrator shall determine, subject to the approval of the Commission, the number and base location of inspection groups in accordance with the requirements in this treaty and its annexes. 8. The administrator shall be responsible for undertaking a pro­ gram to improve the operational capability of the system either by research and development carried out by the staff of the system or by appropriate external contracts. This program may, with the approval of the Commission, include experiments performed by the Control Orga­ nization to test the effectiveness of the system, including experiments in connection with nuclear explosions carried under Article (blank). 9. The administrator shall prepare the budget of the Control Orga­ nization in accordance with paragraph (blank) of Article (blank). 10. The administrator shall render to the Commission such advice and assistance as may be requested. Article IX—Detection and Identification System 1. The system shall be established and shall operate in accordance with the provision of this treaty and its annexes. 2. The parties undertake to provide the necessary transportation from the port of entry, or within the territory of the party, to the site
