September 18–December 16, 1978 381 frankly to him. I am going to remind him that we have been and still are his strong friends and supporters.”8 “However, the time has now come,” Fahd said, “and I will tell Arafat so—for the Palestinians to take advantage of the opportunity which is now given them. If they don’t take what’s been offered them now, I don’t see any alternative that provides any real hope at any time in the future, and I will tell Arafat just that”, he added. “I do not want to be a party to the Palestinians passing up this opportunity as they have others in the past,” Fahd said. “I will tell Arafat that if the PLO truly represents the Palestinian people, they will strengthen and solidify that leadership through the political process that the Camp David accords provide and that he should encourage all to go in and take part.”9 “On the other hand,” the Crown Prince said, “I can understand if Arafat finds it difficult or impossible to endorse openly the Camp David results. It may take him some time, and I will tell him that we will understand if he has to make public speeches, even if he has to froth at the mouth in them. However, I want him to pass the word to his followers, especially in the West Bank and Gaza, to join in the negotiations and the peace process.” “I will tell him to be reasonable,” Fahd said. “I will also add that I know that a reasonable approach will ultimately appeal to President Assad, and that’s important,” Fahd emphasized.10 The Crown Prince added, “I will further tell Arafat that if the Palestinian self-rule entity takes up its task seriously, then, in my opinion, within the first three years the world, including the US, would be so favorably impressed that everybody would turn to Israel and say ‘These are responsible people, the Palestinians; what do you need to keep your armed forces on their territory for?’ Obviously guarantees should be enough to convince you of your security. In fact, by the end of the three years Israel herself may come to this conclusion and start dealing with the Palestinians in this new light.” Fahd assured me he intends to be frank, indeed almost cruelly so, with Arafat and would urge him not to heed the opinions of such extremists as Abu Iyad11 and the others who are trading on this “Palestinian commodity”. The Crown Prince further promised to impress Ar- 8 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left-hand margin adjacent to this and the next paragraph. 9 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right-hand margin adjacent to this paragraph. 10 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the right-hand margin adjacent to this sentence. 11 Also known as Salah Khalaf, Abu Iyad was Deputy Chief and head of intelligence for the Palestine Liberation Organization, and the second most senior official to Arafat.
