1979  557
119.	 Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of 
Defense for Program Analysis and Evaluation (Murray) to 
Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, April 9, 1979
SUBJECT
PRC on the Consolidated Guidance
In a note to Charles on March 20th, you asked that I chair a work-
ing group in preparation for a PRC on the CG.2 The group—­consisting 
of Les Gelb, Randy Jayne, Dan Murphy, Walt Slocombe, Bill Smith, and 
Vic Utgoff—­met for the first time on March 30th to hear suggestions 
for the PRC meeting agenda. Those suggestions are summarized in 
this memo. To the extent that you approve them, the working group 
will turn next to the preparation of suitable back-­up material for the 
principals.
Fortunately, all members of the working group agree on the princi-
pal issue for discussion at the PRC meeting: the adequacy to the needs 
of national security of the forces and capabilities assumed in the CG.3
That is an issue that the CG was never really intended to address. 
Though adequacy is in no small way dependent on funding, the CG 
does not determine the fiscal guidance—­it merely reports it. And since 
the CG is intended primarily to guide the preparation of the Service 
POMs, we labor to assure that its forces and capabilities are at least 
consistent with that (exogenously determined) fiscal guidance. But 
whether that funding—­and the forces and capabilities that flow from 
it—­is adequate to the needs of national security is quite another matter, 
and one the working group agrees is the biggest loose end of all con-
cerning the CG.
Though no great surprise, the most consistent charge from the Ser-
vices and Chiefs in their comments on the CG was one of inadequacy 
to the needs of national security. Our response to the effect that the CG 
was never intended to define “how much is enough”, though correct, 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 75. PRC 
106, 5/15/79, DOD Consolidated Guidance. Top Secret. A copy was sent to Duncan. A 
stamped notation on the first page indicates that Brown saw the memorandum. In the 
upper right corner of the memorandum, Brown wrote: “4/10, RM II, Good, see my notes. 
HB.”
2 Reference is to Charles Stebbins of the NSC. Brown’s March 20 note was not found.
3 In the right margin next to this sentence, Brown wrote: “and is the Financial Guid-
ance enough to fund it.”
