900  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
concerned to acquire such items either from United States sources 
or Panamanian sources unless, in certain instances, it is not feasible to 
do so.” (Underscoring added). The wording of the provisions of Item 
8—“in certain instances, it is not feasible to do so”—­is sufficiently 
broad to permit purchases in third countries. My Government consid-
ers that the provisions of Item 8 in general recognize the preferential 
position of United States and Panamanian sources over other sources 
in the supplying of goods for resale in the Canal Zone. However, that 
preference, while considered to be real and important, is not absolute 
or unlimited. Conversely, the provisions of Item 8 are not regarded 
as precluding or prohibiting the acquisition of merchandise from 
third countries “in certain instances” for sale in the Canal Zone. Your 
Excellency’s Government of course is aware of the obligations of the 
United States Government in this respect as a party to the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the good will of the United 
States has already been demonstrated by the considerable increase 
in purchases by Canal Zone agencies from Panamanian suppliers, 
and by the interest of the Canal Zone Government expressed in the 
development of Panamanian production capable of being used in 
the Canal Zone. The volume of third-­country purchases for resale 
is now a minute percentage of the total value of such purchases. 
However, desirous of eliminating areas of disagreement between 
the two Governments, the Canal Zone authorities are so supervis-
ing their procurement procedures as to afford Panamanian suppliers 
increased opportunities to supply their goods. In addition, United 
States Government agencies are cooperating, and intend to continue 
to cooperate, in increasing the volume and variety of Panamanian 
production. These efforts, augmented by Panamanian enterprise, 
should serve further to decrease the already small volume of third-­
country purchases.
Tire Recapping, Laundry and Dry-Cleaning Services:
As the Government of Panama has been previously informed, my 
Government does not consider tire recapping, laundry and dryclean-
ing to be activities within the purview of Item 9 of the Memorandum of 
Understandings Reached inasmuch as they are services as distinguished 
from the manufacture and processing of goods within the coverage of 
Item 9. Notwithstanding the fact that these services are not subject to 
the commitment contained in the Memorandum of Understandings 
Reached, my Government will continue to afford full opportunity to 
Panamanian industry to compete in these fields of activity.
