1000
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
and the shift of emphasis in our aid program to basic human needs,
have both helped us to regain the initiative in the area of moral and hu-
mane values. We should continue to press those issues, firmly but not
obsessively, in our relations with developing countries. Not all devel-
oping countries will like this position, but in my view it provides the
only possible basis for building and sustaining broad-based support for
foreign assistance with the American public.
The second half of President Carter’s administration presents sev-
eral opportunities to emphasize our second strength, technological
prowess. January 1979 is the 30th anniversary of Harry Truman’s inau-
gural address, in which he put forward his famous “Point Four” pro-
posals. Truman, it is said, is the President Jimmy Carter admires most;
it would be fitting if he picked up a dramatic Truman initiative in his
own administration. The State of the Union message offers an ideal oc-
casion for recalling Truman’s Point Four initiative, reviewing briefly
the substantial progress in the intervening 30 years, and outlining his
own program in general terms.
(Truman’s Point Four program offered to make “the benefits of our
scientific advances and industrial progress available for the improve-
ment and growth of underdeveloped areas”.2 He offered to make avail-
able our store of technological knowledge to “produce more food, more
clothing, more materials for housing and more mechanical power to
lighten their burdens” of the free peoples of the world. It represented
the beginnings of our development-oriented foreign aid program.)
In the international arena, UNCTAD V will take place in Manila in
May and the UN Conference on Science and Technology will take place
in August. Each presents an occasion for unveiling some details of the
program. Indeed, others will be looking to the U.S. to take some initia-
tive at these conferences.
What would be the content of such a program?
First, we could pull together in an integrated fashion a number of
disparate initiatives President Carter has already approved:
1. The Foundation for International Technological Cooperation
(FITC).
2. The technological aspects of the President’s world health initia-
tive, especially greater emphasis on tropical diseases in our medical re-
search.3
2 This program was the fourth component of the “program for peace and freedom”
outlined by Truman in his January 20, 1949, inaugural address; see Public Papers of the
Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1949, pp. 112–116. (Quotation is on p. 114.)
3 Documentation on the Carter administration’s world health initiative is in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 313.
