Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Kamel agreed, and acknowledged that his impression was that President Carter favors the Begin plan with respect to self-government. He recalled that at the Leeds Castle conference,7 Egypt had also put forward ideas on the subject. The Secretary said that we take exception to the Egyptian idea that Jordanian and Egyptian authority should prevail in the West Bank and Gaza during the interim period. We believe authority for the self-governing authority should flow from Jordan, Egypt and Israel. There should be an election for representatives of the Palestinians who will govern. Kamel thought that Jordanian/Palestinian and Egyptian/Palestinian relationships are enough for the interim period. Why should Israel participate in self-rule? Saunders noted that the Secretary had been speaking of an agreement which would provide authority to the government. He had not been talking about Israeli involvement. The Secretary observed that the Israelis would withdraw. Saunders pointed to the difference between our concept and that of the Begin Plan, which speaks of authority deriving from the military government. This, the Secretary noted, is not acceptable to us. Saunders stressed that under our idea, authority would devolve from the three governments— Egypt, Jordan and Israel. They would set up the mechanism for local elections. El-Reedy asked about our interpretation of this difference in terms of the consequences for self-government? The Secretary said he had read the Egyptian proposal as suggesting a continuing supervisory role by Jordan and Egypt. This is not good. Authority should be gotten to the people as quickly as possible. Saunders noted that the Egyptian plan at Leeds Castle turned over authority to Jordan and Egypt jointly. This is not realistic. The Israelis are in the West Bank and Gaza. Hence, agreement by the three is better than any unilateral Israeli authority. El-Reedy asked if this suggests a role for Israel. Saunders said only insofar as the defined agreement on security is concerned. There would be no role in government. Security, possibly immigration and some other matters might be handled through a committee. The Secretary said we would have to find areas where such committee supervision is needed. Quandt noted that, under the Israeli plan, authority derives from the military authority. It can be revoked at any time. This is not acceptable. El-Baz recalled that El-Araby had alluded to United States thinking in terms of beginning the self-government role. What about termination of that role? Would this transpire in the same manner? The Secretary thought there would have to be a provision indicating what happens at the end of five years and how to proceed. This should depend in a major way on the will of the people. Saunders observed that
