126  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Our current position on heavy ICBMs indirectly provides for ulti-
mate U.S.-Soviet equality by banning heavy ICBM testing and mod-
ernization, with the result that as existing SS–18s age they will become 
less effective and ultimately obsolete. NSDD–2906 provided flexibility, 
never used, to allow testing and modernization of Soviet silo-­based 
heavy ICBMs, subject to allowing the U.S. a comparable formal right to 
deploy heavy ICBMs. All agree that the U.S. would not actually exercise 
this right, and that other treaty provisions banning new heavy ICBMs 
make even the formal right a hollow one.
There is a longstanding U.S. policy requiring that any arms reduc-
tion agreement provide for U.S.-Soviet equality. The policy is important 
to Congress and was initially articulated in 1972 in the Jackson amend-
ment, which added the following clause to the September 30, 1972 Joint 
Resolution on strategic offensive arms:
“[The Congress] urges and requests the President to seek a future 
treaty that, inter alia, would not limit the United States to levels of inter-
continental strategic forces inferior to the limits provided the Soviet 
Union.”
The Congress rejected attempts to alter this to refer to “overall 
equality” (i.e., considering technology differences), equality of “strate-
gic forces” (allowing non-­treaty limited items such as SLCM to figure 
in the balance), or equality in “nuclear arms.”
While the Jackson amendment itself was non-­binding, the princi-
ples underlying it have been given legal force by subsequent legislation 
and appear to represent a continuing sense of Congress. In the SALT II 
debate, for example, the Senate Armed Services Committee interpreted 
the Jackson amendment as requiring “equal numbers of intercontinen-
tal strategic forces taking into account throw-­weight.” The SASC con-
cluded SALT II was “unequal because it confers on the Soviet Union the 
right to deploy modern, large ballistic missiles with multiple warheads, 
a right denied to the United States.”
Given this background, there is a political question as to whether 
allowing the Soviets de jure (or even de facto) superiority in a given cate-
gory (in this case heavy ICBMs) meets the intent of the Jackson amend-
ment. More generally, any U.S. position resulting in Soviet superiority 
in any category of strategic arms must be examined for consistency 
with the basic principle of equal rights and limits.
The current U.S. position provides for formal equality in heavy 
ICBM limits (i.e., limits apply to both parties), but an indirect prohibi-
tion on U.S. heavy ICBMs through a ban on new silos. In addition to the 
6 Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1981–1988, vol. XI, START I, 1981–
1988, Document 244.
