Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 185. Memorandum From W. Averell Harriman to President Carter1 Washington, January 30, 1980 In compliance with your request, I state below the high spots of my talk with Dobrynin last night. Pam and Mrs. Dobrynin were present at dinner but not afterwards. Dobrynin indicated the Soviets would be ready to withdraw their troops from Afghanistan providing we stopped outside intervention, particularly from Pakistan. He did not mention China. He concentrated on Pakistan as the source of greatest danger. He suggested that if necessary the Soviet government would be willing to join in guaranteeing Pakistan’s security and independence. He said also we should not establish any military bases in the Persian Gulf but made no mention of the Indian Ocean.2 At a different time, he indicated the Soviet Union would strongly object to any U.S. military assistance to China but said they were not concerned by intervention by Iran. He had indicated that they were developing a carefully trained communist regime, but in answer to my question he said that he did not rule out the possibility of a neutral government for Afghanistan. He had emphasized their satisfaction with the government under the King, which of course Daoud overthrew. He emphasized the cruelty of Amin and maintained specifically that not a single individual had been executed since their troops intervened and most of the political prisoners had been released from jail. Dobrynin was deeply concerned because it appeared to him there was no channel of communication between our two governments. This he considers dangerous. May I suggest, as I indicated yesterday, that you write a letter to Brezhnev in which you emphasize the importance of Soviet troop withdrawal from Afghanistan and that conditions surrounding it might be discussed in an early meeting between Cy and Gromyko.3 I recognize that it will take some time before all of the Soviet troops can be with- 1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat (ES), Sensitive and Super Sensi-
