502  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
365.	 Telegram 1132 from Geneva1
Geneva, November 10, 1955, 4 p.m.
1132. From Johnson.
Have not yet had opportunity discuss text Deptel 1183 with the 
Secretary or Phleger but my thought is that unless in any statement 
they make CHICOMS include text their draft announcement we should 
avoid releasing our text. Am not sure even if they release their text it 
would serve our interests to release our text. Release of texts would so 
freeze positions that further negotiation thereon would become very 
difficult.
As decision is we make no release unless CHICOMS first do so, 
our statement would probably require some tailoring to meet CHICOM 
statement. If release made by Wang here, statement in reply should 
come from me; but if release by Peiping, believe reply should come 
from Washington.
Subject to foregoing concur general lines statement contained 1183 
but consider that if text our draft not released, mention should be made 
in statement of importance that renunciation specifically apply to Tai­
wan area. Otherwise to casual reader Wang’s proposal would appear 
almost completely to meet text statement in Deptel 1183. Suggest addi­
tion of “including specifically the Taiwan area” at end first sentence. 
Also better to meet CHICOM FonMin meeting point believe we should 
be somewhat more explicit concerning our willingness discuss “other 
matters” following renunciation of force declaration. Suggest this be 
done by addition of following sentences after end second para state­
ment Deptel 1183: “The United States Ambassador has made clear 
his willingness within the agreed scope of these talks to discuss these 
other matters at that time. It is the United States view that until both 
sides have exhausted a full and honest effort to resolve these problems 
through this already established and normal channel, the question of 
other channels or other meetings does not arise.”
Gowen
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–1055. Secret; Limited 
Distribution.
