Peru 1127 Upton had been very helpful and had indicated DLF as the principal source of the needed funds for local costs. Mr. Brand had also been most receptive and helpful, saying it was possible to start right away in housing and resettlement if ways could be found to provide such assistance. He had earlier seen Mr. Waugh of the Export-Import Bank, who was very sympathetic, and would be seeing him again. Mr. Dillon said he was delighted that these talks had gone so well. He reverted to the need to work out a pattern for Beltran’s programs, since the law requires adequate plans in order for the DLF to make loans. He suggested that the ICA could provide technical assistance in working out such plans and in drawing up applications to the DLF. In addition to technical assistance, it is possible that ICA special funds could be used next year. Sr. Beltran replied that this type of assistance would be most helpful and important. He mentioned, however, the livestock development program in which ICA had assisted in drawing up the program and the loan application, which had just been turned down by the DLF. Sr. Beltran then reverted to his need for financing over the next six months. He said he had been mentioning $25 million for this period, although he actually thought that about $20 million would meet his needs. With this he could start on some projects right away, while others would take time to develop. He stressed again the need for speed in face of the threat of Castroism and Communism to aggravate an already unstable political and social situation. PE–45. Editorial Note A study mission, consisting of Vance Brand, Managing Director, Development Loan Fund; Hawthorne Arey, Director, Export-Import Bank of Washington; John W. Johnston, Jr., Deputy Regional Director for Latin America, International Cooperation Administration; and Theodore C. Achilles, Counselor of the Department of State, visited Peru in mid-July to consider Peruvian loan applications for jungle colonization and low-­ cost housing. They met with President Prado, Prime Minister Beltrán, Cabinet Ministers, and other Peruvian officials. In telegram 41 from Lima, July 16, they recommended $50 million credit for Peru divided equally between the Development Loan Fund and the Export-Import Bank.
