September 18–December 16, 1978 521 record speaks for itself in this respect. If we have any doubt that we can honor a certain commitment, we shall not make it in the first place. We are talking about linkage because we are both committed to work for a comprehensive peace settlement not a separate agreement. If you go back to the days of Camp David, you will remember that I told you on September 7 that I am for permanent peace and not for a separate agreement, a partial arrangement or another disengagement. This attitude was clearly reflected in my address to the Israeli people through the Knesset last year, exactly as it is reflected in the outcome of our deliberations. The “Framework for peace in the Middle East” bears ample evidence to the nature of the peace we are working for. If this is the case, Why should it not be spelled out and reaffirmed. Dear Prime Minister Begin, Parties often make mistakes in the course of negotiations which is an arduous process. They think that their task is to insist on their demands rightly or wrongly, justly or unjustly. But if this attitude is tolerated in negotiations for an armistice agreement, it should not at all be adopted when nations are making peace. I am not stating that to point a finger of accusation at you. I am merely referring to two unfortunate developments: First: Your Delegation insisted on certain unreasonable provisions15 that serve no useful purpose. Certain concepts were blown out of proportions or stretched beyond the tolerable limit. This was the case with respect to the proposed draft of Article 6.16 What you are entitled to is a commitment from us to discharge our obligations in good faith as we hold you responsible to do the same. It is inappropriate for any of us to attempt to interfere with the way the other party conducts its relations with third countries. It is the responsibility of each party to reconcile its commitments to various partners. Much of the language used in your proposed text in this respect is meaningless and self-contradictory. One way of dealing with it could be challenging the relevance of a certain provision in application. But you know that this is not my style. I always like to be clear and decisive for I believe that I am doing the right thing for my people and yours. I would like to set a model for others to follow. Second: Your delegation retracted its acceptance of certain provisions or concepts after this acceptance had been acted upon. It is not my intention to get into a detailed account of what happened in this respect. Suffice it to cite a few examples: 15 Carter underlined “unreasonable provisions.” 16 Carter underlined “Article 6.”
