8 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 3. Memorandum From the Vice President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Watson) to Vice President Bush1 Washington, May 11, 1988 SUBJECT NATO Trip: Issues Last week I travelled to Brussels, stayed with Al Keel, dined there with Will Taft, and visited USNATO and SHAPE. I wanted to hear what people thought on alliance issues such as burden-­sharing, post-INF NATO, and conventional defense improvements. I visited a UK arms firm and was briefed on anti-­armor projects—­a significant part of our conventional defense efforts. I also attended a two-­day IISS2 conference on the START negotiations. I was asked, as was a Democratic defense advisor, to analyze the future of START, if President Reagan signs it before January 21, 1989, or alternatively, how the next President would approach it in 1989. In one week I was able to pack in reviews of conventional defense, INF, and START—­the full range of our defenses, and our deterrence spectrum. In short, the allies are pulling their share of the NATO burden. The popular perception is that “those rich Europeans do nothing for their own defense; and we Americans have over 300,000 troops there, at great cost—­they ought to do more.” The European view, and Frank Carlucci’s, is that everything they do can’t be quantified—­for instance, as a percent of GNP. They also feel that political and environmental factors (overcoming public opposition to INF deployment, constant exercises, artillery firing ranges, sharing a border with the enemy) should count. Frank Carlucci recently put out a report3 on burden-­sharing, and last week Will Taft met with the North Atlantic Council and toured NATO capitals seeking greater contributions from our allies. There was concern that in seeking greater burden-­sharing (i.e., sharing the risks, the costs, the responsibilities, and the benefits) we treat them as friends, not “them Europeans” with whom only coercion works. 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Vice Presidential Records, Office of National Security Affairs, Samuel J. Watson Files, OA/ID 19865–006, EUR [Europe]/ NATO—NATO. No classification marking. Sent through Gregg. 2 International Institute for Strategic Studies. 3 Reference is to Carlucci’s report to the United States Congress in March 1988, “Report on Allies Assuming a Greater Share of the Common Defense Burden.” (Bush Library, George H.W. Bush Vice President Records, Office of National Security Affairs, Samuel J. Watson Files, EUR [Europe]/NATO—NATO.)
