Human Rights 281 86. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs (Katz), the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian), and the Deputy Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Nooter) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1 Washington, November 9, 1977 SUBJECT PL 480 Title I—Human Rights Reporting Requirements Issue for Decision The issue is when and how PL 480 Title I agreements should be amended to require that the food or proceeds directly benefit the needy. There basically are three possibilities: 1) apply this additional requirement only to countries specifically identified as gross human rights violators; 2) apply it to a limited number of human rights problem countries; or 3) apply it in all future Title I agreements. A related but separate decision is what procedure should be followed for review of proposed Title I allocations. Essential Factors The issue arises due to the inclusion in PL 480 legislation of a new Human Rights amendment (Section 112).2 That provision states in part that “no Title I agreement may be entered into with a country that engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights . . . unless such agreement will directly benefit the needy people in such country.” This will not occur “unless either the commodities themselves or the proceeds from their sale will be used to directly benefit the needy” and finally “the agreement shall specify how the projects or programs will be used to benefit the needy people.” Congressional committees may require the President to demonstrate that specific agreements will directly benefit needy people, and the President must submit an annual report to the Congress on steps taken to carry out Section 112. The statute refers only to agreements with governments en- 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 18, Human Rights—P.L. 480. Confidential. Drafted by Bova, Silverstone, and Ogden on November 5; concurred in by Schneider, Shakow, Butler, and Creekmore. Ogden initialed the memorandum on Katz’s and Creekmore’s behalf; Schneider initialed the memorandum on Derian’s behalf. Attached as Tab 5 to a November 23 memorandum from Oxman to Christopher. 2 Reference is to the International Development and Food Assistance Act of 1977, signed by the President on August 3, 1977 (P.L. 95–88; 91 Stat. 533).
