Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 and is not simply a means of buying SALT. In doing more for defense, as you have done, we ought to stress publicly what you have often said privately: that this is your prime responsibility and that you are the first President in 15 years to reverse the downward trends. 2. Less hesitation in explicitly condemning Soviet/Cuban exploitation of Third World turbulence. This means occasionally a very toughminded remark by you and your instructions to the Secretary of State, to me, and to others at least to echo or perhaps to go a touch beyond you. I have had no difficulty in selling SALT (ask Anne Wexler) in the context of a tough pitch. Thus toughening our rhetoric will not hurt SALT but probably help it, while projecting a firmer image. The French have a saying: “c’est le ton qui fait la chanson” (it’s the tone that makes the song). And our tone has been somewhat opaque; at least, that is the way the country hears it, and what the country thinks it hears we have to recognize as part of our reality. 3. We should adopt a forceful policy of ostracizing Cuba, of maximizing Cuban economic difficulties by urging others to refrain from providing economic assistance, by sharing massively all our intelligence on Cuban activities and on the Soviet build-up of Cuban power-projection capability. 4. While our relationship with China has to stand on its own feet and we cannot use China merely as a “card” against the Soviet Union, the fact is that the U.S.-Chinese relationship does not operate in a vacuum. If the Soviets are insensitive to our concerns, we should go beyond your warnings and do some things in the Chinese-American relationship that they explicitly do not like. This means, at this stage, the transfer of genuinely sensitive technology to China and some consideration of a serious military dialogue with the Chinese. We need not decide now how far we go in this, but we do need to convey to the Soviets that their cynical use of the Cubans against us will be reciprocated in a manner that in some fashion is painful to them. 5. Radio Liberty/Voice of America should be instructed to step up their broadcasts to Soviet national minorities, notably the Moslems and Ukrainians. I see no reason why the Soviets should be free to agitate against us in Puerto Rico as well as throughout the world but we should somehow remain intimidated by the fact that Moscow is sensitive to the problem of its national minorities. 6. We should resume our talks with the Soviets on the issues that you raised with Brezhnev in Vienna: the need for reciprocal restraint.6 In so doing, we should not hesitate to convey to them that we are pre- 6 For documentation on the summit in Vienna, including records of the President’s meetings with Brezhnev, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Docu-
