National Security Policy 289 87. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, August 19, 1958 OTHERS PRESENT Chairman McCone Mr. Gordon Gray General Goodpaster Mr. McCone said the question of custody of large weapons had been raised with him. The AEC retains custody of these, even if they are deployed to outlying locations. Defense now recommends shifting the custody to themselves, and the AEC has no objection if the President should prefer this. Senator Hickenlooper and others, however, bring out that there is a matter of civilian cognizance which may have con­ siderable importance. The President recalled that the point of this distinction had been the danger that some military man, acting without civil restraint, might so use these weapons as to start a war. The military people have author­ ity for action in case of attack on the United States or on U.S. forces, but this is for tactical response. The larger weapons are intended for great retaliatory action, and this is not for military officers to authorize. He said it is not only a question of the danger, but also as to the concern our country might feel as to what military men could do. He asked Mr. McCone to consult the State Department on the matter. Mr. McCone next talked briefly about the proposal to cease the testing of atomic weapons. He said he is sympathetic with the President’s desire to find a way to move forward with disarmament after five and one-­half years of effort. His Commission has strong feelings on this, but will accept the President’s decision. Mr. McCone said he would like to ask reconsideration on one point—­that of including, as an exception, fully contained underground tests for peaceful purposes. He cited the possible use of atomic explosions to extract oil from the Athabaska sands, and to achieve useful heat power by using the salt domes of the southwest. These uses could be made subject to UN agreement and inspection. The President said he had been searching his mind for some way to allow this exception. Mr. ­Wadsworth however had thought we would lose the political gains we are seeking if we try to make this exception. The President added that he had agreed with Secretary Dulles that if the Geneva meetings resulted in agreement—­no matter what our military might 1 Source: Control of large nuclear weapons; cessation of nuclear testing. Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries.
