Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1185
2. During an operational dispersal each Party shall have the right 
to:
(a) suspend notifications that it would otherwise provide in accor-
dance with the Notification Protocol except for notification of flight tests 
provided under the Agreement Between the United States of America 
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on Notifications of Launches 
of Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles and Submarine-Launched Ballistic 
Missiles of May 31,1988; provided that, if any conversion or elimination 
processes are not suspended pursuant to subparagraph (d) of this para-
graph, the relevant notifications shall be provided in accordance with 
Section IV of the Notification Protocol;
(b) suspend the right of the other Party to conduct inspections;
(c) suspend the right of the other Party to request cooperative mea-
sures; and
(d) suspend conversion and elimination processes for its strategic 
offensive arms. In such case, the number of converted and eliminated 
items shall correspond to the number that has actually been converted 
and eliminated as of the date and time of the beginning of the oper-
ational dispersal specified in the notification provided in accordance 
with paragraph 1 of Section X of the Notification Protocol.
3. Notifications suspended pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article 
shall resume no later than three days after notification of the completion 
of the operational dispersal has been provided in accordance with para-
graph 2 of Section X of the Notification Protocol. The right to conduct 
inspections and to request cooperative measures suspended pursuant 
to paragraph 2 of this Article shall resume four days after notification 
of the completion of the operational dispersal has been provided in 
accordance with paragraph 2 of Section X of the Notification Protocol. 
Inspections or cooperative measures being conducted at the time a 
Party provides notification that it suspends inspections or cooperative 
measures during an operational dispersal shall not count toward the 
appropriate annual quotas provided for by this Treaty.
4. When an operational dispersal is completed:
(a) All deployed road-mobile launchers of ICBMs and their associ-
ated missiles shall be located within their deployment areas or shall be 
engaged in relocations.
(b) All deployed rail-mobile launchers of ICBMs and their asso-
ciated missiles shall be located within their rail garrisons or shall be 
engaged in routine movements or relocations.
(c) All heavy bombers shall be located within national territory and 
shall have resumed normal operations. If it is necessary for heavy bomb-
ers to be located outside national territory for purposes not inconsistent
