284  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
38.	
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, July 29, 1989, 8:30–10:15 a.m.
PARTICIPANTS
Lt. Gen (Ret) Scowcroft
Mr Robert Gates
Admiral Crowe
Marshal Akhromeyev
Col. Popov (Soviet Interpreter)
Mr. Afanasenko (US Interpreter)
Maj Stolberg (Joint Staff Notetaker)
Lt Gen Scowcroft: What are you impressions upon leaving the 
United States?
Marshal Akhromeyev: I’m leaving with much bigger hopes for the 
future. I’ve become convinced that most Americans stand for promoting 
US-Soviet ties. I talked to hundreds of Americans. All were positive on 
the USSR. I’m convinced that most Americans and the Administration 
have the same sentiments. We’re all being supplied with much infor-
mation. We’ve been provided with unlimited opportunities. Practically 
all the US leaders talked with me.2 We still face serious issues.
Admiral Crowe: He’s been exposed to the full spectrum.
Lt Gen Scowcroft: The cynics in the US government are in the 
Department of Defense and on the National Security Council staff. 
I wouldn’t say I met cynics on the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Admiral Crowe: What about the Navy?
Lt Gen Scowcroft: I wouldn’t call them cynics. The tone of our rela-
tionship has improved much for the better. But the realities haven’t 
changed much—­we still have work to do.
Marshal Akhromeyev: We have just started. These are old stereo-
types to be changed. General Secretary Gorbachev asked Mr Gates 
if there was an organization in the United States which was working 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft 
Collection, Special Separate USSR Notes Files, Gorbachev Files, OA/ID 91126–002, 
Gorbachev (Dobrynin) Sensitive 1989–June 1990 [2]. Secret. The meeting took place in the 
White House. The memorandum is handwritten. The editor transcribed the portion of the 
text here specifically for this volume.
2 On July 28, Akhromeyev met with Baker in the Secretary’s Office at the 
Department from 11:10 a.m.–12:05 p.m. to discuss the Conventional Forces in Europe 
negotiations. (Department of State, STARS, Document Number 198918482-0) According 
to the President’s Daily Diary, Akhromeyev met with Bush and other top officials in the 
Oval Office that same day from 2:09–3:04 p.m. No memorandum of conversation was 
found. Following the afternoon Oval Office meeting, Baker departed for France for the 
International Conference on Cambodia. He returned to Washington on July 31.
