Costa Rica 437 a sworn enemy of Carías, who made it a practice for 20 years to allege communism against most of his political enemies. We ultimately were able, with the help of the Department, to get over this hump, but the delay was extremely embarrassing and I can assure the OCD that this is a frequent kind of occurrence. Recommendation No. 5 Regional Plan 19—Labor I understand that the basic philosophy of a free labor movement is that management and labor in the United States and throughout the Free World have accepted the principle that a healthy labor movement produces buying power and efficient operation of the free enterprise system, and that enlightened capitalism aids in the well being of workers. True, we have our rows about the details of the operation of this basic principle, but in the final analysis the principle is accepted on both sides. So far as the policy of United States free enterprise abroad is concerned, it has been my observation that the acceptance of this principle has not generally percolated down to the level of the local managers. Nor has it become a tenet of labor leaders in Latin America who are representing the free labor movement. All too often in the local scene I find that the basic philosophy on both sides remains that of Marx: “Labor must fight capital” and vice versa. My suggestions are: (A) That the “head office” management of our American enterprises abroad be approached to see whether they believe that labor and capital abroad in their various enterprises can and should work together to their mutual advantage. This is a delicate problem because conditions vary from country to country. For instance, here in Costa Rica the laws and administration of labor affairs are so relatively advanced that representatives of capital feel that concessions to labor have reached the point where it is economically impossible to make more concessions. I do not necessarily agree with the employers here but this is how they think. Labor, on the other hand, is so well treated in Costa Rica that there is only a slight incentive for a free and democratic labor movement. The situation in Honduras or in Guatemala is completely different. Without attempting to suggest what the policy of the free labor movement should be in every country, I wish to point out that it is not sufficient to “lump” Latin American labor in one category and to adopt one policy for all the countries involved. Like all policies, it is highly important that a “policy board” study and evaluate the actual conditions in every country before going into action. (B) That in any case, where it is agreed that the policy of cooperation of labor and management is correct, the local managers should be called home for consultation and “given the word.” (C) That in those countries where ORIT has active affiliated labor organizations, general labor policy concerning these countries be discussed and outlined between a top representative of ORIT and the top
