World Hunger and Food Policy 833 wish to elaborate further on are the need for a national food policy based upon knowledge of nutrition, the need to encourage economic development in the developing countries, and the need to provide for world food security. A National Food Policy Traditionally, we have viewed food policy simply as a summation of our agricultural policies pertaining to the production and pricing of agricultural commodities. The time has come for the development of an explicit national food policy derived from knowledge of the nutritional requirements of our people. The goal of this policy should be to make available an adequate supply of safe, nutritious food at stable, reasonable prices while providing an adequate return to farmers, processors, retailers, and workers in the industry. There are, however, serious voids in our knowledge base from which this type of national food policy might be constructed. For example, we know less than we should about the nutritional status of various socioeconomic segments of our population, and the relationships between human health and nutrition. Guidance and recommendations from the Commission in these complex interrelated areas would be a valuable contribution to our approach to a national food policy. Economic Development Assistance I would agree with the following statement found in the recent Academy of Sciences study on world food and nutrition.3 “The maldistribution of food can best be corrected over the longer term by providing poor people with the means and opportunities to produce or purchase more food,” and further that, “the major immediate cause of hunger is poverty.” Poverty here is defined as the lack of resources with which to buy or produce food. This classical cycle of poverty combines insufficient food with disease, apathy, and other effects of poverty to foster malnutrition and lower human productivity which in turn result in low income levels. As you know, the maldistribution of food is more complex than a simple classification of countries into those with more than enough food and those with too little food. What we really observe are pockets of poverty or segments of populations within countries that do not have the means to purchase adequate levels of food. In attempting to measure the scope of this problem, however, there is often a tendency to confuse need and effective economic demand. Need is based upon a minimal requirement necessary for a human being to function at some level of productive activity. Thus total need, national or international, 3 See Document 212.
