668
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
development to the utmost. Despite its apparent paucity of military
preparations and the probable unwillingness of the USSR to intervene
militarily on its behalf, Tudeh might succeed in gaining the upper hand
if no definite winner, willing and able to use the security forces to
suppress Tudeh outbreaks, were to emerge. A similar situation might
arise if, in the event of Mossadeq’s death, the Shah and Mossadeq’s
non-Communist opponents failed to work out a rapid solution to the
succession problem.
18. Barring such an unpredictable eventuality, however, a Tudeh
assumption of power is most likely to come about as a result of one or
both of the following somewhat longer-range developments:
a. Tudeh may succeed in coming to power by parliamentary
means. Although Tudeh is unlikely to secure a large representation in
any Majlis election which might be held in 1953, continued failure to
check its growth and provide some alternate vehicle for popular senti-
ment might enable it to secure a dominant position or even a clear ma-
jority in some later Majlis.
b. Even if Tudeh’s purely political potential is not realized, a con-
tinuation of the present economic and political deterioration will
sooner or later increase popular discontent and the demoralization and
Tudeh infiltration of the bureaucracy to a point where Tudeh could
readily seize power on its own initiative.
260.
Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Tehran, August 14, 1953, 1303Z.
TEHE 686. 1. Al Homdulillah.
2. Late last night, accompanied by kisses (literally) from Iranian
source, we informed papers brought by [name not declassified]. They
now in possession Zahedi. Evidently pressure finally effective and we
feel much credit must go to [name not declassified]. Action scheduled
midnight tonight.
3. Earlier meeting with Zahedi showed him firm of purpose but in-
habiting dream world so far as his subsequent program concerned.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency. Secret. Transcribed specifically for the For-
eign Relations series from microfilm in the Central Intelligence Agency that no longer
exists. See “Sources” chapter.
