864  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
attending the meeting and participating in the Council actions below 
were the Acting Secretary of the Treasury (Scribner); the Director, 
Bureau of the Budget; and the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission 
(Item 3). Also attending the meeting were the Director of Central 
Intelligence; the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director, U.S. 
Information Agency; the U.S. Representative to NATO (W. Randolph 
Burgess); the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy); 
the Deputy Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Special Assistants to 
the President for National Security Affairs, for Science and Technology, 
and for Security Operations Coordination; Assistant Secretary of State 
Gerard C. Smith; Assistant Secretary of Defense John N. Irwin II; the 
White House Staff Secretary; the Assistant White House Staff Secretary; 
Mr. Frederic Bundy, U.S. Information Agency; the Executive Secretary, 
NSC; Mr. Robert H. Johnson, NSC; and Mr. Charles Haskins, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
1. SIGNIFICANT WORLD DEVELOPMENTS AFFECTING U.S. 
SECURITY
The Director of Central Intelligence began his briefing by stating 
that during the past week—on the 22nd and 25th—two ballistic missiles 
had been launched from Tyura Tam which had gone 4700 nautical miles 
landing in a new impact area in the Pacific 700 miles from Midway. He 
reminded the Council that sometime back there had been two other 
“long” shots into this same area. He was inclined to credit Khrushchev’s 
statement that these earlier shots had been overshots. The two recent 
shots, however, had landed in the new impact area as planned. Using 
a map he indicated the course of these missiles and the location of the 
impact area. He reminded the Council that in an earlier briefing he had 
described this impact area and the heavily instrumented vessels which 
the Soviets had positioned in this area for detection purposes.
In the case of each of these last two shots the vehicle had been 
sighted during the terminal part of its flight by American observers from 
a nearby island. The first of them had also been seen from American 
aircraft; monitoring of the count-­down had given us sufficient time to 
get planes in the air. There were no reports as yet as to whether the sec­
ond shot had been observed from U.S. aircraft. Preparation for these two 
launchings had been long and elaborate. They may have had something 
to do with the Russian space program—for example, with the develop­
ment of a recoverable nose cone. The missiles had had a lower trajectory 
than they were capable of. If the trajectory had been raised, they could 
have gone farther; the Russians in future shots may therefore have prob­
lems in avoiding coming too close to Midway.
The Director indicated that the scientific office of CIA had been 
analyzing the Soviet moon photograph. The photograph was probably
