1162
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
rely only on the U.S. and on Egypt. Others, like the Arab states, are
unreliable.
The President said he would make the same speech to Begin, and
underline the principles from Camp David. He needs to repeat his toast
almost verbatim, for the benefit of U.S. supporters of Israel, and others.
Second, Camp David could be carried out quickly, if the West Bank
mayors, others, and Hussein would join the discussions. Absent some
action by Begin and the Israelis, what can we do to get Hussein and the
Palestinians to join? Should someone contact the Saudis, Arafat, or
Hussein? They are playing into the hands of the enemies of Camp
David. The whole world would rally to an Israeli withdrawal, and Pal-
estinian rights would have a good chance to succeed if the Palestinians
and Jordan were in. He understands why they are not. But where is the
key to get them in?
Mr. el-Baz said that the Jordanian and Palestinian positions are
different. Jordan and Hussein have their eyes on the West Bank,
and would like to move to negotiations with Israel on the lines of the
Allon plan.17 There could be some Israeli-Jordanian talks, perhaps non-
governmental, or with Peres or others.
The President said that this is required to be done by Camp David in
the second step, which could take place after a few months, and must
begin no later than three years. If the Saudis were convinced that
Jordan should be in, could the Saudis induce it to do so?
President Sadat said 100%. If only to guarantee their economic
assistance, Jordan would immediately come in.
The President asked whether Saudi Arabia could convince Arafat
and the West Bank Palestinians.
President Sadat said no, the Saudis are intimidated by them. But
they (the Saudis) could bring in Hussein.
The President asked how we could bring in the Palestinians.
President Sadat said that if Hussein joins, then for sure there would
be repercussions on the PLO position. They may say that Hussein has
joined the Zionist plot, but in their hearts they would try to do their
best. They know Hussein; they would not want him to take all the land
himself.
The President asked whether Hussein, on balance, was more afraid
of Syria and Iraq, or interested in pleasing the Saudis.
President Sadat said both. If Saudi Arabia backs him, he will come
in, whatever the threats are from Syria and Iraq—and we should see
what is happening in Syria. Saudi Arabia for sure can bring him in.
17 See footnote 10, Document 64.
