September 1953–December 1954
875
3. If the Shah cooperates, the Zahedi Government should be able to
stay in power for some time. However, the government is confronted
with many serious problems, springing primarily from the basic
changes taking place in Iranian society. Zahedi must cope with the
Majlis, composed of heterogeneous groups, motivated by self-interest,
upon whose support the enactment of essential economic and social
legislation will depend. The Communist and other opposition groups
will continue to pose a threat. The problem of Mossadegh must be
solved. Zahedi’s position is also threatened by the Shah’s inherent sus-
picions of any strong Prime Minister. Any non-Communist successor
government would encounter similar difficulties.
4. The United States now has an opportunity to further its national
objectives with respect to Iran by: (a) facilitating an early oil settlement
leading to substantial oil income from Iran at the earliest possible date;
(b) technical assistance and economic aid; (c) U.S. military aid.
Importance of an Oil Settlement
5. The Iranian economy is basically dependent upon agriculture.
Despite revenues from the oil industry, the great majority of the Iranian
people have lived in poverty. However, if it receives substantial rev-
enue from the renewed operation of its oil industry on a sound basis,
Iran should be in a position to establish a self-supporting, stable gov-
ernment, and carry out much-needed economic and social welfare pro-
grams. Without such revenues from the renewed operation of its oil in-
dustry, the Iranian Government will proceed from crisis to crisis,
thereby greatly increasing both Tudeh Party opportunities to cause dis-
order or to infiltrate the government, and pressures on the United
States for substantial aid. Even if Iran again receives oil revenues, there
will be the continuing problem of insuring their application to pro-
grams of permanent value, and minimizing corruption.
6. In recent months some progress has been made in clarifying the
positions of Iran and the U.K. toward a settlement. The resumption of
U.K.–Iran diplomatic relations removes one obstacle to a settlement.
However, the Iranian Government will continue to fear public reaction
to any apparent concessions, and the British may be reluctant to accept
necessary terms.
Economic Aid
7. In September 1953, the United States granted emergency assist-
ance of $45 million to permit the Zahedi Government to meet the oper-
ating deficit inherited from the Mossadegh regime and to initiate essen-
tial monetary reforms. This aid is believed sufficient to carry the regime
until May or June of 1954.
8. Until the oil revenues become substantial, emergency aid in
some form will have to be continued and may have to be increased. In
