698  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Enclosure
Staff Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, April 24, 1959
Summary Statement of Foreign Policy Requirements 
Bearing upon US Strategy
US strategy should serve our national policy objectives of main­
taining the cohesion of the Free World and influencing the policies of 
the Communist empire in directions compatible with US national secu­
rity interests. From the point of view of foreign policy this requires:
1. An evident, secure nuclear retaliatory capability and an acceptable doc­
trine for its use. This capability is the primary requirement. Its existence 
does not, however, solve all problems. We need to reassure our allies 
that this capability would be used only in defense of vital interests and 
that its use would be consistent with their continued survival.
2. An evident, adequate and flexible capability for military operations short 
of general war and an acceptable doctrine for its use against the range of possi­
ble Communist aggressions. This requirement is of increasing importance. 
As Soviet nuclear capability grows, so does Free World and Communist 
questioning that the US would use its strategic nuclear capability in any 
situation that did not clearly and imminently endanger vital US secu­
rity interests. Deterrence of Communist limited aggression, and Free 
World confidence that such aggression will be deterred, will depend 
more and more on the strengthening of US limited war capability. The 
present degree of US reliance on nuclear weapons for this purpose dis­
turbs large segments of the Free World and impedes the fulfillment of 
our national policy objective of maintaining the cohesion of the Free 
World. We need from the point of view of foreign policy a capability 
and a doctrine that are flexible enough to enable us to deter and to 
defeat limited Communist aggression in ways that are acceptable to 
Free World public opinion and that minimize the danger of expanding 
local war into general war.
The foregoing generalizations apply to the deterrence and defeat 
of three categories of Communist aggression as follows:
1. Substantial Soviet aggression against the NATO area would mean 
general war.
2. Overt Soviet non-nuclear aggression against non-­NATO areas. For 
deterrent purposes we must retain the threat of nuclear response. In the 
event of such aggression, however, it would be preferable if our initial 
response were non-­nuclear. Should the USSR persist in its aggression,
