Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
691
279.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance and
Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, November 8, 1977
SUBJECT
Managing the Arms Transfer Program in FY 1978
Because of the President’s commitment to curtail U.S. arms
transfers in FY 1978 by reducing new agreements from the total in FY
1977, and in order to make those transfers which are in the national in-
terest expeditiously and efficiently, the Secretary of State should coor-
dinate the development of options for consideration by the PRC before
January 31, 1978 on the management of the FY 1978 Arms Transfer Pro-
gram. In preparation, the Secretary of State in close coordination with
the Secretary of Defense should undertake the following steps on an ur-
gent basis:
1. To assist in identifying existing commitments, prepare a sum-
mary of outstanding arms sales commitments from previous years
including: Letters of Offer and Acceptance extended but not signed;
proposed sales which have completed Congressional review; and pro-
posed sales which are in advanced stages of processing within the Ex-
ecutive Branch.
2. To assist in forecasting FY 1978 support sales, prepare summary
data relating to follow-on support sales made annually since FY 1973,
including ammunition, logistics, and technical assistance.
3. To provide the information required to control future sales, de-
velop a new management information system for arms transfers in-
cluding at a minimum the following characteristics:
• As near as possible to real-time recording of the dollar values of
signed Letters of Offer; but in no case should the delay be longer than
five days.
• Priority tracking, manual if necessary, of large sales (in excess of
$100 million).
• The use of parametric statistical techniques to forecast aggregate
totals of smaller sales establishing explicit confidence intervals.
• The necessary precision to respond to monthly reporting require-
ments during the second half of each fiscal year with accuracies better
than plus or minus five percent.
1 Source: Department of State, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of
Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Withdrawn Items, Box 7, Arms Transfers.
Confidential.
