228 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 82. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State1 Kabul, December 2, 1979, 1154Z 8271. Subj: (S) Party Document Suggests Real Strains in Soviet- Amin Relationship May Have Flowed From September 14 Shootout. 1. (S—Entire text.) 2. Summary: The leadership of the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) has been circulating an “official” version of the events of September 14 for use in briefing party cadre. We have no doubt concerning the document’s authenticity, and its contents, therefore, should be regarded as current strongman Hafizullah Amin’s view of the “truth” surrounding September 14. The document’s clear condemnation of the Soviet role—in the person of now departed Ambassador Puzanov—in the affair tends to confirm widespread rumors here that there may be strains in the Soviet-Amin relationship resulting from the September 14 shootout. Moreover, the fact that Amin is virtually openly circulating the document among his party cadre suggests he wants to get a message to his Soviet mentors that he is wary of their past (and presumably future) intentions toward him. 3. On the domestic scene, various themes within the document echo theses which the current leadership has repeated often since September 14, most notably that it was the late President Taraki and his henchmen, and not Hafizullah Amin, who were primarily responsible for the repressive policies of this revolutionary government. Few Afghans appear to swallow this particular line, however, and Amin remains the generally perceived villain and despot. In fact, the picture of the Khalqi leadership which emerges from this party document resembles a group of thugs who could shame the Mafia, rather than an enlightened leadership attempting to establish “security, legality, and justice” in Afghanistan. End of summary. 4. The extraordinary and lengthy document (almost thirty pages in translation) essentially recounts the background leading up to the September 14, 1979, shootout between supporters of current President Hafizullah Amin and the late Noor Mohammad Taraki, as well as some details surrounding that event itself. Beyond this, however, the document’s direct charges that now departed Soviet Ambassador Alexander Puzanov (and his senior advisors) was instrumental in luring 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790556–1065. Secret; Priority; Noforn. Sent for information to Ankara, Beijing, London, Moscow, New Delhi, USNATO, and CINCPAC.
