3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
125
Conference—below the Foreign Minister—was specified in the Final
Act. All the European countries have agreed that representation should
be just below the Foreign Minister.
Secretary Vance said that he had established a group to deal with
the Belgrade Conference, and named Warren Christopher as Chair-
man. Schindler asked whether Jewish organizations should direct in-
formation about non-compliance to Christopher. The Secretary replied
that such material could be directed to Christopher or Hartman. Gold
commented that the NCSJ had been sending such information to Con-
gressman Fascell7 as Chairman of the CSCE Commission. The Secretary
and Hartman commented that the Department receives information
from the Commission, so sending it to Congressman Fascell was an ac-
ceptable way to forward it. The Secretary commented that the Depart-
ment is trying to work closer with Congressman Fascell’s Commission.
Gold commented that Fascell and Spencer Oliver8 feel they have a good
relationship with the Department under the new Administration.
Middle East
Schindler asked what had been said about the Middle East during
the Moscow trip. The Secretary said the Soviets had stressed the impor-
tance of their position as Co-Chairman of the Geneva Conference.
There has been no change in the Soviet position. The newspapers
misrepresented Gromyko’s brief comments about the PLO during a
toast. The Secretary specifically asked Gromyko whether there was any
change in their position, and Gromyko replied that there was not. Gold
commented that the April 8 newspaper photos of Brezhnev and Arafat
embracing showed there had been no change. The Secretary said there
had been a general review of the Middle East issues during the Moscow
visit. He said he believed the Soviets could not affect the substance of
any settlement but could be spoilers. For that reason it is essential not to
humiliate them or cause them to lose face. If they are allowed to con-
tinue to carry out their role as Co-Chairman they are less likely “to
throw a spanner in the works”.
Trade
Turning back to the subject of Soviet-American trade, Goodman
and Gold cited a recent Washington Post article about the need of the
East to convert to Western technology through trade. They asked the
Secretary if he thought there was anything they should do as a commu-
nity or Conference in the trade area. They observed that the Soviets’
7 Representative Dante Bruno Fascell (D-Florida).
8 Chief Counsel of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs from 1976.
