694
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
performance in Iran. I agree strongly on this point; it’s a very powerful
case for making the Soviets bleed in Afghanistan. (S)
Jasper contended that Soviet force readiness improvements in the
Transcaucasus are only marginally relevant in comparison to other
factors since (a) Soviets would need many other units in any case and
therefore (b) Soviets are free to manipulate indicators in Transcaucasus
in a disinformation program. The other, more important factors are (a)
the gross power imbalance in the region, (b) the dominance of internal
Iranian developments in any Soviet calculation, (c) Soviet willingness
to risk any level of direct military confrontation with the US, (d) US
readiness to oppose a Soviet move, and (e) reaction of our European
allies. Put simply, grabbing Iran militarily is worth it if the West acqui-
esces but is not worth it if the West is galvanized to isolate the Soviet
Union and thereafter extinguish its penetration into the third world.
We tended to agree on this. We also tended to agree that we are arguing
over variations on a deeply gloomy prognosis. (S)
258.
Memorandum From Marshall Brement and Stephen Larrabee
of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the
President‘s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs
(Aaron)1
Washington, April 17, 1980
SUBJECT
Future Soviet Military Intervention in Iran (S)
Attached at Tab A is a CIA analysis of Soviet policy toward the
Iran-Iraq conflict.2 It argues that the Soviets are likely to try to avoid
getting drawn into the conflict in a manner which could seriously
damage their relations with either side. To date, the Soviets have sought
to cast the blame on the US for the exacerbation of tensions between
the two countries. However, pressure is mounting on Moscow to take
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 31, Iran 4/1/80–4/18/80. Top Secret. Sent for information. Copies were sent
to Albright, Odom, Friendly, Deal, Henze, Griffith, Ermarth, Blackwill, Sick, Thornton,
and Welch. A stamped notation at the top of the page reads: “ZB has seen.”
2 Paper prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, April 10, “Soviet Response to
an Iranian-Iraqi Clash,” attached but not printed.
