158
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
It already adopts an extreme line over the oil question and any de-
viation of the National Front leaders from their present extremist
course would add to its propaganda strength. Much of its strength lies
in the Iranian popular misconception of the nature of the Tudeh. It is
widely viewed as an indigenous political movement advocating re-
forms close to the heart of the populace. In fact, many Iranians have not
forgotten certain reforms sponsored by the Party during the time of its
ascendancy.
The average Iranian has an historic suspicion of the USSR, but at
the same time he has an ostrich-like attitude in viewing current Soviet
intentions. He is being diverted by the current oil dispute and commu-
nist efforts to interpret it as Anglo-American imperialism. His imagina-
tion in this regard is continually sharpened by a steady barrage of
clever Soviet propaganda. The USSR is queen of the airwaves in this
area. At any time one can hear Soviet propaganda on the various short
and long wave-lengths in several languages.
At present the communists are spurring the nationalists’ drive to
oust the British from Iran, while trying to link this with their own anti-
American line. When the western powers are driven from Iran and
their influence destroyed, the communists may be expected to intro-
duce the second stage of their long-range objectives—the destruction of
internal rivals for power in Iran.
The United States recent position in the Security Council regarding
the oil dispute has been construed here as substantive support of the
United Kingdom, thus offsetting the previous impression in Iranian
minds that the United States favored the Iranian case, and may be ex-
pected to increase Tudeh potential directly and indirectly through the
resultant tendency of the National Front and its popular supporters to
turn toward the USSR.4 In time this may create an environment favor-
able to the Tudeh ambition to seize power.
There is little indication of an immediate intention to seize power
by force. However, if an exceptional opportunity presents itself in the
uncertain near future through the disintegration of forces for stability
in Iran, the Party will certainly make its bid. At present it appears that
the Party’s immediate aim is to strengthen its political position by se-
curing the election to the 17th Majlis of a small number of deputies.
These would seek the legalization of the Party, and in this they could
expect support from some right-wing politicians, especially those with
estates in the north, who by this means would try to curry favor with
the Russians. Then the Party would try to increase its influence in the
4 See footnote 4, Document 49.
