380  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
as he did that at every meeting I had to devote time to discussion of 
implementation of agreed announcement. I had to remind him again 
that it was only his government’s failure to act promptly to implement 
agreed announcement which made this necessary.
2. In four weeks since September 10 his government had failed to 
release single one of 19 Americans whose cases, he assured me, were to 
be “expeditiously’’ reviewed. United Kingdom Charge had so far been 
entirely unable perform any of functions envisaged for him in agreed 
announcement. Neither had Wang been willing to assure me here 
whether Charge would in fact be enabled by Wang’s government per­
form these functions.
3. I said my government was profoundly dissatisfied with his gov­
ernment’s failure to implement agreed announcement. We could not but 
conclude that announcement had thus far been meaningless with respect 
to these 19 Americans. It was very disappointing that four weeks had 
passed without any improvement whatsoever in this unsatisfactory sit­
uation. I wanted assure him that my government would continue to be 
concerned so long as Americans in his country were not allowed expedi­
tiously to exercise their right to return, as provided in agreed announce­
ment, and would scrutinize most closely his government’s performance 
this regard.
4. I had brought up this matter of implementation of agreed 
announcement before any other subject this morning again to indi­
cate how important it was for progress of our talks here. I wanted him 
to know that these questions on implementation must continue to be 
uppermost in my mind and that I could not devote my full attention 
to other matters before us so long as Americans were denied their 
right to return.
5. I pointed out that at our last meeting Wang had made some 
remarks with respect to my proposal that under our second agenda 
item we first discuss question of renunciation of force for achievement 
of national objectives. Said from his remarks I believed he might not 
have had clear idea of what I had in mind this regard. In accordance 
with what I had told him at last meeting, I was prepared today to 
amplify and more fully explain this proposal.
6. I then read full text statement renunciation of force (Deptels 789 
and 805) and handed Wang copy.
7. Wang then read from long prepared statement. He said I had 
alleged his government had not acted promptly on implementation 
agreement and thus delayed our talks. He could not accept this allega­
tion. Already five meetings had been held since agreement reached on 
return of civilians of both sides. At first meeting following agreement his 
side introduced two subjects for discussion in accordance with agreed 
agenda and our side had complained that it was premature discuss these
