524
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
tised by many of our Hungarian contacts as the real “comer” on the
Central Committee Staff.
2. I went over much of the same ground that I covered with Nagy
yesterday and found Horn, if anything, more au courant than Nagy
about Washington developments, particularly the Haig testimony
before the Foreign Relations Committee. Horn said the HSWP had
been very worried about a Reagan victory up until the debate which
seemed to them to show Reagan’s position as more responsible than
Carter’s and he added that their positive feelings about the Reagan
administration have increased as they have read various statements of
the President-elect and his Cabinet-designates since the election.
3. Horn divided his comments into the following five areas:
—East/West relations—Horn emphasized what he called the
subjective factors here, which he thought gave some opportunity for
an improvement in US/Soviet relations, although he conceded that
Afghanistan and probably Poland would prevent those relations from
getting very much better in the near term. He said the Soviets had
become so disenchanted with Carter and Brzezinski that their very
removal from the scene is positive in that the Soviets will no longer
be able to dwell on them as personalities and will have to face new
personalities and hopefully “pay more attention to the issues.” He
thought the evolution of US/Soviet relations would take up most of
1981 given the US “structural impediments” (our political system) and
what he called Soviet preoccupation with “border issues”.
—(A) SALT—Horn said the Soviets will be looking early on for
some signals about what the U.S. intends to do on SALT even though
they and all other Warsaw Pact members acknowledge and understand
that SALT II will not be ratified in its present form. He pointed to the
need for some re-statement by the new administration of President
Carter’s assurances of a year ago that, pending ratification of SALT II,
the configuration of U.S. strategic forces would not violate the terms
of the draft treaty.
—(B) TNF—Horn characterized US/Soviet technical talks in
Geneva as a complete failure. He said he and others had accepted
what he called the “Genscher explanation” of the TNF modernization
decision made by NATO in December 1979, namely that the moderniza-
tion was needed to fill a gap in the FBS, both land-based air in Europe
and elements of the Sixth Fleet, which might be needed for deployment
in the Third World contingencies. However, he said it must be recalled
that TNF are “strategic” for the Warsaw Pact and that their moderniza-
tion will almost certainly drive the Soviets toward cruise missiles and
perhaps an ABM system to protect the SS–20 and oncoming SS–36. He
said that this spiraling process would enhance the power of the military
in the Soviet Union and would have a deleterious effect on openings
of pluralism and “democratic socialism” in the East European countries.
