1372  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
factor in existing tension Far East entirely created by US in military 
occupation Taiwan. Had there not been American military occupation 
in Taiwan, reunion between Taiwan and Chinese mainland would have 
been realized long ago. Chinese people would never tolerate occupa­
tion of Taiwan by US. Chinese people certainly will liberate Taiwan. 
No force on earth could ever deter this determination on part Chinese 
people. No amount rationalization and argument offered by me could 
ever cover acts of aggression by US government demonstrated in their 
latest military threats, posed in the Taiwan area in form of stationing 
guided missiles unit on Taiwan.
14. Wang continued, had been common practice by aggressor 
governments in history always speak of aggressive arrangements as 
if these aggressive arrangements entirely for defensive purposes. The 
stark fact at present is that it is US government occupying Chinese 
territory and not Chinese government occupying any territory of US. 
Fact is at present US posing threats against China and not China pos­
ing threats against US. If one desires talk of renunciation of force he 
should make good his words by actual deeds. In face of latest tension 
created by US in Taiwan area, how could anyone believe any more in 
any peaceful promises by US. Chinese people would oppose to end 
such open aggression, provocation. If US had any peaceful intentions, 
it should demonstrate sincerity by concrete acts. This what he always 
looked forward to.
15. I replied, nothing he had said changed fact that it his govern­
ment which still posed threat use force in Taiwan area. There was vast 
difference between saying willing settle disputes peacefully if other 
side surrenders to your point of view and saying unconditionally you 
willing settle disputes peacefully.
16. Wang replied, facts show who was advocating peaceful set­
tlement dispute Taiwan area and who was willing use force that area. 
These facts could not be distorted. Today when people everywhere 
oppose policy of war threats, latest steps taken by US government in 
Taiwan area can never be explained as resulting from peaceful intent. 
Latest military threat posed by US government in Taiwan could never 
succeed in frightening people. On the contrary, they can only stir up 
indignation and hatred.
17. I replied, our problem not to reach agreement on situation in 
Taiwan area. Problem is to agree we will not use force to settle it. That 
and carrying out of first agreement between us are still the essential 
steps in bringing about that improvement in relations which we, on 
our side, seek.
18. Wang replied he had made clear his point of view that this 
series talks here in Geneva should have as purposes relaxation interna­
tional tensions and improvement relations between our two countries.
