Arms Control and Disarmament 1591 sense the fact that we in the past two weeks have not been able to talk with them as frankly as we previously have. We have the impression that as a natural consequence the British delegation here is holding out some of their thinking and not telling us everything that is going on. In spite of some differences of approach we have, during these nego­ tiations, enjoyed the advantage of full and frank cooperation with our British opposite numbers. The fact that we cannot be completely frank with them at this juncture is hurting us now. I hope that in the next day or so we can be authorized to tell them something which will enable them to understand why we must wait for further decisions before we get into some of the questions which they are eager to discuss. I should think it would be at least possible for me to say that we cannot really do anything at all here until after Macmillan’s Washington visit. I would hope it would also be possible for me to tell them that there is serious consideration going on in Washington as to whether it is worthwhile to continue the conference at this stage. Villard 436. Telegram Supnu 325 From Geneva1 Geneva, March 9, 1959, 7 p.m. Supnu 325. Eyes only for Herter from Wadsworth. Reference: Supnu 323. The Sovs today gave what was evidently intended to be an indi­ cation of interest in either reducing the number of our scheduled meet­ ings or of having an early recess. After the regular meeting members of SovDel buttonholed differ­ ence members of USDel informally. They all asked whether we thought regular daily meetings were useful since there was obviously so little to talk about now. Tsarapkin asked US staff member what we thought about cutting down meetings to one or two a week and to another mem­ ber of USDel question was asked what about two meetings a month. Usachev asked Stelle and me what our thinking was about time off for Easter, expressed opinion “US would need perhaps a month to find out where it was going”. 1 Source: Suggests a recess in nuclear testing suspension talks. Secret. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/3–959.
