September 18–December 16, 1978 533 President, were violently attacked by, among others, the Mayor of Ramallah whose insulting words were uproariously applauded. Out of respect, I will not put his words into writing. Suffice it to say, it is not a matter, as you put it to me, of Israel not being held responsible if developments beyond our control prevent certain desired results being realized. I am speaking of simple reason. All of us must learn from experience. Unwarranted charges may be made. It is our perfect right, a priori, to be in a position whereby we will not be required “to justify” ourselves. Very soon, let me say one month, as agreed, after the exchange of the instruments of ratification of a peace treaty, it is Israel’s desire to enter into negotiations with you (even without Jordan’s participation) on all the issues relating to the election of the administrative council. We want the elections to be held as early as possible and we shall, of course, do all that we can to facilitate the necessary preparations. However, any attempt to fix a date before such preparations are made would not only be unreasonable but could also be very detrimental. Dear President Sadat, I entirely agree that both of us have taken upon ourselves an historic responsibility. In the course of our meetings and negotiations there have been good hours as well as some difficult ones. Were not the days in Jerusalem days of friendship and understanding? Did you not tell me that we should put our “cards” openly on the table, to speak with each other in complete candor? Did we not understand after our respective speeches6 from the rostrum of the Knesset that we have differences of opinion? Did I not tell you of my unshakeable faith in our people’s right to return to the land of our forefathers and to live in it with our Arab neighbors together in peace and in understanding? Did I not sincerely suggest to you to put behind us, all the memories of the past—and each one of us can speak about his memories—and then together we declared: no more war, no more bloodshed—we shall negotiate? In Ismailiya we brought you a peace plan.7 We reached several serious understandings just as we agreed, as is the nature of things, to differ on several issues. But we found common language and, again, we pledged to each other to continue the negotiations. Then, suddenly, and I will admit I was taken totally by surprise, there came a turning point towards a non-desirable direction. I will not go into details because—and this is the all important thing—there came 6 See footnote 2, Document 146. 7 For a report of Begin’s December 1977 discussions with President Sadat in Ismailiya, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1981, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977– August 1978, Document 180.
