314  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Table S–1
EXPECTED RESULTS FROM MASSIVE US/USSR  
NUCLEAR EXCHANGE, 1978
Population Survival
US (In-Place)
USSR (Evacuated)
Initial Survivors (%)
35–65%
80–90%
Immediate Fatalities (106)
72–137
23–50
Leadership Survival
Personnel Uninjured
Less than 40%5
High
Facilities Undamaged
Less than 20%6
High
Economic Survival
Low
Low
II. KEY QUESTIONS
A. What is the Role of Civil Defense in Strategic Policy?
Significant differences exist as to the role of civil defense in relation 
to strategic policy. Some analysts argue that civil defense capabilities 
influence an opponent’s perception of the strategic balance and may, in 
the extreme, reflect on the credibility of a deterrent. They further con-
tend that the lack of population protection could reduce stability and 
inhibit decision-­making.
This argument rests on the following assumptions:
1) Defensive as well as offensive capabilities contribute to the stra-
tegic balance. Civil defense will therefore be calculated into the balance 
of forces.
2) The effectiveness of population protection will figure into the 
cost/risk thinking of an opponent.
3) There is a positive correlation between surviving population 
and a nation’s ability to recover.
4) Deterrence rests, in part, on a willingness to act. An inability to 
protect a population will inhibit decisions to act, by inducing doubts 
and increasing the perception of risks.
5) The Soviet ability to provide civil defense might put them in 
a position to coerce the United States. An asymmetry in civil defense 
capability will undercut US confidence in a crisis and will encourage 
Soviet risk-­taking and intransigence.
In contrast, others contend that civil defense plays no role in the 
perception of a nuclear balance. They argue that the population protec-
tion that civil defense can provide is insignificant in light of the mag-
nitude of destruction following a nuclear exchange. They argue that 
civil defense gets no consideration in crisis decision-­making and has no 
5 Assuming Emergency Operating Centers are not targeted. [Footnote is in the 
original.]
6 Assuming Emergency Operating Centers are not targeted. [Footnote is in the 
original.]
