Chile  227
CH–4.	
Telegram from the Chargé in Chile (Belton) to the 
Department of State1

Santiago, April 17, 1958, 8 p.m.
692. Further analysis Ibanez decision cancel trip underscores con-
viction immediate cause was irritation resulting from his misunder-
standing U.S. position copper import tax and lack inclination or ability 
take time (Frondizi here April 14 to 16) to understand it. Ibanez appar-
ently expected Puga obtain clarifying statement from Secretary State 
or President expressing determination U.S. Government avoid copper 
tax damaging to Chile. Ibanez also apparently assured that in U.S., as 
in Chile, Interior is top-­ranking member Cabinet and principal spokes-
man government policies.
Also likely Ibanez foresaw difficulties if copper tax should go into 
effect shortly after his return and seized on current furor re copper as 
convenient basis avoid them.
Whatever his true motives (which are subject of much speculation 
among few who understand that U.S. Government position was not 
unfavorable to Chile and know these facts were available to Ibanez) 
his action has gained support among even best friends of U.S. here, 
who feel this dramatic gesture may bring to our attention the neglect 
which Chileans feel the U.S. has shown for Latin America as compared 
with rest of world. The left is particularly enthusiastic and responsible 
rightist politicians are fearful it may be prelude to a sharp turn to left by 
Ibanez which would aid Allende presidential campaign.
Ibanez momentarily riding unaccustomed wave popular support 
as Chileans almost universally applaud his decisive action in upholding 
national dignity in face allegedly unfriendly act by U.S. Only criticism 
stems from transparently false reasons cited in message to Eisenhower.2
In considering this whole incident, particularly the illogical aspects 
of it, we must bear in mind two important factors - Ibanez advisers and 
his character.
[text not declassified]
Belton
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 725.11/4–1758. Confidential; Priority.
2 Telegram 575, April 17, 1958, instructed the Ambassador in Chile to deliver 
Eisenhower’s response, which expressed regrets and further stated, “Your visit would 
undoubtedly have strengthened even further the close ties that characterize relations 
between Chile and the United States. I especially regret your not coming because our 
Governments will be deprived of a signal opportunity to review problems of mutual inter-
est to us. Nevertheless, I can well understand and appreciate the matters of overriding 
national importance which must perforce occupy the attention of the President of a great 
democratic nation like Chile and which have necessitated your decision.” (725.11/4–1758)
