Venezuela  1283
The implementation of nationalistic policies outlined above would 
not be limited to the possible unsettling effect on American investment 
and interests in Venezuela and Latin America. The position of our oil 
companies throughout the world would be weakened, as would the 
assured access of consuming nations to adequate supplies of oil at rea-
sonable prices. The importance to Western Europe of an assured access 
to oil was demonstrated in the recent Suez crisis.
Moreover, these nationalistic policies will not serve Venezuela’s 
own economic self-­interest. Venezuela is already in a weak competitive 
posture, attributable in part to its action, taken without consultation, to 
upset the “50-50” division of profits through large income tax increases. 
Given the present situation of world oversupply of all and the threat 
that cheaper Near and Far Eastern oil will displace Venezuelan exports 
in its traditional markets, our task is to get Venezuela to understand that 
it can best maintain a satisfactory level of oil income by improving its 
competitive posture rather than by seeking an international commodity 
agreement for government control of production, prices and marketing.
Against this background, the Department of State considered the 
possibility of offering Venezuela a country import quota in exchange for 
abandonment by Venezuela of it nationalistic oil policies. This course 
of action is believed to be impracticable because it would discriminate 
against Far and Near Eastern producing countries; because Venezuela 
is in any case unwilling to change its policy at this time; and because 
such action would, by appearing to reward nationalism, encourage 
nationalistic oil policies in Venezuela and in the Near and Far East. 
Those companies which have the largest investments in Venezuela con-
cur in this estimate.
The Department of State has also considered the possibility of 
completely rejecting Venezuela’s desire for special treatment and has 
concluded that this would create a situation of maximum risk of nation-
alistic reaction.
In an effort to find a middle ground – ­one which, on the one hand, 
could be regarded as a gesture of equal importance to the one which 
we have made toward Canada, and, on the other, which would not 
facilitate the carrying out of nationalistic oil program—­the Department 
of State has recommended that the importation of residual fuel oil to 
be used for burning be freely licensed to historic importers who have 
used storage capacity. This course of action would be tantamount to an 
effective decontrol of residual imports but it would not remove residual 
from the import control program. It would favor Venezuela because 
more than 40 percent of its oil exports to the United States are in the 
form of residual.
This action would not satisfy Venezuela’s aspirations. The seri-
ous risk that Venezuela will implement nationalistic oil policies will
