Options Identified Efforts are continuing to get as many nations as possible to speak on behalf of release of the hostages. The Soviets are being unhelpful by requesting that no meeting be held tonight. Mr. Newsom will raise with Secretary Vance the advisability of raising this directly with Dobrynin 4. Iranian Assets. Mr. Solomon said that there is a noticeable erosion of our position on the assets frozen in U.S. banks abroad. An adverse court ruling in London may come within a matter of days. Mr. Solomon stressed the urgency of deciding on a course of action. The options are: (1) proceed to ask our allies to adopt financial sanctions of their own, which would then assure their intervention on our behalf in their own national courts; (2) ask our allies to intervene with their courts for a delay in judgment on the grounds that this is a sovereign matter between governments; or (3) we can begin taking steps to withdraw on the foreign freeze as gracefully as possible. (TS) Mr. Solomon stressed that option (1), getting our allies to impose sanctions, will be very tough and will require extreme pressure, including threats to the allies that a failure to respond will adversely affect our overall defense relationship. He did not believe that a strongly worded letter from the President would suffice nor would the prospect that we might take some military action against Iran which would ultimately interrupt oil supplies. The British, in particular, were not concerned about Iranian oil. (TS) The second option, getting allied governments to persuade the courts to stay a judgment, would protect our present freeze position but not place more pressure on Iran. The U.K. is the key since that is where Iran is presently challenging us in court. Mr. Solomon reported that the British told us informally that they wanted to stay neutral and avoid getting involved in the case. (TS) The rationale for the third course of action would be that we have now determined that sufficient assets exist within the United States to cover prospective claims; therefore, there is no need to hold assets abroad. It would be seen as a retreat but perhaps less so than if the U.K. court ordered the freeze lifted. (TS) Mr. Solomon stressed that option (1) would take very significant pressure at the highest level and should not be undertaken unless we were determined to follow through. Moreover, it was becoming increasingly difficult as each day passed. Mr. Komer noted that if we interfered with our NATO defense relationship, we would be threatening self-defeating action which might not be credible. [Note: The fact that the U.K. wants a decision in the near future that we will help modernize the U.K. deterrent does provide us with very significant leverage over this key country. Moreover, U.K. refusal to help could
