784
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
245.
Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for
International Health Issues (Bourne) to President Carter1
Washington, February 17, 1978
SUBJECT
Report of the World Hunger Working Group
Attached is a summary of the report prepared by the World
Hunger Working Group involving 26 agencies which you asked me to
chair.
The report analyses the major causes of hunger and malnutrition
and identifies the key elements necessary to alleviate the problem.
Present United States programs are reviewed and their shortcomings
identified.
The report recommends the following:
—A clear concise statement of our overall policy, rather than the
inferred policy from our present fragmented programs.2
—Presidential commitment that is unequivocal, and which is com-
municated clearly to the leaders of food deficient countries so they in
turn will give it a similar priority.3
—Increasing production through the development of national
food and nutrition plans, enhanced technical assistance, a general focus
on the interrelated problem of abject poverty, and reduced consump-
tion through stabilization of population growth.4
—Improved research, generally as recommended in the study by
the National Academy of Sciences, with a shift in emphasis towards the
problems of the developing world.5
1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Staff Secretary, Handwriting File, Presidential
File, Box 73, 2/21/78. No classification marking. A stamped notation on the memo-
randum indicates that the President saw it. A copy of the World Hunger Working
Group’s 81-page report, entitled World Hunger in Perspective, is in the Carter Library, Staff
Office Files, Special Assistant for Health Issues—Peter Bourne, White House Office Files
on World Hunger Group, Box 51, Government Agency Hunger Reports, 1/78–9/23/78.
2 The President placed check marks at the end of each recommendation with the ex-
ception of the third point. The President underlined the words “clear,” “concise,” and
“statement.”
3 The President underlined the words “commitment” and “unequivocal.”
4 The President wrote “equitable distribution” in the right-hand margin next to this
recommendation.
5 The President underlined the word “research.”
