1064 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II velopmental and supporting assistance, professional and scientific exchange, and U.S. commerce and finance. At present, it is cumbersome to develop and introduce such initiatives government-wide. Coordination is ad hoc when it takes place. More systematic procedures should help to ensure an integrated, government-wide strategy to implement these initiatives in ways which best exploit government capabilities in concert with U.S. international health and foreign policies. Development and promotion of such international health initiatives require the capacity to identify needs or opportunities for assistance or collaboration in other countries, to promote these objectives in the U.S. and host country governments, and to design and select appropriate projects and allocate responsibility for implementation among the many U.S. agencies and private sector resources devoted to international health activity. To some extent, AID personnel perform these functions in developing AID health programs in countries that meet their criteria for assistance. Attaches of the State Department perform similar functions in broader areas related to science, technology, agriculture and commerce; but little or no direct attention is paid to health and basic human needs. Other agencies are similarly involved, e.g., HEW’s research and scientific exchange activity and VA’s technical assistance for hospital construction. But, AID’s coverage of health problems is limited to AID countries and operationally directed to its own programming needs; State’s Attaches are only minimally oriented to health; and the activities of other agencies often miss opportunities for more effective involvement, fuller U.S. participation, or more coordinated activity. Therefore, development and promotion of international health initiatives as described above requires some improvement. In the future, such initiatives should be routinely developed and promoted through whatever means exist in the government for international health coordination. In addition, Working Group II recommends working within the State Department’s Attache system to the following extent by: (1) Creating the post of Deputy Science Attache for health in some countries; (2) Recruiting health scientists to serve as Science Attaches; and (3) Raising awareness of Science Attaches by: (a) health orientation at annual or regional meetings of the Science Attaches; and (b) visits to Science Attaches at their in-country posts. Furthermore, in the case of international health initiatives with multilateral organizations—especially with WHO, the current staff at HEW, AID and IO is fully deployed and overextended. Most staff work
