1166 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 709. Telegram 232 from Geneva1 Geneva, September 7, 1956, 6 p.m. 232. From Johnson. 1. I opened 57th with prepared statement: A. Hope you have reconsidered remarks made at last few meet­ ings, and particularly at last meeting, on inescapable priority of ques­ tion of agreement by your govt to genuine renunciation force. B. As pointed out fruitful discussion trade cannot be expected under conditions in which your govt persistently refuses agreement and attempts evade clearly renouncing use force in disputes involving two countries, and in fact even continues openly threaten use force. Just common prudence dictates my country not contribute to increasing economic industrial potential of country which maintains such posture toward my country. C. Tragic event of night of Aug 22–23 in which lives of number my countrymen unjustifiably taken again demonstrates need for your govt genuinely renounce use force. So long as your govt maintains present attitude this subject danger of attacks such as this will always be present. Most solemnly must state conviction that continuation of this attitude of hostility and readiness destroy lives property of others makes impossible that attainment of stable secure situation in Far East which my govt continues seek. Cite this merely by way example and not for purpose of here discussing unhappy incident. However in order your authorities may have full accurate text, I am giving you copy joint statement Departments State and Defense of August 31 with regard this incident. (Pointed copy on table.) D. Also related to this is question of good faith in carrying out agreements. All too clear and continued failure your authorities permit return detained Americans accordance our agreement of year ago can­ not but give rise to increasingly serious doubts this regard. E. This then is situation which two of us confronted. Question is what we do resolve it. It clear it cannot be resolved by discussion sub­ sidiary subjects, but only by progress on fundamentals, that is, uncon­ ditional renunciation force as I have proposed and by carrying out in full our agreement Sept 10 last year. F. Very much look forward to hearing from you this morning any­ thing that will assist us in making progress on these fundamentals. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–756PA. Confidential; Limit Distribution.
