188
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Once, in the early days of his premiership, when Dr. Mosadeq
worked in his official office, an important visitor asked to see him with
some request. The Prime Minister, who up to that point had been ener-
getically handling correspondence at his desk, said he would receive
the man in a minute. He then hastily undid his tie and collar, adjusted
some pillows on a sofa and lay down. When the visitor appeared, the
Prime Minister, in a gasping voice, asked him to make his request. The
visitor, horrified to see the Prime Minister so weak, left without making
his request, flattered that Dr. Mosadeq had received him.
His illness also serves to emphasize to the Iranian public that Dr.
Mosadeq is carrying on his duties despite great personal pain. This act
encourages, and to some extent symbolizes to Iranian minds, national
resistance to the British. On April 30, 1951, in his first speech as Prime
Minister, Dr. Mosadeq declared, “I never thought that my health
would ever permit me to accept so important a position, but the oil
question obligates me to take up this heavy burden”.5
It is possible that more than age and acting contribute to these
physical infirmities. One of Dr. Mosadeq’s daughters is in a mental in-
stitution. A Persian physician once told Ambassador Grady that he
thought Mosadeq suffered from a form of hereditary insanity. Too
much emphasis, of course, cannot be placed upon this diagnosis; but
there is little doubt that Iran’s Prime Minister is a sick man and his fre-
quent petty passions reflect to great extent his physical infirmities.
Dramatic Personality To his career, Mohammad Mosadeq brings the
most necessary attribute of a demagogue—a dramatic personality. The
fainting and the tears which seem so funny to Americans deeply move
his Persian listeners. He has a superb sense of timing and of symbolism.
A good demonstration of this quality occurred when he left Tehran
in 1951 to present Iran’s case in the oil dispute before the United Na-
tions. At the airport, after the dignitaries and a small crowd had ar-
rived, a car drew up some distance from the waiting plane and the limp
figure of the Prime Minister was helped by attendants past the crowd.
The shrill chanting of the mullahs, the wailing of the crowd, the pathos
of the fainting man, who claimed that he would champion his people
before the world, were all background to the well-timed moment when
the very symbol of Iranian hopes and fears was supported, half-
fainting, in the doorway of the aircraft to take a last look upon his
people. It was very foolish and unstatesmanlike but very moving.
Oratory Mosadeq is a master of the rhetoric which appeals to Per-
sian listeners. His voice, in every speech, ranges from a slow reasonable
5 Radio address to the nation, April 30 (Embassy despatch 881, May 1, 1951). [Foot-
note is in the original. Despatch 881 is in the National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy
Files, 1950–1952, classified general records, Box 29.]
