148  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
TRENDS IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
26. Bolivia’s foreign policy has traditionally been conditioned by its 
land-­locked position. Under the MNR, policies have been increasingly 
concerned with the economic needs of the country. Bolivia maintains 
generally friendly relations with other Latin American states. There is 
occasional friction with Brazil and Argentina, in part because these coun-
tries wish to discourage foreign development of oil deposits in areas of 
Bolivia near their borders.
27. The trend in recent years toward closer relations with the U.S. 
has accelerated under Siles. The favorable policy toward the U.S. is pri-
marily a result of the regime’s desire for continuing economic support; 
recognition of the need for this support has tended to inhibit even the 
labor-­left from criticizing the U.S. In the UN and the OAS Bolivia contin-
ues to support the U.S. and the West on most important political issues. 
However, like the rest of Latin America, it often takes positions indepen-
dent of the U.S. on economic and colonial questions. A major reduction in 
U.S. aid would almost certainly damage U.S.-Bolivian relations.
28. Except for diplomatic, commercial and cultural ties with 
Czechoslovakia, which maintains a legation in La Paz, Bolivia has little 
contact with the Soviet Bloc. So far it has not shown interest in strength-
ening ties with the Bloc, despite a few overtures from that direction, 
and has also indicated that it plans to curtail Czech Legation activi-
ties. Should the Bolivian government come to believe that the country’s 
economic outlook was worsening and should it be unable to count on 
effective U.S. assistance, strong pressure would be generated to expand 
its relations with the Bloc countries.
THE OUTLOOK
29. Bolivia’s future stability is greatly dependent on the success of 
the moderate MNR leadership in dealing with the country’s difficult 
economic problems. The Siles regime will probably retain a margin of 
support for the stabilization program at least for the next year, if it con-
tinues to obtain external assistance. Because of labor dissatisfaction, it is 
almost certain to encounter serious difficulties in maintaining this mar-
gin. However, we believe that the chances are somewhat better than even 
that Siles will remain in power until the expiration of his term in 1960,9 
­barring his death or resignation. In either event, Senate president Federico 
Alvarez Plata, an MNR moderate, probably would succeed as provided 
by law, but would be unable to provide as effective leadership as Siles, 
with consequent loss of strength by the moderate regime.
30. Siles’ ability to proceed with the stabilization program will 
depend on his success in retaining influential labor support. Some of 
this support will inevitably evaporate by the mere passage of time, and 
9 Under the Constitution, Siles is not eligible for re-­election in 1960. [Footnote is in 
the source text.]
