840 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 524. Telegram 1611 from Geneva1 Geneva, March 8, 1956, 5 p.m. 1611. From Johnson. 1. Two-­hour 25 minute meeting this morning with no (repeat no) change. 2. Wang was obviously marking time and refused to respond to or be drawn into discussion on renunciation. 3. In context making points Deptel 1718 repeated Karachi Tosec 13, I also characterized his position at last meeting and CHICOM March 4 statement as constituting retrogression from apparent previous position and stated my understanding their present position was they refused to renounce force even temporarily with respect Taiwan area unless US first agrees to Foreign Minister meeting and that this logically leads question what new conditions and prerequisites would be presented in connection with Foreign Minister meeting, that is, would they con­ sider renunciation binding only up to and during such meeting and if meeting did not result complete concession their views would they then consider themselves free use force? Such position is complete per­ version renunciation force principle and glaring reversion to war-­like ultimata and holding negotiations under threat by one party of initiat­ ing hostilities in absence peaceful surrender by other party. Contrasted with US position particularly as set forth in January 21 and March 6 statements stressing last paragraph both statements. 3. Wang completely failed respond these points stating respective positions fully developed last 20 meetings and their views set forth their March 4 statement to which he had nothing to add. Hoped next meeting I would make choice between their two drafts. I hoped he would correct me if my foregoing statement their position in error. 4. I made very strong statement on implementation, characteriz­ ing situation in this field also as retrogression with CHICOM receding to same positions they held before agreed announcement both with respect Americans in China and Chinese in US. During course of give and take I said, “insofar as desires your government with respect to our talks here are concerned, policy continuing to hold 13 as political hostages can only be counterproductive”. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/3–856. Confidential; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated for information Priority to Karachi for the Secretary and Robertson as telegram 7. An additional transmittal note reads: “Also request confirma­ tion receipt and delivery Geneva’s 1611 to Secretary. If not (repeat not) delivered retrans­ mit immediately to New Delhi.”
