136
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
37.
Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to
President Carter1
Washington, July 1, 1977
SUBJECT
The U.S. Trade Balance
Our analysis of the U.S. trade balance indicates the following:
A. The Facts
The U.S. trade balance will be in deficit by at least $25 billion in
1977, an increase of some $16 billion from last year. The deficit in 1978
may be as high or higher. Since we will be paying some $45 billion for
fuel imports this year, we will have a surplus of $20 billion on all other
trade. The reasons for this large deficit are several. Major factors
include:
1. A substantial increase in our oil import bill. About 40% of the in-
crease in the deficit between 1976 and 1977 is accounted for by our
trade with the OPEC nations.
2. Differential rates of growth in the U.S. compared with many of
our traditional markets. As we grow faster, we import more. Since our
markets abroad are showing only sluggish growth, our exports also
will increase less rapidly.
3. Higher food prices and slower growth in the developing coun-
tries, particularly those in Latin America, account for 40% of the deteri-
oration in the U.S. trade account between 1976 and 1977. Mexico and
Brazil, both of whom have embarked on stabilization programs, ac-
count for 20% of the swing.
There is no evidence that our basic export competitive position has
declined. The swings are on the import side. In addition, the U.S. has a
large and growing surplus on international services, primarily due to
large receipts of income from our foreign investments. This surplus
offsets part of the trade deficit—thus the current account balance,
which includes both trade and services, is expected to show a deficit of
about $12 billion this year.
B. Am I concerned about this situation? There is reason to be con-
cerned—but more for political and psychological reasons than for eco-
nomical ones.
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 88, Trade Deficit [1]. No classification marking. Watson for-
warded the memorandum to Carter, with copies to Lance, Schultze, and Cooper, under
cover of a July 6 memorandum. (Ibid.)
