Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko First Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin Mr. V.G. Makarov Mr. V.G. Komplektov Mr. A.A. Bessmertnykh Mr. N.N. Detinov Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter The President first wanted to tell the Minister that he was glad to have him come back to Washington for this meeting. He was happy to note that relations between our two countries appeared to be rapidly improving. He believed that a matter of first priority for our two states was successful completion of the work on the SALT Agreement.2 As far as we were concerned, this could be accomplished this morning. The President also wanted Gromyko to know that a comprehensive detente remained a major aim and keystone of our policy. We wanted our relations with the Soviet Union to be based on mutual respect and mutual advantage. There had been mention of competition as well as cooperation between us. The President wanted to put major emphasis on cooperation.3 The President noted that there were a number of differences between us which had resulted from competition. He proposed to mention them briefly. [Omitted here is discussion of the Middle East, the ongoing MBFR negotiations in Vienna, U.S.-PRC negotiations, trade and science topics, the comprehensive test ban, and Africa.] 2 In his weekly report, September 29, Brzezinski suggested that it would be helpful for Carter to stress to Gromyko several points made previously: “that we desire to improve the relationship, that it is our determination to seek SALT, but that the overall status of the US-Soviet relationship is not immune to events in key parts of the world. In this connection, we are concerned about Cuban/Soviet behavior in Africa and Soviet attacks on the Camp David Accords.” The President underlined “improve the relationship,” “seek SALT,” “not immune,” “Africa,” and “Camp David Accords.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject
