Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
471
U.S.S.R.
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
First Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. V.G. Makarov
Mr. V.G. Komplektov
Mr. A.A. Bessmertnykh
Mr. N.N. Detinov
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
The President first wanted to tell the Minister that he was glad to
have him come back to Washington for this meeting. He was happy to
note that relations between our two countries appeared to be rapidly
improving. He believed that a matter of first priority for our two states
was successful completion of the work on the SALT Agreement.2 As far
as we were concerned, this could be accomplished this morning. The
President also wanted Gromyko to know that a comprehensive detente
remained a major aim and keystone of our policy. We wanted our rela-
tions with the Soviet Union to be based on mutual respect and mutual
advantage. There had been mention of competition as well as coop-
eration between us. The President wanted to put major emphasis on
cooperation.3
The President noted that there were a number of differences be-
tween us which had resulted from competition. He proposed to men-
tion them briefly.
[Omitted here is discussion of the Middle East, the ongoing MBFR
negotiations in Vienna, U.S.-PRC negotiations, trade and science topics,
the comprehensive test ban, and Africa.]
2 In his weekly report, September 29, Brzezinski suggested that it would be helpful
for Carter to stress to Gromyko several points made previously: “that we desire to im-
prove the relationship, that it is our determination to seek SALT, but that the overall
status of the US-Soviet relationship is not immune to events in key parts of the world. In
this connection, we are concerned about Cuban/Soviet behavior in Africa and Soviet at-
tacks on the Camp David Accords.” The President underlined “improve the relation-
ship,” “seek SALT,” “not immune,” “Africa,” and “Camp David Accords.” (Carter Li-
brary, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject
Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National Security Report: 7–9/78)
3 In the September 29 weekly report (see footnote 2 above), Brzezinski made the fol-
lowing point: “In brief, I think it is important to use the meeting with Gromyko also to
communicate a broader message: that as you said at Annapolis, de´tente should be gen-
uinely comprehensive and reciprocal. Otherwise, I am quite convinced that the US-Soviet re-
lationship will again deteriorate, and this will certainly complicate attainment of such
otherwise desirable objectives as SALT. If he does not get this message clearly from you,
he certainly will not get it clearly from anyone else.” In the right-hand margin next to this
paragraph, the President drew a mark pointing toward the first sentence.
