1042
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
International Health Policy: Assessment of Problems, Programs, Re-
sources and Opportunities.”6 This draft report was circulated to the in-
volved Departments and agencies for their comment. On January 9th,
Dr. Bourne recommended a program called “New Directions in Inter-
national Health” be initiated as the first response to the President’s
promise to implement a global basic human needs strategy.
At present, U.S. Government international health programs are
scattered among 22 agencies with various responsibilities and author-
ities, operating relatively independently of each other. Both domestic
and international issues are involved in international health matters,
which highlights the need for a flexible and responsive management
structure. The Federal agencies involved in international health spent
$528 million in FY 1976, under more than 100 separate legislative man-
dates; yet there is no government-wide coordinating mechanism to es-
tablish overall policy, goals or programmatic priorities. A central focal
point is essential to achieving the full potential of current knowledge
and resources and is likely to be as important to basic health needs as
are new scientific discoveries.
What is needed is the allocation of U.S. resources on the basis of an
assessment of real global health needs taking into account health
problems which cause most damage to human potential, and most se-
verely compromise economic development, and vice versa. Priorities
must be set, working with the World Health Organization and the in-
volved countries, and programs developed for action against the re-
maining major crippling or fatal diseases. Criteria must be developed
for resource decisions, taking into account cultural differences, country
or area priorities and levels of training and systems capacity for contin-
uing to carry out the program at the local level.7
International health has in the past been exclusively thought of as
an aspect of foreign aid primarily through development assistance.
However, commercial, diplomatic, and environmental avenues are also
ways to approach international health problems.
Presidential endorsement and higher priority on U.S. involvement
in world health matters is fundamental to a new strategy. Potential
Presidential initiatives which are suggested involve impaired vision
and blindness, rural water supply systems, establishment of an Interna-
tional Health Services Corps and other measures and changes in policy
which would enhance the effectiveness of our international health
program.
6 See footnote 2, Document 299.
7 An unknown hand underlined this paragraph, beginning with the word
“assessment.”
