352 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 comed by Ghotbzadeh—who Waldheim thought genuinely sought a settlement.4 8. Waldheim said that he had discussed a commission of enquiry but the Iranians were naive about such a commission. They expected it to be appointed next week, to submit its conclusions within one week and have the General Assembly or the Security Council order implementation of the conclusion. Only then, presumably if they agreed with the conclusions, would the hostages be released. In Waldheim’s view this was an impossible approach and even if acceptable, contained no guarantee that the “students” would agree to release the hostages. 9. With regard to his report Waldheim said he would state that Iran was not prepared to release the hostages at the present time; however a commission of enquiry may help to defuse the situation, while the search for a peaceful solution continues. (We are datafaxing to IO bootleg—rpt bootleg—draft of Waldheim report.)5 McHenry 4 Waldheim met with Carter and Vance from 5 until 7:30 p.m. at the White House on January 6 and repeated much of this information. Carter told Waldheim that he would neither accept an international tribunal, try the Shah, nor allow Iranians to receive funds before the hostages were freed. He also insisted that he did not want to delay economic sanctions. (Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in Iran, pp. 109–110; Carter, Keeping Faith, pp. 478–479; Brzezinski, Power and Principle, p. 485) No official record of the meeting has been found. 5 The bootleg version is attached to the January 6 Iran Update memorandum from Saunders to Vance. (Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran Update Jan 1980) Waldheim reported on his trip to the Security Council on January 6. For a summary, see Yearbook of the United Nations, 1980, p. 309. Waldheim’s report is in telegram 63 from USUN, January 8. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, UN and Security Council)
