734 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX this decision by President Sadat.2 And Begin stated that he would submit the final matters to his Cabinet. We heard shortly after takeoff from Cairo that Begin had called a meeting of the Israeli Cabinet for 10:00 a.m. tomorrow morning,3 Israel time, to discuss and decide upon these last outstanding matters. Clearly, the final decision is in the hands of the Israelis on the few remaining and relatively less important questions, the resolution of which has been recommended by President Carter and agreed to by President Sadat, and which Begin previously had agreed with Carter to submit to the Cabinet (although he had not stated whether or not he would recommend them to his Cabinet). On board Air Force One the atmosphere is one of exhilaration, tempered somewhat by the realization that there are still many weeks and months of difficult implementation lying ahead, assuming that the Israeli Cabinet will agree to the final details and that the Knesset of Israel will ratify these actions. The President himself has walked through the plane, thanking everyone who has been involved in the process for their help, and Secretary Vance has received particular expressions of admiration and congratulations along with the President for his role in this process, which has included 10 trips to the Middle East during the past couple of years. In addition to the President and Mrs. Carter on board, also on board are Secretary and Mrs. Vance, Secretary Harold Brown, Dr. Brzezinski, Hamilton Jordan, Gerald Rafshoon, Ed Sanders, Roy Atherton, Harold Saunders, Bill Quandt, Herbert Hansell, et al. Secretary Vance commented very forcibly that this was a successful team effort and that everybody on board this plane particularly, as well as others, had made a significant contribution to the success of this long effort. One of the obviously important items which must be worked upon is the selection of the United States’ representative for the future negotiations between the parties, which are going to be extremely tedious, time-consuming, and complex. Secretary Vance mentioned that it is extremely difficult to find someone like Sol Linowitz, who was excellent in the Panama Canal Treaty negotiations, to handle such a project.4 Every effort obviously should be made to find a person who has the right characteristics and 2 For the text of Carter’s statement at the Cairo airport following his meeting with Sadat, March 13, see Public Papers: Carter, 1979, p. 430. Although Carter references a telephone conversation with Begin in his remarks no memorandum of conversation of the call has been found, nor is the call logged in the President’s Daily Diary. 3 See Document 211 for a discussion of the Cabinet meeting. 4 Carter announced the appointment of Special Trade Representative Robert S. Strauss as his personal “Ambassador-at-Large” to the Middle East negotiations on April 24. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Strauss Appointed Envoy for Mideast,” The New York Times, April 25, 1979, p. A1) Sol Linowitz would succeed Strauss in this role on January 29, 1980.
