Comprehensive Test Ban
475
197.
Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination
Committee and Presidential Review Committee Meeting1
Washington, May 2, 1978, 2:30–3:50 p.m.
SUBJECT
CTB—Stockpile Reliability and Permitted Experiments
PARTICIPANTS
State
White House
Cyrus Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Jerome Kahan Dep Dir, Bureau of
NSC
Politico-Military Affairs
Reginald Bartholomew
Defense
Benjamin Huberman
Harold Brown
OSTP
David McGiffert Asst Sec for
Frank Press
International Security Affairs
John Marcum
Energy
CIA
Donald Kerr Acting Asst Sec for
Stan Turner
Defense Programs
Sayer Stevens Dep Dir, National
JCS
Foreign Assessment Center
General David Jones Acting
Chairman, JCS
Maj Gen Edward Giller JCS Rep
CTB
The purpose of the meeting was to continue discussion of the issue
of stockpile reliability and permitted experiments under a CTB. The
discussions focused on a treaty of fixed duration as proposed by the
British, and whether this would strike a better balance between military
risks and foreign policy objectives than a treaty of indefinite duration.
In discussion of the fixed duration approach, there was general
agreement that it should include a strong safeguards program, a re-
quirement for Senate ratification of any extension, and a review confer-
ence in the fifth year to consider the future of the treaty. There was dis-
agreement, however, on whether the term of the treaty should be three
rather than five years, whether we should declare our intention to re-
sume testing after five years or just preserve the option to do so if nec-
essary, and the level of permitted experiments.
Defense and Energy generally argued in favor of a plan rather than
option to resume testing. Secretary Brown noted that this would reduce
problems in retaining laboratory personnel and would be more accept-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 93, SCC
071, CTB, Permitted Experiments/Reliability: 5/2/78. Secret. The meeting took place in
the White House Situation Room.
