668
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
131.
Remarks by President Carter1
Washington, December 12, 1979
United States Defense Policy
Chairman Reg Jones, members of the Business Council:
It’s indeed a pleasure for me to be with you again. This afternoon I
would like to make a very important statement to you, following which
the Chairman and I will walk down the hall, and I’d like to greet each
one of you individually, as has been my custom in the past when we’ve
been together. And then we’ll have a chance for a few questions that
you might want to put to me concerning energy or inflation or legisla-
tion before the Congress or Iran or other matters of interest to you.
But my first concern, and the first concern of every President who
has ever lived in this house, is and must be the security of our Nation.
This security rests on many kinds of strength, on arms and also on arms
control, on military power and on economic vitality and the quality of
life of our own people, on modern weapons, and also on reliable energy
supplies. The well-being of our friends and our allies is also of great im-
portance to us. Our security is tied to human rights and to social justice
which prevails among the people who live on Earth and to the institu-
tions of international force and peace and order, which we ourselves
have helped to build.
We all hope and work and pray that we will see a world in which
the weapons of war are no longer necessary, but now we must deal
with the hard facts, with the world as it is. In the dangerous and uncer-
tain world of today, the keystone of our national security is still mili-
tary strength, strength that is clearly recognized by Americans, by our
allies, and by any potential adversary.
Twice in this century, each time in the aftermath of a global war,
we were tempted in this country by isolationism. The first time, we suc-
1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 2232–2237. The President spoke at 5
p.m. in the East Room of the White House before members of the Business Council. Brze-
zinski sent a proposed speech outline to the President under an October 17 cover memo-
randum, requesting the President’s “reactions and guidance.” He indicated that he and
his staff planned to develop a draft for subsequent revision by the President’s speech-
writers, adding, “It is meant to be a serious speech and not an exercise in oratory, and
therefore I do want to focus on substance above all.” Brzezinski continued: “I think it
would also be better to keep plans for the speech restricted, because otherwise the exer-
cise will degenerate into ‘group-think’ (like the Cuban brigade speech, which at one time
had as many as 14 people drafting it). It is impossible to do a decent job in such a context.”
The President wrote “Zbig, ok—proceed. J” in the top right-hand corner of the memo-
randum. (Carter Library, Hertzberg Donated Historical Material, Speech Files, Box 12,
President’s Address to the Business Council—Part II Defense Speech 12/12/79)
