780 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Paragraph 18 (page 14) deals with U.S. bases overseas. It omits the reference to the possibility of “a small net expansion” of the base sys­ tem, which was written into basic policy last year. The revised language reads: “The entire overseas base system should continue to be reviewed periodically in order to assure that base requirements are adequately met and are related realistically to developments in weapons technol­ ogy and other factors.” The last sentence of paragraph 18 (which is unchanged) deals with the positioning of IRBM’s around the Soviet periphery. While the Planning Board has not as such recommended any change in policy, on my own motion I submit that IRBM’s should be the subject of a separate paragraph and not included in the paragraph on U.S. overseas bases. I therefore propose to the Council the following new paragraph: “IRBM’s will be positioned only in those NATO and other Free World nations which demonstrate a desire to have them, and pressure will not be exerted by the United States to persuade reluctant nations to accept them. Proposals for the positioning of IRBM’s outside the NATO areas will be subject to approval by the President.” Paragraph 19 (page 15) treats generally of strengthening the collec­ tive defense system. As revised, it contains the new guidance that the United States should, as practicable, “induce Western European and other allies with well-­developed economies to increase their share in collective defense.” Paragraph 20 (page 15) is amended to say that we should educate not only our allies, but the Free World as a whole as to the importance of nuclear weapons as an integral part of the arsenal of the Free World. 178. Memorandum of Meeting with the President1 Washington, July 15, 1959 Present: General Goodpaster 1. I indicated to the President that I wished to talk with him further about paragraph 12 a of Basic National Security Policy. I reported that 1 Source: Discussion of proposed changes to paragraph 12–a of NSC 5906, basic national security policy. Top Secret. 7 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project Clean Up. Drafted on July 17.
