1172 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement UR–13. Memorandum of a Conversation1  Montevideo, March 2, 1960. US/MC/32 PARTICIPANTS United States

Uruguay The President

Senator Luis BATLLE Berres Ambassador Robert F. Woodward Deputy Jorge BATLLE Ibañez Major John Eisenhower

Sr. Luis BATLLE Ibañez Colonel Vernon Walters SUBJECT Conversation During Courtesy Call of Senator (former President) Luis BATLLE Berres Senator Luis BATLLE Berres, accompanied by his two sons, Jorge Batlle Ibañez (who is now a Deputy in the Uruguayan Chamber of Deputies and the principal administrative manager of the Colorado List 15 newspaper ACCION) and Luis Batlle Ibañez (who is a concert pianist just beginning his career) called on President Eisenhower on March 2 at a few minutes past 9:00 p.m. and talked with the President for about 20 minutes, in the company of Ambassador Robert F. Woodward; Major John Eisenhower; and Colonel Vernon Walters, the President’s interpreter. Senator Batlle inquired about the health of Mrs. Eisenhower and expressed regret that she had not been able to make the visit to Uruguay and the other countries of South America. President Eisenhower inquired about Sra. de Batlle and recalled the pleasant visit that he had received from former President Batlle and his wife and two sons at the White House in 1955. The President and Senator Batlle reminisced briefly about Senator Batlle’s visit to the United States.2 President Eisenhower remarked on the very warm reception that he had received from the Uruguayan people during the afternoon, and then Senator Batlle commented apologetically about the irresponsible actions of a very small number of university students. President Eisenhower replied that it was apparent that the great majority of the Uruguayans who greeted him were very friendly and that he was very appreciative of this warm welcome. He said that he did not consider the student demonstrations of any significance and that he was not worried about the kind of bombs (tar bombs) which the students were rumored to be preparing. He alluded, good-­humoredly, to the fact that he had been exposed to more dangerous bombs than these without ill effects. 1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files, Lot 64 D 559, OF 1607. Official Use Only. Drafted by Ambassador Woodward, and approved in the White House on March 22. Information on the source text indicates that the conversation took place in the U.S. Embassy residence at 9:00 a.m. 2 Senator Batlle Berres, who had been President of Uruguay, March 1, 1955, to March 1, 1956, visited the United States, December 5–8, 1955. For documentation on his visit, see
