1956 1221 undisputable facts with regard public agreement between us and my govt is considering making public statement with regard to these facts. H. It is in light of these facts as well as continued unwillingness of your govt enter into meaningful renunciation force that world will judge which side is willing carry out its public commitments, which side is willing unconditionally renounce recourse to use of force in settling our disputes, and thus, which side is truly demonstrating its good faith in attempting improve relations between us. 2. Wang replied, in my statement I referred to issue civilians as well as renunciation force declaration. He could only say I had only repeated old arguments in this respect and in doing so reversed facts. In discussing question civilians had never made any clear accounting in cases 52 people of 55 names he had given me and also failed give accounting with regard 26 persons whose cases brought up previously and whose names I had given him. I had not referred to any improve­ ment in ability Chinese in US return their fatherland. I had not spoken of any action taken by my authorities eliminate obstruction offered Chinese returning their country. Thus it was their side which actually dissatisfied with present situation on civilians. Despite repeated rep­ resentation of their side, situation had not yet improved. I had made reference to American nationals in China but not able state any case of ordinary American resident in China hindered or prevented from leaving. This fully proved it precisely Chinese side which carrying out agreement between us. Policy his govt any aliens residing his country without respect nationality, who are friendly to people and abide by their law, will be treated with even more friendliness and protected. To treat foreign friends as criminals is not practice of China and will never occur China. Such is only practice of American authorities with respect innocent Chinese residents in America. However, any aliens residing China who dared go against Chinese law would certainly be punished according to law. 3. Wang continued, with regard concrete example I had given this morning regard case Fr. McCarthy, if he had not engaged in intel­ ligence activities against China and had not carried out subversive activities against China Govt, he would never been punished by law. Fr. McCarthy had himself made confession regard these criminal activities. In case any foreign nationals engaged in subversive activi­ ties against Chinese Govt, could anyone expect Chinese stand idly by without doing anything against him. Supposing such case occured in US, he presumed my govt would also take similar measures against him. This is only natural. 4. Wang continued from prepared statement, at today’s meet­ ing he would like point out talks have now come to stage where no progress can be made. This could not but greatly disappoint them. At
