500
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
177.
Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,
Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, March 11, 1953.
SUBJECT
The Situation in Iran
1. The almost three-week-old political crisis precipitated by Mos-
sadeq’s attack on the Shah’s position and his subsequent effort to force
the monarch into exile has now died down in intensity but is still unre-
solved. Mossadeq retains control of the government and has steadily
consolidated his position. However, some disorder continues, the Shah
and other opposition elements have not yet made their peace with Mos-
sadeq, and the Majlis has still to act on a proposed vote of confidence in
him.
2. The present position of the various elements in the political pic-
ture is as follows:
a. Mossadeq retains a predominant position. He has consolidated his
grip on the reins of government, retained the support of the hard-core
National Movement deputies, won over such small right-wing groups
as the Pan-Iran and Somka parties, and successfully rallied popular
street support. Although he suggested last week that he might be
willing to forego a Majlis vote of confidence (pointing out that even the
opposition resolution called for his retention) he has not finally com-
mitted himself and will presumably take advantage of any sign of op-
position weakening.
b. The opposition has lost ground and energy and, for the most part,
appears content to accept a compromise by which the Shah and Mos-
sadeq would both remain.
(1) Kashani and other right-wing dissidents—Baghai, the bazaar mer-
chants, the mullahs—have done little since the rioting of 28 February
which resulted in the Shah’s decision not to leave Iran. Although pro-
Kashani deputies have blocked a vote of confidence by absenting
themselves from the Majlis and some religious extremists are still ful-
minating against Mossadeq and his circle, Kashani has stated that Mos-
sadeq as well as the Shah should remain and is reportedly now
“sulking in his tent.”
(2) The pro-Shah element2 in the army and air force, which also partici-
pated in the 28 February riots, has been greatly weakened by the arrests
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 79T00937A, Box 2, Folder 2,
Staff Memoranda—1953 (Substantive). Top Secret; Security Information.
2 An unknown hand wrote “faction” above this word.
