Chapter 4, February–April 1990  637
Wheeler said Peresypkin’s concept went beyond U.S. thinking in at 
least two ways:
— The U.S. side advocated EODs because we had found no con-
vincing FRODs which satisfactorily balanced the need for effective 
verification and the need to protect design features of the missile, and 
which would clearly demonstrate that a cruise missile declared to be 
conventional could not carry a nuclear weapon.
— The U.S. side could not accept the principle that one would 
inspect the heavy bomber itself in all cases to see that it was not capable 
of carrying a particular kind of weapon. In other words, Wheeler said, 
the U.S. side did not find placement points to be an acceptable solution 
for all categories of heavy bombers.
Wheeler cited two aspects of Peresypkin’s concept where the U.S. 
side could agree:
— Random visits to declared storage areas at bases for heavy 
bombers not equipped for nuclear ALCMs; and
— Random inspections of missiles for closer determination; what 
would tend to guide that selection would be the EODs on the missiles.
Peresypkin asked why not include interior distinguishing features 
such as the interface of the control mechanism with the missile pay-
load, and why the U.S. was concerned about looking inside missiles. 
He noted that the advance of technology had brought missile designs 
closer; both sides’ designs were subject to the same laws of aerody-
namics and used similar design and architecture of ALCMs and the 
placement of warheads in compartments. He said it was important to 
be convinced regarding the internal missile assembly. Without this, an 
element of mistrust would appear, since a side could circumvent the 
Treaty by making a missile with the same EODs as a conventional mis-
sile, but which would be nuclear-­armed.
Wheeler asked whether Peresypkin’s concept for inspections inside 
missiles envisioned a single-­occasion inspection—­for example, when 
a new cruise missile entered the inventory—­or whether it envisioned 
more frequent inspections. Peresypkin replied that there would doubt-
less be an initial exhibition to demonstrate that a missile was non-­
nuclear. But a side would also have the right to challenge inspections 
in cases where it had doubts. This applied to missiles associated with 
heavy bombers and to conventional missiles, he said.
Peresypkin asked Wheeler to clarify why, when the U.S. side did 
not object to the inspection of nuclear weapons during initial displays 
of ICBMs and SLBMs, it objected to similar procedures with respect 
to ALCMs. He presumed that during such an inspection it would not 
be possible to see, let alone steal, the technology for the engine or the 
guidance system. Wheeler pointed out the difference between look-
ing at mounting stations on a PBV and looking at the insides of a
