120 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Shahi said that, as expected, the appeals have “incensed the Afghans,” who are having a hard time maintaining control over the country, and now—with both Iran and Pakistan having risked Soviet wrath— Moscow has stepped into the breach. 17. Shahi said that it is in this context that the GOP “seeks a clarification” of USG policy in relation to the 1959 bilateral. Shahi said that both DepSec Christopher and Assistant Secretary Saunders have told the Paks that the bilateral remains in force, although Shahi said that the DepSec had said that the treaty is “twenty years old and needs a new scope of definition.”3 I told Shahi that the bilateral indeed remains in force, and that any “new definitions” mentioned by the DepSec were in the nature of expanding economic assistance to Pakistan (not covered in the bilateral), as a reflection of our desire to be more help to the GOP. I also reminded Shahi of my call on FonSec Shahnawaz, in which I presented the Department Spokesman’s comments that we would regard external involvement in Afghanistan’s internal problems as a serious matter with the potential of heightening tensions and destabilizing the situation in the entire region. 18. Shahi said that a clarification was very important to the GOP at this time because “if we have to deal with this threat alone we will take one policy,” but “if we feel the U.S. is behind us we can be courteous but firm” in a response to pressure from Moscow and the DRA. Shahi said the military situation is “not academic” because Saudi Arabia has asked Pakistan for military manpower, and, while the GOP can provide training and maintenance personnel now, “if they want more” to counter Soviet moves in the Yemen”, then the GOP will have to gauge carefully its own military situation. 19. When I asked Shahi what concrete Soviet action the GOP fears, he said that there is a real concern that “KGB agents” will begin to work in Baluchistan, and this, combined with the “incitement of ethnics” already happening in Iran under Soviet tutelage, could make Pakistan a “target of opportunity for the Soviets.” Baluchistan is an even more likely target, Shahi maintained, because Baluch leaders— “such as Bizenjo”—are already “pro-Soviet.” 20. Shahi agreed that one reason for the Soviet démarche may be that things are getting out of hand in Afghanistan, and he suggested that Moscow may be preparing Communist and other international opinion for an intervention along the lines of “Hungary or Czechoslovakia.” 3 Christopher met with Zia on March 1 in Islamabad. The Embassy reported on the meeting in telegram 2569 from Islamabad, March 2. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790095–0655)
