808
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
elected representatives to express Iran’s feelings toward the former
Iranian regime and the United States, without direct involvement of
American diplomats.
Our overriding concern is to do nothing that would jeopardize the
safety, prolong the confinement or humiliate the hostages. Their welfare
and their dignity as individuals must be protected. We feel confident
that simple, dignified procedures can be devised to release the hostages
and to hear Iran’s grievances. Similarly, adequate means can be estab-
lished to resolve the bilateral disputes between the United States and
Iran. We would welcome the President’s views on this subject as con-
veyed through Ambassador Lang. We would also be prepared to sug-
gest ideas.
295.
Message From the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang) to the
Department of State1
Tehran, June 13, 1980
Please find hereafter Ambassador Lang’s reply to your message
0032 from Washington, June 11, 1980 (re trials).2
1. During the reception I tried to have the Director of the Cabinet
set up a meeting with Bani Sadr. He gave me little hope for the 7th,
8th, and 9th and added that from the 10th to the 15th Bani Sadr would
be invisible. This wording really puzzled me.
Last night I was with my FRG colleague who has encountered the
same refusal in spite of the good offices of Tabatabai (?). He has heard
a crazy rumor from a usually serious source. According to it the test
of strength could occur in the coming days and Bani Sadr, Ghotbzadeh
and T. might be leaving the capital if not even the country.
2. But day before yesterday, Ghotbzadeh received me and was
most friendly.
2.1. He is against any kind of trial whatsoever and is struggling
in that direction. (If you analyze his statements his fallback position
would, if necessary, be to accept a trial condemning the United States,
but not the hostages.)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 33, Iran Update 6/80. Secret; Sensitive. The document was found attached to
an undated briefing memorandum from Saunders to Muskie, Christopher, and Newsom
entitled “Iran Update, June 13, 1980.”
2 See Document 294.
