Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 363 Third World now represents 74% of the world’s people; it has 58% of the world’s armed forces. The reasons behind this Administration’s decision to devote a new degree of attention to the United Nations then are not trivial or the result of Andy Young’s [U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations] personal views. The U.N. system is the essential element for the conduct of foreign relations by most of the Third World countries. It is the collective source of much of their diplomatic influence, the basic outlet for their foreign relations initiatives. As we come to comprehend better the importance of these countries to us, we realize the necessity of dealing with them through international organizations. In short, the perception of the U.N. system as a nice but essentially meaningless institution should end. It does not match the reality of 1978. This greater interest in international institutions is laying the groundwork for addressing many of the more important issues on the international agenda—issues which can only be effectively handled in the multilateral context. The catalogue is almost endless: energy, population, food, health, pollution, money supply, economic growth, human rights, narcotics control, arms sales, nuclear proliferation, outer space, the deep seabed. Yet we face this paradox. In the past we praised international institutions and tended not to use them. Now we use them and tend not to praise them. How long can this continue without undermining the instruments we need? Human Rights: Religion or Foreign Policy? A renewed emphasis on human rights is a major new trend in American foreign policy, strongly supported by the American people. It is more than posturing toward foreigners as it expresses the essential values of our society. It is more than just another factor grafted on our diplomatic efforts to be evaluated by simple input-output analyses. Yet it is here where we encounter an enormous controversy with cries of success and failure sometimes uttered by the same person. How does one measure success in this endeavor? We might suggest two possibilities. First, if one views the human rights issue as a religious campaign, then one is almost never satisfied because, regardless of the progress made, one will always see more to do. The danger of such an approach is that the opponents of human rights will begin to argue that unless the same degree of success can be attained everywhere, the whole effort should be abandoned. Second, if the human rights effort is viewed from a more traditional foreign policy point of view, then the foremost “success” of our human rights policy lies in the undeniable fact that human rights have become a global issue and are decreasingly an exclusive domain of American
