Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I b. In Central Europe, a NATO buildup has been launched, which seems likely to restore the military stability that had been called into question by Soviet military programs in the mid-1970s. (C) These are big improvements. There are still a lot of risks ahead, particularly in unstable countries on the periphery of the USSR, but we’re clearly better off than in December 1976. This improvement was made possible because we had our priorities right: During the campaign you said that the main focus of US foreign policy should be on constructive cooperation with our friends. What we have done to this end in Europe and the Middle East has been more important in reducing risk of war than anything that has been, or could have been, accomplished in direct dealings with the USSR. (C) Substantial progress has also been made in those dealings, however; the main advantage of SALT-II may be in paving the way for a more ambitious SALT-III agreement, in which we can get at the principal cause of nuclear instability: technological change. This argues for seeking a SALT-II whose ratification will not provoke such intense opposition or leave such a residue of bitterness in this country as to prejudice our ability to move quickly to far-reaching follow-on negotia- 2. Prosperity. The second test of a successful foreign policy is whether it helps or hurts our economic well-being. (U) You worked out a strategy with our partners at Bonn3 that is bearing fruit: Germany and Japan have taken stimulus measures; the US is giving fighting inflation top priority; and these policies are creating a convergence of economic policies that Jacques de Larosiere, head of the IMF, believes portends a steadily improving world economic situa- We have also taken a stagnant Multinational Trade Negotiation and brought it to the verge of success. (U) Energy remains a problem, but we’re moving in the right direction—toward deregulation, which will allow market forces to reduce oil imports and spur oil production. Your recent anti-inflation decisions have strengthened OPEC confidence in the dollar and thus moderated pressures for price increases. (C) These achievements create a good prospect for a strong dollar and a continuing reduction in the US external deficit. To fulfill this prospect, we will need in the next two years to: (U) —press Japan to adopt a more stimulative domestic policy (de Larosiere considers Japan’s failure to fulfill its 7% growth target world economic problem #1); (C) 3 See Document 92.
