Arms Control and Disarmament 1585 put forward treaty language to take care of these contingencies has not yet arrived and omission of such provisions now does not in any way preclude us from introducing them at a subsequent state if the negoti­ ations either continue or are renewed after a recess. Provisions of this type could be put forward at a later time, possibly in a separate article dealing with how the Control Commission might make reviews of the effectiveness of the control system. Largely because of the unresolved question of just how we are going to handle the problem of threshold, we will not at any time while we are here state that we have tabled all the articles that we propose. We will always say that there may be further articles which we may recommend in the light of further dis­ cussions. Accordingly, we will not be precluded from tabling additional articles or additions to our present draft articles later on if necessary. I hope very much you will agree with my suggestion that we slim down a duration article and put forward as a simple one-sentence text. And I hope that you will be able to secure agreement to such a text from the other agencies concerned. I am sure we would have no difficulties at all in getting the British to go along with such an article. I believe that Khrushchev’s recent speech has made our position here look better than ever. It should also assist us greatly in securing agreement from the British to recess the present negotiations. The one thing we really need to round out our position is a duration article. We need one quickly. I think the kind of article I have suggested would help us immensely. Villard 433. Memorandum From Twining to McElroy1 JCSM–71–59 Washington, March 2, 1959 SUBJECT Surprise Attack Study Group (U) 1. Reference is made to a memorandum, dated 23 January 1959, by the Military Advisor to the Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA), subject as above, which requested that the Joint Chiefs of Staff evaluate and 1 Source: Conveys JCS views on formation of a group to study problems of surprise attack. Secret. 5 pp. Library of Congress, Twining Papers, Chairman’s File.
