Dominican Republic  477
of eleven official Americans, three members of the local diplomatic 
corps, two American clergymen, four American businessmen, and four 
Dominican citizens. No one who has lived in the Dominican Republic 
less than a year was approached. Excluding Dominicans, the average 
length of residence here of the participants is approximately three years.
The questions posed and their answers follow:
(1) Do you think there will be a serious invasion attempt against 
the Dominican Republic in the next six months and, if so, would it be 
successful?
Answer – Eighteen answered that they believed there would be no 
serious invasion attempt within the next six months and six indicated 
one is unlikely. Only one person predicted that an invasion would be 
successful if attempted.
(2) How long will the present regime survive?
Answer – All but one person expressed the belief the present regime 
will survive until the Generalissimo becomes seriously incapacitated 
or dies. The average estimate before this would transpire, was approx-
imately four years. One source thinks the Generalissimo would retain 
control for an indefinite period even though seriously incapacitated – ­in 
much the same fashion as Henri Christophe did in Haiti.2 (It is noted that 
Trujillo’s mother is reportedly 96 years old and is still active.)
(3) What will be the sequel to the downfall of the Generalissimo 
with respect to the assumption of authority?
Answer – Five sources said all contenders are so far overshadowed 
by the Generalissimo that it is impossible to make anything approxi-
mating an intelligent prediction. One said son Ramfis would take over 
on a permanent basis together with President Hector Trujillo. Two held 
out strongly for the chances of Lt. General Jose Garcia Trujillo. The 
remaining vast majority simply stated that a military junta would take 
over. Only two said this would be done without violence. The prevail-
ing sentiment was that a relatively short period of time of tranquility 
will transpire, accompanied by furious jockeying for power behind the 
scenes, before the onset of inevitable violence.
(4) Will the government that eventually stabilizes the political situ-
ation be more or less cooperative with the United States than the pres-
ent one?
Answer – Nine answered more cooperative, nine about the same, 
and four less cooperative.
2 Reference is to a leader of the Haitian war of independence who established a 
kingdom in northern Haiti in the first years of the nineteenth century. Henri Christophe 
suffered a paralytic stroke in 1820 and committed suicide later that year when revolts 
broke out at news of his incapacitating illness.
