870
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
D. The Kennedy Amendment received widespread publicity
throughout the country and triggered a second wave of grateful public
and private comment. As a result, substantial US reconstruction assist-
ance is considered by most Yugoslavs, despite our best efforts to the
contrary, to be virtually a fait accompli.
4. These then are the circumstances in which we find ourselves.
Failure to provide any reconstruction assistance in the face of these
facts would inevitably entail some consequences. But I do not want to
exaggerate. If we do no more:
A. It will not mean an immediate deterioration in our bilateral
relationship. The GOY’s interest, at least for now, in close ties with the
US is based on factors of such importance that it will not be seriously
affected by what we do about earthquake assistance.
B. It will not much affect the economic difficulties the Yugoslavs
will face this year, or the rapidity of Montenegrin recovery. Whatever
we might have done would have been so small in comparison with
total needs that the economic impact would have been minimal.
5. The case for providing some help, then, must rest on other
grounds. And most of those grounds are so well known in Washington
that they need not be dwelt on here. They range from the political
arguments about the importance of Yugoslav-US relations in the sensi-
tive period prior to Tito’s passing, through the humanitarian considera-
tions that are so much a part of our makeup, and the fact (well known
here) that Yugoslavia’s neighbors Romania and Italy have been recent
recipients of major US earthquake assistance, to the fact that Yugoslavs
of every variety will simply not understand, after the Kennedy Amend-
ment publicity, what led the USG to oppose (and that is how it will
be seen) giving aid to Montenegro.3
6. But, important as I believe all those arguments to be, there is an
additional factor that I worry about, and Washington ought to worry
about. It is the question of confidence, which is, I recognize, a nebulous
quality. But it will probably prove to be the single most important
element in the minds of the Yugoslav leadership both now and after
Tito as they chart their future course. I find it difficult to believe that
Yugoslav confidence in our ability or willingness to put our money
where our mouth is when the chips are really down will be much
3 In telegram 123994 to Belgrade, May 15, the Department notified the Embassy
that the administration’s official position with respect to Senator Kennedy’s amendment
was that while the issue had been closely examined in the Department of State and the
administration remained sympathetic to the needs of Yugoslavia and had examined
various alternatives, “none of them seem currently feasible because of budgetary restric-
tions. We will therefore not send up any proposal of our own, but we will not oppose
the initiative of Senator Kennedy.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D790220–0092)
