settled by the Protocol of 1901, occasioned the subsequent rise of
discussions and difficulties ended by the exchange of letters of July 2, 1905.
By the terms of Section 3 of these letters China was entitled to bring about
the payment to the Powers of the Indemnity of 1901 by one of three
systems: “either in silver according to the price of silver on the London
market, or in gold bills, or in telegraphic transfers.” The machinery of the
two last systems, gold drafts and telegraphic transfers, differ only in the
more or less rapid means of transmission of the document of exchange from
one place to another with a resulting difference corresponding to the rates of
exchange.
In the two cases, China, the debtor, buys with silver Taels instruments of
exchange representing the amount of gold which she owes to her creditor.
These purchases, insofar as the service of the Indemnity of 1901 is
concerned, are generally made of the banking agents of the Signatory
Powers at Shanghai. The arrangement of 1905 has at the same time and
quite justly reserved to China the, right “to obtain drafts and telegraphic
transfers to the best of her interests in any locality and in any bank as
cheaply as possible, or by award.”
The three methods of payment enumerated in Section 3 of the letters of July
2, 1905, lend themselves perfectly to payment “in gold” as it has been
defined above by the eight Ministers. The note of December 26 last has
confused the quotations of the international exchanges by telegraphic
transfer with the telegraphic transfer itself. Telegraphic transfer, in effect, is
applied as well to a gold currency as to a silver currency, to a paper
currency or an exchange currency.
 
When, on December 30, 1922, the Chinese Government attempted to
resume the service of the Indemnity of 1901, in the matter indicated by its
note of December 26 [1923?], her representative presented himself,
according to established custom, to the Shanghai agents of the interested
Governments to negotiate the purchase of telegraphic transfers in francs.
The disagreement which ensued was solely about the rates of exchange of
the Tael quoted by the two parties. If the representative of the Chinese
