400  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
without attempting to obtain more funds for the construction of another 
road not really a part of this project. Mr. Echandi did not press this 
request but said he wondered if a change could be effected in the pres-
ent agreement for constructing the Inter-American Highway. He stated 
that it would be desirable for Costa Rica to control the awarding of the 
contracts for completing the unfinished parts of the road rather than 
to continue letting the Bureau of Public Roads control the awarding of 
these contracts. Mr. Rubottom pointed out to Mr. Echandi that when 
construction of the Inter-American Highway was first begun Costa Rica, 
owing to lack of an adequate Road Department, had requested that the 
Bureau of Public Roads assume the function of awarding the contracts. 
Mr. Rubottom indicated that it would be a poor time to change now as 
the final stages of construction are being entered into. He said that of 
course the United States, through the Bureau of Public Roads, is willing 
to give technical assistance to training Costa Rican road technicians.
Communism
President-­elect Echandi said that he was concerned with communism 
in Central America, and on his recent trip through the Central American 
countries had discussed ways and means of combatting communist 
activities. He said that these countries desired to form a united front to 
combat communism and were willing to cooperate with an exchange of 
information regarding movements and activities of known communists. 
Mr. Rubottom indicated that the common efforts of the Central American 
countries to eradicate communism had merit, but stressed that the first 
thing to do in this connection was for each country to concentrate on 
taking care of its own internal situation and establishing its own inter-
nal controls against communism. He said that the United States would 
be willing to exchange information on movements of communists and 
indicated that we would give assistance in combatting communism com-
patible with our foreign policy. He said that it was well known that we 
do not follow a policy of intervening in the affairs of other countries nor 
do we approve of other countries so doing. He then asked Mr. Echandi 
about communism in Costa Rican labor unions. Mr. Echandi said that 
there were some communists in the labor unions as well as a number of 
leftists, Mr. Rubottom then asked him whether there was much commu-
nism in the banana unions. Mr. Echandi replied that there was commu-
nist infiltration in the Federación Obrera Bananera y Anexos (FOBA) and 
indicated that it was something that had to be dealt with. Mr. Rubottom 
then said thought could be given to the role that ORIT could play in com-
batting communism in the labor unions.
Political Exiles
Mr. Echandi stated that he would follow a policy whereby politi-
cal exiles could continue to reside within the country in keeping with
