Yugoslavia Since Secretary Brown’s visit to Belgrade in October, our arms sales have expanded markedly although the total figure remains relatively small. FMS sales for FY 78 could reach $10 million or a little more compared to $267 thousand in FY 77. While various items are still being reviewed, six Yugoslav requests for advanced or sensitive weapons have been denied. The Yugoslavs have expressed disappointment that we refuse to sell them high technology or to provide data on weapons still being developed. Points to be Made: —We welcome the improvement in relations which has occurred over the past year and we seek further ways to strengthen ties. —The exchange of letters and briefings in recent months has been helpful and we value Tito’s views. —We look forward to more active exchanges across the spectrum of our relationship, including visits to the U.S. by Yugoslav legislative representatives and political leaders. —We continue, as in the past, to support Yugoslavia’s independence, unity and territorial integrity, and we respect its commitment to non-alignment. —We strongly support the expansion of U.S. trade and investment ties with Yugoslavia. —On the Exim guarantee problem (if Tito raises), assure him that Chairman Moore is anxious to solve the problem, as indicated by the flexibility he has displayed, and suggest that discussions be resumed as soon as possible so that this issue does not affect our excellent trade relations. —We welcome the establishment of a bilateral working group (below the Cabinet level) to discuss the whole range of economic questions on a regular basis. —We are pleased with the expanded cooperation in military sales and feel that it reflects the improvement in overall relations between our two countries. —Since the visits of Secretary Brown and General Cemalovic, arms transfers have increased significantly, and we expect this encouraging trend to continue. As a result of these meetings and the following discussions between technical experts of both countries, several advanced weapons systems have been offered to and accepted by Yugoslavia. (If they raise the question of denial of certain high technology systems): —There are obvious constraints on both countries in this relationship, but the important thing to emphasize is the progress we have made and to work for improvement.
