3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
730
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
253.
Memorandum From Vice President Mondale to
President Carter1
Washington, January 3, 1980
SUBJECT
Possible Restriction of Grain Sales to the Soviet Union
I very much hope that you will decide not to reduce grain sales to
the Soviet Union. I believe it is in our interest to gain the cash sales—
and it is all cash—from these sales to the Soviet Union and to maintain
this market in future years which has a very beneficial impact on our
economy and on the dollar. Sales of food for cash to the USSR takes
hard currency from them to develop a stronger consumer economy
with higher protein components for their consumers. All of this is good
for us. If you feel we must do something in the grain area, I would hope
at the most we would terminate our agreement for sales in excess of
those already contracted. Some 17 million tons are already under con-
tract—the remainder (i.e. up to 25 million tons) has not yet been con-
tracted. It would hurt far less if we could do that. We might then follow
Harold Brown’s suggestions that the difference between the 17 million
tons and the approved 25 million tons be made available on conces-
sional terms for use in countries such as Bangladesh that are having se-
rious nutritional problems. I think that this would be viewed by the
farmers as moving with proper concern for their needs and be seen in
the world as a responsible decision.
If you look at the list of actions that we’ve taken and will take in re-
gard to this matter, it is pretty impressive.
1. Defer SALT
2. Recall Ambassador from USSR
3. Reduce Soviet diplomatic presence including expelling some So-
viet agents and restricting travel. I think we also ought to review
whether we can block Russian occupation of their new Embassy here in
Washington—something that they want very much.
4. Suspend opening of Kiev and New York consulates.
5. Step up VOA broadcasts
6. Stall consular review
7. Reduce numbers of Soviet visitors
8. Require equal numbers of media representatives
9. I hope we would really go after the Olympics—I don’t see why
that is sacrosanct.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 82, USSR: 1/1–8/80. “Top Secret” is handwritten on the memorandum. Printed
from a copy that does not bear Mondales’s initials. The initial “C” is written in the upper
right-hand corner of the memorandum, indicating that Carter saw it.
