XIV
Sources
the Directorate of Operations (DO) within the CIA. To be sure, the dis-
tinction between operational files and analytical files does not always
accurately reflect what is housed in DO files. Nevertheless, these files
tend to have been created and organized with the intent to facilitate
policy decisions and implementation. Also of great importance are the
relevant files maintained by the Office of the Director of Central Intelli-
gence (DCI). These actually are not considered operational files, but, for
the purposes of this volume, have been utilized to document the Di-
rector’s role in the covert policy toward Iran. These files are often very
useful, but are not of uniform quality, nor do they give the consistent
impression of completeness. They contain the DCI’s correspondence,
important files on specific issues the documentation of which was not
maintained in the individual directorates, the DCI’s records for the Psy-
chological Strategy Board and other inter-departmental bodies subor-
dinated to the NSC, and, importantly, the DCI’s logs and the minutes of
his regular meetings with the Deputy Directors.
Of greater importance are the Directorate of Operations files them-
selves. (References to records maintained by the Directorate of Opera-
tions (DO), Central Intelligence Agency, were accurate at the time the
volume was compiled. The DO has since been renamed the National
Clandestine Service.) On the whole, DO files are well-organized. In ad-
herence to the strict operational principle of compartmentation, they
tend to be organized by operation. That is, unlike in the Department of
State where a central filing system was maintained in order that indi-
viduals could become familiar with overall policies, the DO system
parceled out information on the “need-to-know” basis. If one was in-
volved in a specific operation, one could obtain access to documents
that related specifically to that operation and that operation only. These
kinds of files are called project files. While in theory, compartmentation
made a considerable amount of sense, it also became obviously clear
that there was a need to maintain collections that illustrated policy con-
texts within which specific operational needs were to be met. This prac-
tice was significant to this volume in two ways. First, there is an overall
tendency for certain project files for countries regarded as more impor-
tant to contain documentation of internal DO discussions that led to the
approval of proposed covert operations as well as the execution of
those operations. These files, a kind of central file by default, contain
relevant telegraphic traffic, DO analytical pieces, operational pro-
posals, and reports about the implementation of covert operations.
Second, the DO also maintained more general files for top-level offi-
cials within the Directorate. The files maintained for Frank Wisner, the
head of the Office of Policy Coordination (OPC) and later the Direc-
torate for Plans (DP) were particularly relevant for this volume.
Wisner’s “secret” files, in Job 79–01228A, organized by subject, are vari-
ously rich and sparse in documentation, but generally episodic in char-
