1955  475
70. Wang replied that he would not have made remarks about 
Korean War had this issue not been put forward. He had no intent 
discuss question. He had no information to give concerning men 
enumerated.
71. I replied that he did not even know names of men. All I was 
asking that he take names and ask for information. Immaterial whether 
answer supplied here or in MAC. All I asked was that he take names, 
ask his authorities to look into matter. If information is that men are not 
living we should be told.
72. Wang replied that since this question had been raised in Korea, 
it should be put through the same channel. He did not think this was 
proper place to discuss. He had no intent engage in debate with me.
73. I asked him whether his government was willing instruct 
its representative in MAC to discuss question there. It was precisely 
because his side had refused to discuss matter and accept names there 
that it had become necessary raise matter here.
74. Wang replied this was not suitable place raise question.
75. I said I would not pursue the matter further this morning; that I 
wished to raise another matter. I then presented prepared statement on 
subject of trade, as follows:
A. Mr. Ambassador, as I have indicated to you, we are continuing 
our study of your draft statement on renunciation of force. I believe our 
discussion of this subject this morning has been useful.
B. I full well recognize, and I am sure you do, that the formula­
tion of any declaration on this subject agreeable to both of our gov­
ernments is going to be a matter of delicacy that will require some 
thought and time.
C. At our last meeting you suggested that, following any agree­
ment we may be able to reach on a renunciation of force statement, we 
should undertake discussion of what you term trade embargo.
D. I am glad that you have thus recognized the inherent relation­
ship between the two subjects and that my response to the questions 
which you may raise under your item of trade embargo must greatly 
depend upon the degree of agreement which we are able to reach with 
respect to renunciation of force.
E. The two subjects are fundamentally related as the measures 
which the United States and other like-­minded countries have taken 
with respect to trade with your country are in response to consider­
ations of national security and must be considered in that light.
F. However, while the question of renunciation of force is being con­
sidered, I would, in the interest of expediting our discussions, be glad 
to hear whatever views you desire to put forward with respect to trade.
