Arms Control and Disarmament  1643
executive session of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy yesterday. 
Some members of the Committee had felt that the language of the reso­
lution and particularly that of the preamble seemed to give the impres­
sion that the U.S. was headed toward nuclear disarmament rather than 
overall disarmament including conventional forces. Some members 
also had felt that it would be highly unwise for the U.S. to stop under­
ground and high altitude testing until our present needs for weapons 
development in the anti-missile and small-weapons fields had been 
satisfied and that therefore we should agree now only to a cessation 
of atmospheric testing. Mr. McCone said that he had notified Senator 
Fulbright, and had so informed the Joint Committee, that the AEC sup­
ports the proposed joint resolution but felt that the specific language 
should be reviewed carefully in order to avoid any wrong impressions. 
He said he mentioned this matter at the present time to indicate that 
the Macmillan proposal would probably meet resistance among some 
members of Congress.
Mr. Farley suggested that it might be more forthright if the staff 
paper could quote AEC and possibly DOD judgement as to the relevant 
factors pertaining to problems with the laboratories, necessary research 
and desired weapons tests in relation to the Macmillan proposal. It was 
agreed that the AEC and the DOD would undertake to prepare suitable 
language for inclusion in the paper.
Mr. Quarles said he felt the tactical situation with regard to any uni­
lateral action such as proposed by the U.K. should be considered before 
any firm conclusions as to its desirability were drawn. He felt that the 
U.S. should not join with the Soviet Union in any suspension of nuclear 
testing for which no control is planned. He would suggest that the U.S. 
adopt the position that as long as the negotiators are continuing to seek 
controls for a total agreement we will continue to abstain from all nuclear 
testing until the October 31, 1959 date previously announced by the Pres­
ident, and that we will examine our course of action at that time in the 
light of the situation which then exists. He believed that this would be as 
far as the U.S. should move without risking damage to its own overall 
security position.
Dr. Killian suggested that urgent consideration be given to the 
question of what would be our policy toward future tests in the atmo­
sphere in the event we do not reach agreement with the Soviet Union at 
the present negotiations to ban such tests.
Mr. Farley noted that we had not pressed for any firm understanding 
within the Government on this question because we felt that the Soviet 
reaction to the April 13 proposal and the course of these negotiations 
as well as the Foreign Ministers meeting during the next month or two 
would have considerable bearing an any decision we might make.
