1979  749
This far-­reaching step reflected common Allied recognition that only 
through greater cooperation and mutual burdensharing could NATO 
meet the security challenges of the 1980s.
Our efforts are also breathing new life into collaborative design 
and production of new weapons such as the F–16, ROLAND, 120 mm 
tank gun, and the Multiple Launch Rocket System. The December 1978 
agreement on joint funding and operation of a $2 billion NATO air-
borne early warning fleet is especially noteworthy. The U.S. has also 
proposed an innovative concept of jointly developing “families” of 
new systems, where Europe would take the lead in some and North 
­America in others.
Under U.S. leadership, the Alliance is spurring the modernization 
of NATO’s theater nuclear forces, through a proposed force of longer 
range theater ballistic and cruise missiles. Adoption of this program by 
NATO will close an emerging and serious gap in the Alliance’s spec-
trum of deterrence.
In addition, the U.S. is greatly accelerating its ability to reinforce 
Western Europe with massive ground and air forces in a crisis. We are 
prepositioning additional U.S. equipment, but counting on our Euro-
pean allies to provide adequate facilities and host nation logistic sup-
port, as well as the bulk of the ground and air forces that would engage 
in a conflict in Europe. This “transatlantic bargain” will markedly 
enhance NATO’s military posture.
IV
Confidence in Our Conventional Forces
Your Administration has taken vigorous measures to modernize 
our conventional forces, which experienced a severe decline in capa-
bilities during the prior decade. We have laid particular stress upon 
achieving a higher state of readiness, largely through overcoming 
maintenance backlogs and increasing initial supply stocks.
Rapid Deployment Forces. We are systematically enhancing our 
ability to respond rapidly to non-NATO contingencies wherever 
required by our treaty commitments, or in response to requests from 
friends and allies. These rapid deployment forces can range in size 
from a few ships or air squadrons to formations as large as 100,000 
men, together with their support. We are giving priority at present to 
the Middle East and Persian Gulf contingencies, but our forces stand 
ready for rapid deployment to any region of strategic significance, like 
the Caribbean.
We are taking two specific initiatives to help us respond in a crisis 
outside of Europe. The first is the development and production of a 
new fleet of large cargo aircraft with intercontinental range; the second
