692 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Subject: Prime Minister Begin reports on Israeli Cabinet decisions of previous night and Prime Minister Begin responds. Begin explains reason for removing reference to comprehensive peace in note to Article 6, paragraph 2. Begin explains rejection of language in West Bank/ Gaza letter on Gaza First and Egyptian liaison. Offers language to the effect that Israeli will consider proposals on Gaza first in next phase of negotiations. Begin insists that Egypt must supply 2.5 million tons of oil annually over long term at market prices. President Carter says that Egypt will not accept this arrangement on oil and asks for Israeli reconsideration. Prime Minister Begin says he can go back to the Cabinet again, but not today. Other Cabinet members discuss importance of oil.10 March 13, 1979; 8:00 to 10:00 a.m., President’s Suite at King David Hotel, Jerusalem, Israel American Side Israeli Side President Carter Prime Minister Begin No record available unless President Carter has one.11 March 13, 1979; 10:00 to 11:00 a.m., King David Hotel American Side Israeli Side President Carter Prime Minister Begin Secretary Vance Foreign Minister Dayan Dr. Brzezinski 10 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter had an additional working luncheon meeting with the Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee of the Knesset, following his televised address to the assembled legislature on the afternoon of March 12. The meeting, held at the Knesset, began at 2:02 p.m. and continued until 3:02 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No memorandum of conversation for this meeting has been found, but Carter’s handwritten notes and a list of talking points are in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel, 3/79. In his memoirs, Carter stated that during the meeting he listened as “the leaders of the various political factions expressed their hopes and concerns to me” and described the meeting as an “excellent, constructive exchange of views.” (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 423) For the details of Carter’s speech to the Knesset and of the round of U.S.-Israeli Ministerial-level meetings during the afternoon and evening of March 12, see Document 207. 11 No memorandum of conversation for this meeting has been found. Carter’s handwritten notes from the meeting are in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel, 3/79. According to Vance, the meeting took place at Dayan’s suggestion (see Document 207), following a round of discussions at the Ministerial level the evening of March 12. Carter recalled in his memoirs that during the meeting Begin and he “reviewed again the proposals which were necessary for Egypt and seemed to me advantageous for Israel.” “I could easily see a clear resolution of the remaining issues,” Carter remembered, and assured Begin that the United States would “guarantee” Israel an “adequate supply” of oil if Israel could not get access to Sinai supplies, that Sadat would agree to an exchange of ambassadors if Israel kept its “promise” to an “early withdrawal” from Western Sinai. Pressed by Carter, Begin also agreed that the Palestinians would “be permitted peaceful political activity” and limits on the movement of West Bank and Gaza residents would be lifted. (Carter, Keeping Faith, p. 424)
