Colombia  351
CO–21.	
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the 
Embassy in Colombia1
 
Washington, July 22, 1959, 6:03 p.m.
46.
Embtel 40.2 In view economic record GOC, Department and 
Eximbank sympathetic problem raised reftel re development credits. 
If you believe further response by Embassy is necessary, or if question 
again raised by President or other officials, you should take sympa-
thetic and cautiously encouraging line, being careful not to arouse 
exaggerated hopes.
Specifically, following points should be made in any further dis-
cussion this subject with GOC:
(1) Re “broad plan” mentioned by President, U.S. agencies appre-
ciate value of sensible overall program but do not, repeat not, make 
practice of underwriting such programs or fixed percentage thereof. 
Long established policy is rather to consider development credits on 
project by project basis.
FYI. In any case $200 million is overly ambitious in terms of avail-
able resources of U.S. lending agencies and current economic position 
of Colombia.
End FYI.
(2) Sound high priority projects within Colombia’s debt-­servicing 
capacity will receive careful consideration on evidence of maximum 
self-­help effort.
FYI. Eximbank has taken this position in contacts with Colombian 
officials for several months. End FYI.
(3) Re local currency requirements, Colombia must look to own 
resources, possibly supplemented by PL 480, Title I proceeds. Policy of 
DLF is to finance local costs “only if it is clearly demonstrated that there 
are no other ways to finance such local costs without seriously jeopar-
dizing the economy’s financial stability” and to require dollar repay-
ment when, in opinion of DLF, borrower’s situation warrants.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 821.10/7–1359. Confidential. Drafted 
and signed by Alexander M. Rosenson of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic 
Affairs; cleared with the Office of West Coast Affairs, the Economic Development Division 
in the Bureau of Economic Affairs, Treasury Department, Export-Import Bank, and in 
substance with the Development Loan Fund.
2 Document CO–20.
