723.2515/1947: Telegram
[Document 163]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
[Extract]
LIMA, February 18, 1926—3 p.m.
[Received February 20—6:10 p.m.3 ]
10. Your 12, February 16, 6 p.m., slightly garbled in transmission, being
corrected. On yesterday by appointment I accompanied Mr. George Duval,
head of the New York commercial house of Wessel, Duval and Company
having establishments in Peru and Chile and which has been in business on
this coast for 100 years, to see President Leguía on a visit of courtesy. Mr.
Duval and President Leguía exchanged quite an extended friendly and more
or less intimate conversation. President Leguía asked Mr. Duval how he
found business in Peru. Mr. Duval replied that business at this time in Peru
was slack. At this point I stated that Mr. Duval had informed me that he was
of the opinion that business in Peru would be greatly improved if the Tacna-
Arica question were settled. President Leguía seemed quite interested; and
Mr. Duval at some length confirmed my statement, pointing out the
abundance of capital now accumulated in the United States, the increasing
interest in South American trade and the encouraging agricultural riches of
Peru, but that he had found in talking with New York capitalists hesitation
in making investments in Chile or Peru at the present time on account of the
uncertainty as to the stability of government aroused by the bitterness of the
controversy over Tacna and Arica, and Duval stated that if this question
could be settled by some kind of a peaceable compromise a great impetus
would be given to American investment in the two countries. The President
immediately responded that that would not be acceptable; that the Tacna-
Arica question was a matter of sentiment with Peru. He added that as the
Peruvians looked upon the provinces as captive Peruvian provinces and as
Chile had not complied in good faith with the terms of the Treaty of Ancón,
the bitterness of feeling in Peru over the question could be ended only by
the restoration of the provinces to Peru. Duval at this point asked the
