International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1163 consideration is a 2–3 day seminar for Department officials (possibly with an initial Latin American focus) to explore how G–2000 issues will affect conditions, and hence, U.S. foreign policy decisions, at the regional and country levels over the next several decades. 3. Unresolved Issues: The following are key issues of both near and longer term significance that we are working to address. (a) What will be the scope and thrust of the Task Force recommendations to the President? We are concerned about a possible lack of focus in the Task Force efforts as they currently are being orchestrated by CEQ, and by what appears to be an attempt to do too much all at once with the Report, thereby jeopardizing appreciation of the long-term follow-up that is required to address the issues effectively. We are also concerned that the two “cross cutting” issues (the Government’s long-range forecasting and analysis capability, and the institutional ability to integrate Global 2000 issues in decision-making processes) may not receive sufficient attention by the Presidential Task Force. Our internal State Department Task Force will concentrate on the latter issue as it relates to foreign policy decision making. I will be meeting with Gus Speth this week to discuss and attempt to clarify and resolve these questions. (b) How can the LDCs, and other nations, be brought into an expanded international effort to address the problems? While we have received some positive feedback to the Report, we do not yet know how other countries will react to U.S. calls for accelerated action to actually address the problems. (c) Can the USG mobilize the funding necessary to maintain U.S. leadership and back up our calls for action? Can public opinion be swayed to support greater foreign aid investments, and longer [larger] contributions to UN specialized agencies, on the basis of G–2000 arguments? Or, should funding channels other than AID be suggested to avoid association with a “give-away” image? (d) How can we effectively engage the U.S. private sector in the follow-up? We and CEQ are putting this question directly to leaders of the business community, academia and private foundations.
