Afghanistan 313 We will probably meet this weekend with our NATO allies to discuss the Afghan situation. President Zia said it is right to think on those lines. Pakistan considers itself an ally and a great friend of the United States. Our past association contains many instances of mutual respect and assistance according to our capabilities. It is encouraging that the U.S. is still the torchbearer of the free world. We consider ourselves members of the free world and look to the U.S. as a beacon. What has happened in Afghanistan is delicate, tragic and most significant in this part of the world. Tomorrow it could be Pakistan. President Carter suggested that Warren Christopher could come to Pakistan in the next few days to talk with Zia, if that were desirable. President Zia recalled the pleasure of meeting Christopher, an old friend, and promised to give his reaction to the idea tomorrow through Ambassador Hummel.3 President Carter invited President Zia to come to visit to discuss matters of mutual concern. When Zia decides that would be advantageous our foreign ministers could work out arrangements. President Zia expressed his appreciation and said it would be a great honor to meet the President of the U.S. He promised to arrange mutually convenient dates. President Carter said he would have Secretary Vance tell Hummel to expect an answer on the Christopher trip. The conversation concluded with best wishes on both sides. 3 In telegram 15326 from Islamabad, December 30, the Embassy relayed the content of a conversation between Hummel and Shahi during which Shahi stated that Pakistan wanted to delay a visit by Christopher for long enough to determine if the Muslim world, following the lead of Iran and Pakistan, would coalesce to condemn the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. According to the telegram, Shahi believed “a visit by Christopher would undermine prospects for Islamic condemnation of Soviets and would provide ammunition to Soviets and pro-Soviet Muslim countries to accuse Pakistan and others of acting at behest of USG in collusion with NATO powers.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850040–2170, N800001–0154)
