El Salvador 581 Both Presidents rose at 12:10 and, following the taking of pictures, President Lemus and his party departed for the Capitol. ES–7. Memorandum of Conversation by the Officer in Charge of El Salvadoran Affairs (Ross)1  Washington, April 1, 1959. SUBJECT Salvadoran Interest in a Mutual Assistance Agreement PARTICIPANTS Dr. Don Hector David Castro, Ambassador of El Salvador Mr. Roy R. Rubottom, Jr., Assistant Secretary Mr. Robert Ross, Officer-­in-Charge of Salvadoran Affairs Ambassador Castro said President Lemus had asked him to discuss informally with Mr. Rubottom the possibility of obtaining a U.S.-El Salvador mutual assistance agreement under the provisions of the Rio de Janeiro accord.2 He said that while the previous Salvadoran administration, under President Osorio, had been “disinclined” to sign such an agreement with the U.S., President Lemus believed his country’s inter American defense obligations and close friendship with the U.S. indicated the desirability of an agreement of this type. President Lemus would like to know, the Ambassador said, whether or not agreements were still being signed and the possibilities for consideration of one with El Salvador. Mr. Rubottom said that certainly the absence of such an agreement with El Salvador was not due to a lack of friendship between the two countries nor does it have any deleterious effect upon this friendship. He went on to say that the world and the future of its people had changed a great deal since the Rio agreements. The Assistant Secretary cited the new probability of any future war being an atomic conflict as an example of the changes, since 1945. He also pointed out the effectiveness of the Organization of American States as an instrument for the avoidance of inter-American wars and reminded the Ambassador of the small size of our mutual defense programs in Latin America, with 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 716.5-MSP/4–159. Limited Official Use. 2 Reference is to the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (Rio Treaty), signed at Rio de Janeiro, September 2, 1947; for text, see 4 Bevans 559.
