84 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI and tight constraints in ballistic missiles (and especially certain categories of ICBMs), with looser constraints on strategic bombers, bomber weapons, and cruise missiles. Deep Reductions (S/NF) Today the Soviets deploy about 11,000 intercontinental nuclear weapons. The Intelligence Community believes that all elements of Soviet intercontinental nuclear forces will be extensively modernized between now and the late 1990s. Without START, Soviet forces would probably grow to a level between 12,000 and 15,000 weapons in the next ten years, and the Soviets have the capability for expansion in the late 1990s to 16,000 or even 18,000 weapons if, for example, they decided to expand forces in response to a U.S. deployment of strategic defenses. Based on the current U.S. bomber/ALCM counting rules, a Soviet START force of 6,000 accountable warheads could legally contain in excess of 8,000 weapons. In a crisis or wartime situation, the Soviets might over the course of several months be able to deploy a few thousand additional weapons in their post-START force, even if a treaty does not permit de-MIRVing. (S) In comparison, today the U.S. deploys 12,000 to 13,000 intercontinental nuclear weapons, and all legs of the strategic Triad are undergoing modernization. In the absence of START, this number is not projected to change significantly over the next decade. With START, the U.S. could legally deploy 9,000 to 10,000 strategic weapons, based on the U.S. bomber/ALCM counting rules. (S) Our reduction objectives in START have two elements. First, reduction in overall strategic delivery vehicles and warheads, and second, reductions in the most destabilizing elements of the Soviet threat—­ballistic missile warheads, warheads on heavy ICBMs, and throw-­weight. The overall reductions envisioned in START halt and reverse the trend under SALT II toward increasing inventories of strategic nuclear weapons; however, overall reductions were not by themselves meant to carry the burden of improving crisis stability. The emphasis on deep reductions in destabilizing weapons was designed to do that. The effectiveness of our deep reduction provisions in improving stability is discussed in the next section. (S) With U.S.-­proposed bomber and ALCM counting rules, START will allow the U.S. to deploy sufficient weapons to accommodate U.S. targeting requirements. With appropriate modernization of U.S. strategic forces (which is not constrained by START), the U.S. can deploy strategic nuclear capability to support a strong deterrent policy and, if war occurs, will have the power to render further Soviet actions ineffectual. (S) While START limits allow for military sufficiency, they take our military forces toward the margins of their ability to satisfy existing
