3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
788
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
nitely. Moscow had heard what the President had said and they also
heard the comments of so many Senators, but in any case he would
pass to Moscow what the Secretary was now saying.
The Secretary said that the President is firmly committed to SALT
II and we feel it becomes even more important when times are tense.
We do not intend to take any action which would impede the imple-
mentation of the treaty and we will maintain that policy. We hope and
expect that the Soviets will do the same. Dobrynin replied that the
United States has the means to check the Soviets.
Possibility of a Foreign Ministers’ Meeting
The Secretary said he would talk to the President this weekend
about when such a meeting might be appropriate. Dobrynin had ap-
parently nothing with which to respond. He said there had been
various exchanges since the year’s beginning, including the proposal to
send a special emissary for conversations in Moscow. The Secretary
and Dobrynin went to and fro about events. Dobrynin thought we had
changed our mind. The Secretary observed that from the tone of the
high-level exchanges we had been left uncertain whether the Soviets
wanted to have a meeting; that was why earlier the President had de-
cided to let the matter rest. However, the Secretary thought the time
had come to consider when a meeting would be worthwhile—April or
May—and he asked Dobrynin to pass on his views to Gromyko.
US-Soviet Relations
Dobrynin was pessimistic about the future. He saw no prospect of
improvement in our relations during or until well after the election
campaign and thereafter it might take six months, two years, or longer
before we could make progress. What did the Secretary think?
The Secretary pointed out that the invasion of Afghanistan had
caused a major deterioration in our relationship and this would con-
tinue to be an important negative factor until the Soviet troops were
withdrawn. We don’t see much chance in the foreseeable future of that
withdrawal. The President had made our position clear in his response
to Tito2 and in his comment on guarantees as related to a Soviet with-
drawal. The relations between our two countries is the most important
foreign policy issue for both of us and we had to find a way to control
the dangers. There are positive things we must do. We should pursue
SALT and key nuclear negotiations between us such as TNF and CTB.
Arms control is the area in which bridges can be built, even in difficult
times like the present. We on our side do not wish to destroy this essen-
tial part of the East-West framework. We will continue to abide by the
2 See footnote 2, Document 268.
