Chapter 2, January–June 1989 201 Tab D Paper32 Washington, June 7, 1989 START 08C NSR 14 START Review Paper Eight—New Initiatives Purpose. To review possible new initiatives under START. Background. The Arms Control review conducted in response to NSR 14 has reaffirmed the basic continuity between the Reagan Administration and the Bush Administration approach to START. The President has also made it clear, however, that he wishes to place his own imprint on the U.S. START proposal. There are two aspects to such an imprint. The first is the overall vision which the President wishes to project. In this regard, the President intends to stress the value of START in reducing the risk of nuclear war and in promoting stability. The second aspect is the degree to which new substantive initiatives should be offered to support the broad emphasis on strategic stability. Two such possible new proposals in START are a ban on MIRV mobile ICBMs and a ban on short-­time-­of-­flight ballistic missile tests. These initiatives are discussed in other NSR–14 papers. This paper discusses other possible initiatives. I. Reduce Fractionation. MIRVed ballistic missiles have an undeniable political reputation as destabilizing. This option attempts to address that perception by placing direct constraints on fractionation in order to encourage deMIRVing. This approach is based on the view that fractionation is destabilizing in and of itself, regardless of whether it occurs on survivable systems or vulnerable systems. Fractionation also increases the breakout potential associated with mobile refires or covert mobile launchers/missiles (this aspect of fractionation limits is discussed in the paper on mobile ICBMs). Since both the U.S. and Soviet Union are improving the hard-­target capability of their SLBMs and improving the survivability of their ICBMs, in the future there will be fewer differences between ICBM and SLBM characteristics. Thus, in this view, the case is weakened for distinguishing in START between MIRVed ICBMs and SLBMs, or between MIRVed mobile and fixed-­silo ICBMs. Another view is that fractionation in and of itself is not destabilizing. The most highly fractionated missile that now exists, the 32 Secret.
