496ŌĆā Foreign Relations, 1958ŌĆō1960, Volume III, Supplement
campaigns in the Middle and Far East until they could assess the results 
of the initial nuclear exchange.26
153. In the naval field, Soviet objectives would be: to prevent NATO 
carrier strikes and submarine-┬Łlaunched missile attacks on Bloc targets 
as part of the highest priority effort to neutralize US nuclear capabili┬Ł
ties; subsequently, to interdict US reinforcement of overseas areas and 
to isolate the European theater.
Strategic Attack Capabilities
154. Soviet capabilities for strategic air attack will improve during 
the period of the estimate, as the Soviet stockpile of nuclear bombs and 
the number of high-┬Łperformance long-┬Łrange bombers grow. Present 
Soviet capabilities for attack on the continental US are restricted by the 
relatively small numbers of operational heavy bombers, the status of 
support facilities at Arctic bases, and the lack as yet of a substantial 
inflight refueling capability. We estimate, however, that during the 
period of this estimate, the capacity of Soviet forward base areas could 
be increased sufficiently to permit the staging of the entire estimated 
long-┬Łrange bomber and tanker force. Moreover, the USSR will be capa┬Ł
ble of launching increasing numbers of heavy bombers from interior 
bases on two-┬Łway missions against the US.
155. Soviet planners would attempt to distribute their initial attacks 
in such a way as to achieve the optimum combination of surprise and 
weight of attack against all areas where US and Allied nuclear retal┬Ł
iatory capabilities were deployed. Nearly all available Soviet heavy 
bombers and many medium bombers would almost certainly be used 
against the continental US in an attempt to destroy or neutralize US 
retaliatory capabilities and other key elements of US war-┬Łmaking capa┬Ł
bilities. Light bombers could be employed in initial attacks against 
overseas targets within their range.
26 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army, believes that 
any Soviet delay in initiating operations in the Middle and Far East would be minimal, 
and, if it occurred, would be occasioned primarily by a desire to place maximum logistic, 
combat, and manpower support behind operations in the NATO area. The Soviets pos┬Ł
sess adequate ground, naval, and tactial air forces to support simultaneous offensives on 
several fronts. The difficulty in shifting forces over long lines of communication (which 
presumably would be disrupted) to or from the Middle and Far East obviates the value 
of waiting to assess the results of a nuclear exchange. Under the assumed conditions of 
an all-┬Łout nuclear war, the Soviets would have to commit forces to an attack on Western 
retaliatory bases in the Middle and Far East. Hence, surprise would already have been 
minimized by preparations for and execution of such attacks. Immediate launching of 
combined arms operations into Western territory in these two areas would best exploit 
any surprise attained in initial long-┬Łrange attacks. Moreover, such operations would 
make it difficult for the West to attack Bloc forces without also damaging Western civil 
populations and military forces. Conversely, any delay would provide the West with 
opportunities to build-┬Łup and re-┬Łattack the Bloc from these areas and would expose Bloc 
forces to Western retaliation in their homeland. [Footnote is in the original.]
