Afghanistan
655
It is our prediction that President Carter will be nominated and
reelected, and our expectation that Dr. Brzezinski will be a part, an
important part, of the new administration. Nevertheless, our feeling is
that the rhetoric you have used about the USSR has exceeded what
was really necessary. You have to understand that we are no longer
living in the world of the 1950s and 1960s. At some point we will
return to a detente relationship. It may be in two years, it may be four
years from now, but we have to live together in this world. We have
no choice about that. But it will never be the same as it was. It will
have to be an entirely different track, Bessmertnykh said. (S)
Based on a close reading of your press and of what I know about
Afghanistan, what is not clear to me, I responded, is whether you fully
understand that the current low state of US-Soviet relations is entirely
the fault of the USSR. It was, after all, the USSR which invaded Afghani-
stan and brought about the very dangerous situation which now faces
both of us in Southwest Asia. (U)
Afghanistan is only the latest in a series of events, Bessmertnykh
rejoined. Relations were on the way down beginning last summer and
they have gotten steadily worse ever since then. We had absolutely no
choice but to take the action we did in Afghanistan. It was a state along
our borders. Our vital interests were involved. Hostile states were
disturbing our security. We have no intention of remaining in Afghani-
stan. We will get out. But we could not let the situation simply fall
apart. (S)
You did not use your security needs to justify the invasion, I
retorted. You did not say that this was a vital interest of the Soviet
Union and therefore you had no choice but to invade Afghanistan. On
the contrary, you said you were invited into Afghanistan by the legally
constituted government and that you had every right to be there
because you have a treaty with the Afghans. That kind of justification
can apply anywhere in the world. And if the superpowers arrogate to
themselves the right to use combat forces whenever they feel like it,
then we will truly be living in a dangerous situation in the ’80s and
’90s. (S)
You say that Afghanistan involved your “vital interests,” I contin-
ued. But you do not explain why it involved your vital interests. The
fact of the matter is that Soviet vital interests were far better served
by the Daoud government, when Afghanistan was a true buffer state.
The President has said that this is the most dangerous situation we
have faced since the Second World War, and I am firmly convinced
that this is an accurate statement. My hope is that the Soviet government
will perceive the danger and that a reasonable solution will be worked
out to resolve this problem. (S)
But your allies are not in accord with your assessment, Bessmert-
nykh interjected. They have said so publicly. More convincingly, they
