1978  271
The CG is a practical document designed to produce programs and 
budgets. Your review of the CG is to allow you to see that major defense 
program guidance properly reflects your overall national security pol-
icy, early enough in the defense program/budget process so that pro-
grams can be easily adjusted to reflect your concerns.2
Since the Services are currently drawing up their programs on the 
basis of the CG, this is not the point to make specific decisions on weap-
ons programs; but rather to examine the underlying policy assump-
tions and ensure that an adequate range of options is maintained and 
examined. You will have further opportunities to examine defense pro-
grams during the OMB Spring Review, your review of DOD’s Status 
Report in September, and the final budget review in December.
I think it likely that the Chiefs will make a strong pitch for more 
money, based on Soviet military programs and political activity, for 
example in the Horn and Afghanistan. While you should take the 
opportunity to affirm your interest in doing what is necessary to pre-
serve a strong defense posture regardless of cost, I don’t believe you 
should make firm commitments at this point.
The following annotated agenda may help you structure the lunch 
and the NSC meeting.
Lunch
1. CTB. You should seek to neutralize any JCS opposition to our 
CTB position—­a five year treaty with a review conference in the fifth 
year plus Senate ratification of any extension, strong safeguards and 
Presidential assurance that any reliability testing required after five 
years could be carried out.
2. SALT/Strategic Programs. The Chiefs will be looking for specific 
weapons decisions to show that SALT does not imply a slackening in 
US efforts to maintain strategic equivalence with the Soviets. The CG 
suggests that their concerns would be significantly moderated if we 
were to improve our air defenses as an answer to Backfire, commit our-
selves to a new ICBM as an answer to Minuteman vulnerability, and 
establish options for a significant expansion of our strategic forces in 
order to maintain essential equivalence. The danger is that we could 
find ourselves committed to potentially open-­ended programs and still 
face military opposition to SALT.
—On air defense, I suggest that you ask the Chiefs how much of 
an improvement in air defenses is needed before you make any commit-
ments to air defense improvements.
—On the new ICBM, I suggest that you should not agree to pro-
ceed with full-­scale development of M–X until a survivable basing 
2 Carter drew an arrow in the right margin pointing to this paragraph.
