March 1952–February 1953
335
119.
Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans (Wisner)
to the Chief of the Near East and Africa Division, Directorate
of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Roosevelt)1
Washington, undated.
SUBJECT
Views of Mr. Max Thornburg
1. Submitted herewith for your information and comment is a copy
of a Memorandum of Conversation between Mr. Thornburg and Dr.
Raymond Allen of the PSB.2 During a conversation with Mr. Thornburg
in the office of Mr. Dulles on Friday morning,3 I gathered that Mr.
Thornburg has also had some conversations with officials of the State
Department, including Mr. David Bruce. I further understood that Mr.
Thornburg had been requested to put down in writing a further expres-
sion of his views and recommendations with regard to the situation in
the Middle East,4 and return to Washington sometime during the
course of next week for a further presentation and discussion of his
views.
2. Mr. Thornburg was somewhat diffident regarding his ability to
prepare alone a paper that would be really useful from the standpoint
of the State Department and CIA. He said that it would be much more
profitable if he were able to sit down with certain other Near Eastern
experts and exchange views, on the theory that while he might be able
to make a contribution of some value, not he nor any other single
person could be expected to produce a well-rounded and entirely well-
grounded appreciation of the situation. He said, for example, that he
did not even know what you thought of the last paper which he pro-
duced5 and he felt sure that you would be able to pick loopholes and
find soft spots in portions of it. This Agency and the State Department
would be sure to have information which, in some instances, would en-
tirely reverse his own opinion, such as might be based on inaccurate or
out-of-date factual information.
3. Mr. Dulles, nevertheless, encouraged him to put something
down in writing in the form of a “think piece” which might serve as a
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Intelligence, Job
80B01676R, Box 41, Folder 20, Shah of Iran Operations. Secret; Security Information.
2 Dated August 24; attached but not printed. Thornburg’s memorandum of this
conversation is Document 116.
3 August 22.
4 See Document 118.
5 Not further identified.
