844 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement ­continued to receive information (see memo of conversation dated February 21, 1958)2 leading President Somoza to believe that an invasion from the exiles was imminent. He said that his Government had received reports that arms were being moved from Costa Rica to Honduras for use in the invasion, and that Nicaraguan exiles residing in Costa Rica were joining the exiles in Honduras. According to Sevilla-Sacasa his Government had reason to believe that the exiles were gathering for the invasion just east of Teotecacinte in the disputed border area. The Ambassador said President Somoza believed that Honduran President Villeda was sincere in his declarations of intention not to permit the exiles to launch an invasion from Honduras. However, President Somoza had information leading him to believe that Honduran Cabinet Ministers Milla Bermudez, Alvarado Puerto, Oscar Flores, and President of the Congress Rodas were working with the Nicaraguan exiles, behind Villeda’s back. Sevilla-Sacasa then asked Mr. Rubottom if our Embassy in Honduras would impress upon Villeda the need to take appropriate measures to prevent the exiles from carrying out their planned invasion. He expressed the belief that Villeda was not completely apprised of the exiles’ activities and consequently was not fully aware of the threatened danger to Honduran-Nicaraguan relations being caused by these activities. Mr. Rubottom told Sevilla-Sacasa that the Department had received full reports regarding this subject from our Embassies in Honduras and Nicaragua. He said that we were concerned over these reports and the possible effect they might have on Honduran-Nicaraguan relations. He cautioned Sevilla-Sacasa against any rash action on the part of Nicaragua, such as sending troops into Honduran territory to ferret out the exiles. Mr. Rubottom said he understood Villeda had announced publicly his willingness to cooperate with Nicaragua in attempting to locate and prevent any exiles from launching an invasion into Nicaragua. Sevilla-Sacasa indicated this was correct, and assured Mr. Rubottom that Nicaragua had no intention of sending troops into Honduran territory in the disputed area in search of exiles. Mr. Rubottom informed Sevilla-Sacasa that our new Ambassador to Honduras would be there in the next few days and would discuss this problem further with Villeda. He then expressed his appreciation for Sevilla-Sacasa’s frankness and thanked him for his call. 2 See Document NI–2.
