Eastern Europe Region
127
at this time would conflict with our aim of signalling to the GDR our
displeasure over its support for the Soviets in Afghanistan. Others
however, feel that such an agreement is inherently in our interest and
should be pursued.]
We will continue to monitor carefully the public statements and
actions of the Eastern European countries concerning Afghanistan and
Iran, modulating our implementation of the steps suggested above in
accordance with these statements and actions.
37.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 17, 1980
SUBJECT
Dissidence in Eastern Europe and the USSR—Are We Doing Enough? (U)
Dissidence in this paper is used to mean not simply actions by
regime critics who achieve prominence, but the entire range of activity,
some obvious, some extremely unobtrusive, which generates pressures
for freedom of thought and expression, human rights and the advan-
tages of a pluralistic society. (U)
On the demonstrative and declarative level the record of the Carter
Administration is second to none in the past fifteen years. The President
has personally identified himself with prominent Soviet dissidents such
as Bukovsky, Shcharansky and Sakharov and during his visit to Poland
insisted on contact with both dissident and church figures. Other
Administration officials, most notably yourself, have repeatedly met,
endorsed and communicated with dissidents in the USSR and Eastern
Europe. The “spies for dissidents” exchange you arranged last year2
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special,
Box 4, Chron File: 4/80. Secret. Copies were sent to Griffith, Brement, and Larrabee.
Brzezinski wrote at the top of the memorandum: “Good memo. Consult with MB [Mar-
shall Brement] and LB [Lincoln Bloomfield] on possible implementation? Which steps?
Which memos? ZB.”
2 On April 27, 1979, Powell read a statement announcing that Carter had commuted
the sentences of convicted Soviet spies Valdik Enger and Rudilf Chernyayev, who would
be departing the country. Powell also announced that the Soviet Union had released
five Soviet dissidents, including Alexander Ginzburg, all of whom were now in the
United States to be joined shortly by their immediate families. (Public Papers: Carter,
1979, Book II, p. 731)
