September 18–December 16, 1978 393 112. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, October 27, 1978 SUBJECT Preliminary Cost Estimates for Replicating Israeli Military Installations in the Sinai Set out below are our preliminary estimates for replicating Israel’s military installations in the Sinai. Considerably higher costs have been mentioned both within DOD and by the Israelis, but these have, I believe, been based on assumptions going beyond replication; we have been careful to make clear both in the Pentagon and to the Israelis that no commitment has been made except with respect to the airbases and then only on a replication basis at most. ($ million) Etam and Etzion airbases $1,220 Ground force installations 120 Naval facility at Sharm-el-Sheikh 95 $1,435 In addition, the Israelis will probably want and need a military road, with laterals to bases, paralleling the Negev-Sinai border. Our estimate for this is $345 million, based on 400 km of road which Israel says it needs—a requirement which may well be overstated. Some portion of these funds would need to be expended as a precursor to construction of the facilities. The estimates assume replication of current operational capability and support facilities, as best as these can be determined from aerial photography and other data sources. The estimate for the ground force installations could be lower if based on the tentative Israeli plan to transfer one of the two Sinai regular divisions to the reserves; it also could be reduced by taking advantage of the fact that many of the structures are relocatable. The other Sinai airbases, all small, are not costed since no aircraft are permanently deployed there and the bases probably will not be replicated; costs for any possible replication of the J–1 early warning station have not been estimated. Costs of providing water and power are included but are especially uncertain. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 81, Sensitive XX: 10/78. Secret; Sensitive.
