March 27–December 31, 1979 1001 proach). Nevertheless, we do not propose a formal multi-year budget commitment. Rather we recommend that we continue the planning process with Egypt, indicating the specific level of FMS financing we intend to seek from Congress in FY 1981 and FY 1982. We would make clear that financing is subject to annual Congressional authorization and appropriation. We would point out that we do not have a formal multi-year commitment with Israel. We would indicate that we intend to request substantial levels for the out-years, suggesting we use the FY 82 figure (and by implication its extension in future years) for planning purposes only. As programs are planned by the US and Egypt together under these sums, the US would carefully control the flow of letters of offer to them in order to avoid overcommitment. FY 82 Funding Levels We have studied Egypt’s military needs and priority equipment requests in great detail. We examined alternative annual funding levels to see what militarily justified types and quantities of equipment could be bought by Egypt with our credit assistance. Illustrative alternatives are as follows: —$500 million a year would permit purchase over five years of some 50 F–16s, 300 M60s, 4 patrol gunboats, but a severely cut-down list of vehicles and other equipment, and no additional air defense. This is well under the quantities Egypt has said have priority and which we believe are justified from a military point of view. —$650 million a year would allow us either to add somewhat to the numbers of aircraft or tanks Egypt could buy or to offer a more substantial amount of the smaller equipment items the Egyptian services would like so much to have and we believe they urgently need. —$800 million a year would permit purchase of the full quantity of priority F–16s (80), but still only 300 M60s, plus other equipment, but no more aircraft and no more air defense weapons. This amount would neatly replace Arab military aid, which was $800 million a year. —$1 billion a year—President Sadat’s request and the same as Israel now receives—would permit the purchase by Egypt of 80 F–16s, the full priority complement of 900 tanks, additional air defenses, but no additional aircraft or frigate-type ships. The PRC recommended $800 million a year. None of these alternatives meet all of Egypt’s needs or priority requests. They would, however, provide some of Egypt’s requirements for advanced weapons (which we support) over the next six years. Nonetheless, the lower alternatives shown above would result in considerable delays in the delivery of equipment, because of the slow pace of programs required. While we are also embarking on a program of
