1022 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX over.” The current West Bank/Gaza negotiations aim at obtaining “full autonomy” for the Palestinians and a satisfactory resolution of the Jerusalem problem. The revised letter was in fact prepared by Osama Al-Baz and given to me late that night. The original English translation prepared by Al- Baz is attached to this report. The Arabic version was in a sealed envelope and I could not therefore check it, but I have no reason to question that it corresponds to the English translation. Talk With Fahd (November 17/18) The greater part of my four-hour meeting with Fahd focused on Egyptian/Saudi relations. Fahd remains leery of any direct or indirect contact with the Egyptians, is deeply suspicious of Sadat, thinks Sadat has deliberately betrayed the Arab cause at Camp David and that nothing will come out of the West Bank/Gaza autonomy talks. He is also convinced that, despite Egyptian promises, they will leak any messages between the two countries. I first told him that you are concerned that a continuation of the Saudi/Egyptian contretemps makes it more difficult for you politically to move ahead in a meaningful fashion in the Middle East peace effort. It is unhelpful to have the two Arab countries with which we have the closest relations be so publicly at odds with each other. I recalled your messages to Fahd and Sadat and said Sadat had sent you a letter in reply, enclosing a letter to Fahd and asking that you arrange to deliver the letter. You had asked me to undertake this mission. I then gave him the letter and suggested it would be useful if he read it so that we could use it as a starting point for our discussion. He did so, sometimes nodding in slight approval, but otherwise making no substantive comment. He then gave me an hour and a half litany of his complaints against Sadat very much along the lines of what he had said to me in Rome last May,3 but updating it to include more recent Sadat attacks. The thrust of his complaints was that Sadat had lied to him, that Sadat’s earlier protestations of wanting to go to Geneva4 had been a sham as evidenced by the sudden Jerusalem trip, that Sadat was not authorized by anyone to speak for the Palestinians and that, judging from what he could tell from Israeli settlement policies, nothing meaningful would come from the current negotiations. He went to great lengths to defend
