3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
230
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Moscow. The Senator could come either before or after the New Year—
the time would be left to him. As for whether the Senator would see
Brezhnev, Dobrynin had to say that was not a good possibility. Do-
brynin asked whether in extending the invitation to Jackson he should
mention the Administration’s role in it. The President thought it would
be better to have it be an invitation from the Soviets. Dobrynin said that
he would follow this and extend the invitation to Jackson on Tuesday
morning. The President said that he thought the visit will help Senator
Jackson’s understanding of the Soviets and that he knows the Senator
wants to go to the Soviet Union.
Dobrynin then presented the Brezhnev letter, which the President
read.
The President said that he appreciated the letter—it was positive
and constructive. He had also found Brezhnev’s oral response to Toon
encouraging.5 He felt that there was increasing ease of communication
and mutual trust, and that this was developing at an increasing rate. He
thought that it was especially useful to have private communication on
important questions before taking public positions.
The President said that the Middle East was the most immediate
question. He was discouraged by the delay of a reply from Brezhnev on
convening the Geneva Conference. (In response to Dobrynin’s query,
Secretary Vance specified that the President was speaking of the request
relayed to Gromyko.) The President said that the Soviets had not even
answered. He said that if Brezhnev would look into this and let us hear,
it would be very helpful. Delay would mean problems in keeping the
parties together on track toward Geneva. The President said that he did
not know about Sadat’s visit to Israel beforehand, but that he favored
the visit and had told Sadat and Begin this. It would be very helpful if
the Soviet government took a positive position on the visit so that if it
were fruitful, the world would know that both we and the Soviets hope
Israeli/Egyptian talks can be productive.
The President said he thought it important for the US within the
bounds of our influence to encourage the parties to go to Geneva
without delay and that he thought it important for the Soviet Union to
use its influence to encourage the parties to go to Geneva without
delay. It would be valuable to have the Middle East nations and the rest
of the world recognize that the US and the Soviet Union are acting in
concert on this and that there are no differences between them. (Do-
brynin agreed.) The President said that he thought this was an accurate
description (of US and Soviet agreement) but that the public was uncer-
tain about it. The President said that the PLO and the Syrians looked to
5 See Document 59.
