Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission and all the ground operations are part of the Delta team. They would simply continue on into Tehran as part of the activity there. Dr. Brzezinski thought that trying this operation might be worthwhile so that we could see whether the risks proved to be as great as one thought. The President added that conducting a prepositioning of fuel operation would increase the risk of detection, but if successful, it would increase our confidence in being able to conduct the overall operation. The Chairman explained that a large number of planes over Saudi Arabia in the daytime might provide a tip-off to the Iranians that an operation was under way. Dr. Brzezinski added that the Israelis might well know of it, and they could be penetrated by the Soviets. The Chairman said that, because our target date is the 24th, they would like to come back to the National Security Council in five or six days on a decision as to whether to cache the fuel. Admiral Turner asked how many C–130s were involved. The Chairman explained that there would be three. He said that we would come out of Diego Garcia the first night, and the second night we would fly over Saudi Arabia. The President asked whether it would be better to come out of Diego Garcia than Egypt. The Chairman replied, yes. Dr. Brzezinski asked, that if we were aiming for the 24th, when would the Delta team have to leave the the United States. The Chairman replied, the 18th or 19th. The President asked, how far do we usually put the carriers up into the Gulf? The Chairman said that we come as close as 60 nautical miles from the Straits of Hormuz, but we are normally operating farther away. Mr. Aaron asked whether the British would be notified of our operations out of Diego Garcia. The Chairman replied that we could figure out a way to operate so that the British would not know what we were up to. The President asked if there were any further observations. Admiral Turner said that he thought it was time to intensify our political action operations in Iran. [4 lines not declassified] Admiral Turner felt that, in the long run, [less than 1 line not declassified] neither Khomeini nor Bani-Sadr is going to be viable and will be replaced at some point. [1½ lines not declassified] Admiral Turner also noted that we had been polite during this period of negotiations in the material broadcast [less than 1 line not declassified]. He would now like to be more strident. The President replied that we will not prevent any group from making whatever moves they may make—that we couldn’t do so in any event. The Secretary of State asked whether the groups would then expect money if we gave them such a signal. [1½ lines not declassified] This portion of the meeting concluded at 11:30 a.m.
