324
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
not contain verification provisions. In March 1956 the Soviets declared
a suspension of testing and called upon the West to follow their ex-
ample, but the US and UK declined to do so because of the verification
problem, and in October the Soviets resumed testing.
In the summer of 1958 the US, UK and USSR agreed to commence
negotiations for a test ban treaty that would include an international
system of control posts, and the US and UK proposed a reciprocal sus-
pension of testing for one year from the commencement of negotia-
tions. The Soviets ceased testing in November, and this moratorium
lasted until 1961. In December 1959, we announced that we felt free to
resume testing but did not do so. In 1959 and in March of 1961 the So-
viets informed us that they considered that continued testing by France
was giving NATO a unilateral advantage. In August 1961 they an-
nounced that they would resume testing and did so with an intensive,
well-planned program. Although the US responded with a proof test of
a stockpiled weapon within a few weeks, due to the decline of the
weapons program during the moratoria it was well over a year before a
developmental test of any significance could be conducted.
The first agreement concerning limitation of nuclear testing to be
achieved was the Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963 which banned explo-
sions in the atmosphere, outer space and under water. The Non-
Proliferation Treaty of 1968 recognized the connection between the ces-
sation of weapons testing and the achievement of non-proliferation
objectives, and obliged its parties to pursue good-faith negotiations
toward that end. The TTBT and PNET, signed in 1974 and 1976 respec-
tively, will, if ratified, limit the yield of individual US and Soviet nu-
clear explosions to 150 kilotons.
Although the US has long been politically committed to the con-
cept of an adequately verifiable CTB, the issues of verification and ad-
herence have been among the obstacles to a serious attempt to reach
that goal. We have taken the position that national technical means
alone are not adequate for verification and that some measure of on-site
inspection would be required for adequate assurance of treaty compli-
ance. The question of the need for adherence by all nuclear weapons
states has also been an obstacle, in that the Soviets have stated it as a
condition precedent to an agreement, and the PRC and France have
adamantly refused to consider a CTB. (For the last few years, the US
has not expressed a position on the adherence issue.) As discussed in
Section II, there are now some indications of Soviet flexibility on these
issues.
IV. Key CTB Considerations
A. Verification Capability
The historical record shows that the Soviets, in complying with in-
ternational treaties and agreements, can be expected to exploit fully the
