Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
661
Aaron recommends Control 3(b). He believes that, given your
statements on this subject, defense of a new policy of restraint would be
a political impossibility without a quantified percentage reduction or
ceiling. He stated that this would be the first question asked of Jody
Powell and our witnesses on the Hill.
Brzezinski recommends Control 3(b), believing that only a ceiling
will allow you to fulfill your pledge to reduce the transfer of arms. Es-
tablishment of a ceiling would tell the U.S. public and the world that we
intend to scale down our arms transfers, thus indicating our sincerity to
the French, British, and other suppliers.
DOLLAR VOLUME CEILINGS
Issue: Should there be a fixed ceiling on the dollar volume of U.S.
arms transfers?
Controls:
1. Utilize ceilings for planning purposes only, relying on other spe-
cific controls to achieve greater restraint in arms transfers.
2. State that the dollar volume of arms transfers in FY 1977 will be
reduced from the FY 76 total, and that the volume of FY 1978 transfers
will likewise be reduced from the FY 1977 total.3
3. For FY 1977, impose a ceiling on total U.S. arms transfers at a
level equal to the FY 1976 total. For FY 1978, reduce the ceiling by 10
percent4 from the FY 1976 total. The ceiling could be applied:
a. Across the board to all types of transfers: weapons, ammuni-
tions, supporting equipment, spare parts, training, and construction.
b. Only to weapons and weapons-related items, exempting those
sales which clearly can be classified as services.
Decision:
Control 1.
2.
5
3a.
3b.
3 Carter bracketed the phrase that begins with “the dollar volume” and ends with
“transfers will likewise”, drew a line through “likewise”, and wrote a comment in the
right-hand margin that is illegible.
4 Carter underlined “10 percent” and wrote a comment in the right-hand margin
that is illegible.
5 Carter drew lines to 2 and 3a here and wrote “Combine. J” and “Specific to reduc-
tions or # limits [that] will be set by me with Cy + Harold—J” in the right-hand margin.
