1156 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 346. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality (Speth) to the Members of the Task Force on Global Resources and Environment1 Washington, September 15, 1980 SUBJECT Problem Areas Needing Priority Attention by the Task Force on Global Resources and Environment You will recall that the President directed the Task Force to report to him as soon as possible with recommendations on problem areas needing priority attention. As you know, we have solicited the views of all affected agencies, of informed people in the Congress, and of thoughtful private citizens on this subject. We have discussed these areas at length with interested Task Force members. The enclosed draft memorandum to the President2 represents our considered distillation of views on the subject. You will note a number of changes from our earlier suggestions, both adding areas thought by agencies to be of significant importance and modifying the scope of others previously identified. In describing these priority areas, we have held extensive discussions with those within the government who can be expected to lead efforts to develop recommendations in the particular areas. In some areas there are existing groups who have agreed to use their organizations and resources to assist us with recommendations (e.g., NSC Working Group on Population; Interagency Task Force on Tropical Forests). In other areas permanent coordinating organizations are being formed which will assist us (e.g., interagency committee cochaired by State and Interior on endangered species). In others, efforts are under way on which we can capitalize (e.g., State’s preparations for 1981 U.N. Conference on New and Renewable Forms of Energy; IDCA’s chairing of government effort to respond to Brandt Commission). In still others we have discussed problem areas with agencies who may be expected to have the lead on an ad hoc basis using their particular expertise (e.g., EPA—toxics and pollution; USDA—food and agriculture; Commerce—conservation of marine resources; WRC and Interior—water supply). 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P800131–1099. No classification marking. Speth was Chairman of the Task Force. 2 Attached but not printed is a draft memorandum in which Speth outlined nine major problem areas needing priority attention. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P8000131–1101) The final version of the memorandum is printed as Document 347.
