312
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
111.
Memorandum of Telephone Conversation1
Washington, December 28, 1979, 1:42–1:50 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
President Carter
President Zia of Pakistan
The President opened the call with an exchange of holiday
greetings.
President Carter expressed concern about the latest development in
Afghanistan and stressed the importance of strengthening U.S.-Paki-
stani relations. We should consult at various levels and the U.S. should
expedite delivery of the military equipment that Pakistan has ordered.
We should put aside differences that have caused concern in the past
and move expeditiously to strengthen our mutual resolve against fur-
ther Soviet intrusions into Southern Asia.
President Carter reported that European leaders had said this is one
of the most serious Soviet actions since the take-over of Czechoslovakia.
He solicited President Zia’s reaction and asked what the U.S. could do
to help Pakistan.
President Zia expressed his gratitude for U.S. concern for Pakistan
which is now about to face the Soviet onslaught. He confirmed Presi-
dent Carter’s assessment of the situation. President Zia had recently
completed a detailed discussion of the situation which concluded that,
beyond the intrusion of Soviet troops, the overthrow of the Amin
regime is a direct involvement of the Soviet Union in a country border-
ing Pakistan.
President Carter reassured Zia that he has a friend here and we are
eager to help in any way possible.2 The U.S. wants to continue detente
and progress on SALT. But we cannot afford to stand mute and let the
Soviets take this very serious action with impunity and without political
consequences. We will take our case concerning the hostages in Iran
to the UNSC tomorrow. Other countries—Pakistan or others—should
raise this issue of Soviet intrusion publicly or even, later on, in the UN.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 37, Memcons: President: 10–12/79. Confidential.
2 In an undated memorandum to Brzezinski regarding the United States–Pakistan
Defense Agreement of 1959, Thornton noted that Carter “implicitly affirmed” the agree-
ment during his phone conversation with Zia. (Carter Library, National Security Council
Institutional Files, 1977–1981, Box 57, NSC–026, 01/02/80, Afghanistan Invasion, Christo-
pher/Brown, Pakistan/Afghanistan/China)
