Human Rights
111
c. Lipshutz then selects an excerpt from the Treasury paper and at-
tacks it apparently solely on the grounds that the statement contains
three conclusions stated as facts. He does not, however, challenge the
validity of the conclusions, namely that Badillo would undermine the
integrity of the IFI’s, would represent unilateral amendment of the
bank charters, and would severely harm our policy interest in en-
hancing the role of the banks. While these arguments may have been
somewhat overstated and could stand some fleshing out, I think they
are basically sound.
d. Lipshutz then attacks the Treasury memo’s conclusions that a
certain percentage (42 percent) of loans in FY–1976 would not have
been approved by us had the Harkin Amendment been on the books.
The Treasury paper also observed that Congress might reduce the ap-
propriations to the IFI’s by an amount commensurate with the loans
which we would vote against under Harkin. Lipshutz interprets these
points as suggesting that the past practices of the banks are inviolate
and that a reduction in the banks’ budgets is inconceivable. Again, Lip-
shutz is straining to make an argument that leads nowhere. It is not
necessary to justify the past practices of the banks or to argue that their
budgets ought not be reduced in order to decide the question presently
on the table. That question is simply whether it makes any sense to
adopt legislation which may have the effect of causing Congress to re-
duce by almost one-half the level of U.S. funding for the IFI’s.
38.
Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, April 20, 1977
SUBJECT
Human Rights
I. Major Actions So Far and How They have been Decided
1. Repeal of the Byrd Amendment2—This decision was formally
reached in PRM–4,3 enjoyed unanimous interagency support, was well
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 94, Human Rights: 1977. No classification marking.
2 See footnote 4, Document 26.
3 Scheduled to be printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume XVI, Southern
Africa.
