International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1115 ested mainly in former colonies and in linking aid to domestic commercial interests. The Japanese have provided aid for a number of water-related projects but have not yet expressed a particular commitment to the UN Decade. In Canada, interest was high in the previous government, dropped off with the election of Clark, and will probably recover should Trudeau be reelected. The EEC is enthusiastic about the decade and has promised to give it high priority, subject to the degree to which recipient countries request such aid. The EEC will try to promote the decade among member countries and will probably hold a two-day meeting in Brussels next fall to encourage and coordinate European donor interest. All the main donors seem to accept the idea of the Water Decade as good as in principle. However, given the uncertain and unformed nature of many other summit countries’ commitments, the US would have to exert early leadership and pressure to achieve a significant result at the summit. Options for the Summit 1. Announce US commitment of $2.5 billion for the Decade, encourage others to announce comparable targets A summit initiative would have maximum impact if the countries could announce high targets. Public announcement of a US target would also be a useful lever for encouraging other donors to set such goals. However, this option faces two major obstacles: 1) it will be difficult, given the fiscal climate, to gain OMB acceptance of the requisite additional funding and advance commitment of funds; and 2) it will probably be quite difficult to persuade all the summit countries to make similar announcements. In order to make a public commitment of $2.5 billion in bilateral aid for domestic water and sanitary projects (urban and rural) for the decade, the President and OMB would have to: —agree to an absolute increase in AID’s budget specifically for this purpose. The exact amount of the needed increase has not been determined but may approach $1 billion spread over the decade. —agree to an advance commitment of $2.5 billion for AID spending on water supplies and sanitation over the decade. Option 2. Announce U.S. commitment of $2.0 billion for the decade; encourage others to announce comparable targets AID and OMB may be more willing to make this smaller commitment, though even this level probably exceeds current AID spending expectations. Announcing a specific target, even if it is lower than that
