Eastern Europe Region 39 increasing contact between East and West. These follow-on studies may be no place to return to first principles, but without it the policy alternatives seem too abstract. Worse, the draft turns what looks like a basic disagreement into something that appears in the end not to matter: Options III and IV, with very different premises, seem to have quite similar policy implications. —how does our policy toward Eastern Europe relate to our policy toward the Soviet Union? Again, the question is a basic one, but it at least needs to be raised. In a period of strain in U.S.-Soviet relations, should we freeze relations with Eastern Europe (as a signal to Moscow) or make special efforts to move them (as a signal to Eastern Europe)? Or if it is fair to characterize our posture toward the Soviet Union as Option IV (subject to Congressional limitations), then does it make sense to pursue another policy with respect even to the closest Soviet satellites?14 Differentiations Among Countries —what are the different policy instruments that might be used to differentiate among Eastern European countries on some agreed basis? What are possible initiatives, country-by-country, that might be employed? —to put the same question the other way around, is any attempt to differentiate among countries likely to be swamped by several major actions, such as returning the Crown or awarding MFN? —given a general approach, to what extent should specific actions on our part be conditioned on commitments by the countries (on family reunification, emigration or other issues), as opposed to using those actions as rewards for good performance? Is there much practical difference between the two? —is there a case for special treatment of the GDR? If so, what is it? The draft tends to argue that given the GDR’s pivotal position and given the paucity of our information about it, we should expand our contacts with it no matter what general approach we take to Eastern Europe. Is that convincing? How would we expand our contacts with the GDR? And what would we gain? —Yugoslavia is omitted from this draft. On what basis? How do choices about policy toward Yugoslavia—economic, political and military—bear on our general policy toward Eastern Europe? 14 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph in the margin.
