National Security Policy  563
economic integration and specialization but the effect will proba­
bly not be large. Although Bloc economic integration is expected to 
increase, the benefits will be of greater importance to the smaller 
Satellite economies than to the USSR. The Soviet Union imports 
machinery from the Satellites, though the contribution to the Soviet 
economy of machinery imports from the Satellites will continue to be 
offset by the necessity of exporting scarce Soviet raw materials. The 
Soviet export surplus in its trade with the European Satellites will be 
reduced if repayments of credits granted to Satellite countries, sched­
uled to begin in 1960, are carried out.
III. TRENDS IN SOVIET SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
74. The USSR has for many years placed great emphasis on sci­
ence and technology with a view to creating a corps of superior per­
sonnel and building a scientific establishment adequate to support its 
aspirations to national power. Soviet scientific effort has been focused 
preponderantly on the building of a strong industrial base and the 
development of modern weapons. As a consequence, the USSR’s 
achievements in areas of critical military and industrial significance 
are comparable to, and in some cases exceed, those of the US. During 
the past year, the Soviet Union has strikingly demonstrated to the 
world its maturity in science and technology. Earth satellite launch­
ings, striking progress in weapons development, and fundamental 
research of military and economic significance attest to a rapidly 
increasing Soviet capability which presents a growing challenge to 
the Western World.
75. We believe that the rate of advance of Soviet science is accel­
erating in consequence of the building over the past three decades of 
a broad scientific and technical foundation. During this period, the 
number of graduates of scientific and technical curricula has constantly 
increased, research facilities have been greatly expanded, and the qual­
ity of Soviet scientific training has improved. The size of the Soviet 
research and development effort, in absolute terms, has been smaller 
than that of the US. However, the Soviet effort has been far more highly 
concentrated on fields related to national power, while research in con­
sumer products has been proportionately much less. Soviet expendi­
tures on science and technology are increasing yearly and probably 
permit full utilization of new personnel and facilities. Consequently, 
significant Soviet advances in science and technology are likely to occur 
in the future with greater frequency than in the past.
76. The reorganization of economic administration in 1957 has 
probably been accompanied by improved planning and coordination 
of science, especially in the formulation of long-­range and nation-­
wide scientific policies. New scientific coordinating bodies have been
