566  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
proposals. Bartholomew: That would be useful. We are open to ideas 
on the schedule.
Akhromeyev: Tomorrow there will be a meeting with Ministers in 
the morning and then lunch. Perhaps we could meet from 2:00 until 6:00 
in the afternoon. I propose we discuss SLCMs and ALCMs. Then we 
could report to Ministers at 6:00. There will be time later, into the night, 
for further work. Then on Friday2 the President is receiving the party 
from 10:00 to 11:00. So I propose we meet from 11:30 to 1:00 to discuss 
CFE and Germany. At 2:00 we would report to Ministers again. Then 
Friday afternoon we could address future talks on stability, and give 
concluding reports to Ministers. The Ministers could decide whether 
we had worked enough.
Bartholomew: That is a useful outline. Tomorrow from 9:00 to 
12:00 we will be with the two Ministers. We may learn more from our 
Ministers at that time what they want from us. I agree to begin the 
Working Group at 2:00 on Thursday. Our proposal is to meet initially 
in the full Arms Control Working Group, and quickly send off teams 
on nuclear testing, chemical weapons, and Open Skies. We could keep 
START, CFE, and the non-­proliferation statement in our main group. 
We might agree at some point to have the other three come back to 
report to us. We can also decide whether to make Burt and Nazarkin or 
Woolsey and Grinevsky go off to do some work. That would be some-
thing we could address and agree on.
As for the order of issues, we should as you suggest begin with 
START. As host, I will invite you to begin, and from what you have 
said I assume you will begin with SLCMs and ALCMs. We will want 
to address the central START questions in the first session tomorrow 
afternoon, and leave future talks to the second day. Secretary Baker will 
present ideas on non-­circumvention in the meeting tomorrow morning.
I agree with your suggestion to address CFE Friday morning at 
11:30 to 1:00. If Grinevsky and Woolsey want to address some of the 
issues like armor, they can do so on Thursday.
Akhromeyev: I agree with your proposals. Woolsey and Grinevsky 
can have their own discussions. The second day you and I will address 
only the major questions. Burt and Nazarkin could stay. Bartholomew: 
For the START discussions but not for CFE.
Akhromeyev: I would like to hand over our proposals on SLCMs 
and ALCMs. (Hands over two Soviet position papers.)3 These were 
drafted in view of the common ground reached in Malta and Moscow 
in February. I will be more elaborate tomorrow.
2 April 6.
3 Not found.
