National Security Policy 69 as an effort to block their further development as independent states. Many of them are becoming increasingly susceptible to Sino-Soviet influence. It appears to us that the principal choice which will increas­ ingly confront underdeveloped countries in Asia and Africa will not be between East and West but between neutralism and pro-Communism. 51. The Middle East. Most of what we have described in the pre­ ceding paragraphs applies with particular force in the Middle East. The politically-­conscious majority throughout the area, and especially the leaders of the revolutionary governments of Egypt and Syria, are deeply suspicious of the West. Despite US condemnation of the attack on Egypt, the US is predominantly identified in the popular mind with Israeli “imperialism,” support of the colonial powers, and exploita­ tion of oil resources. The US is regarded as not genuinely interested in Arab objectives, but primarily desirous of mobilizing the area against the USSR. The Soviet leaders, on the other hand, have skillfully repre­ sented themselves as ideologically and emotionally on the side of the Arab nationalists. They have created the impression of wanting to help the Arabs because they support their general objectives. The radical Arab nationalist leaders believe they can accept a considerable amount of Soviet assistance without danger to themselves and that they can replace their traditional social and economic institutions with a state socialism of their own contrivance. 52. The Arab nationalist movement, with its devotion to Arab unity, to economic change, and to its various conceptions of neutralism, appears to be here to stay. It aims to extend its influence widely through those parts of the Middle East and Africa where the inhabitants are Moslems. We see little chance that the pro-Western conservative Arab governments will be able to direct the movement in channels satisfac­ tory to them; indeed some of them will have difficulty in preventing their own overthrow. 53. Asia. The US has greater assets in Asia than in the Middle East. Respect for Communist China’s power and economic progress is tem­ pered by fear of its growing military capabilities and by dislike for cer­ tain Communist methods. In some countries there is a recognition that US assistance was essential to the establishment and maintenance of independence. In some countries, especially those which have experi­ enced Communist pressure or aggression, there are strong and vigorous anti-Communist sectors in the society. Nevertheless, the Communist countries, and particularly Communist China, have achieved some suc­ cesses in expanding their influence. Having failed notably to expand their influence further by insurrection and invasion, the Communists have shifted to the less obvious methods of diplomacy, propaganda, subversion, cultural exchanges, and economic inducement. This growth
