El Salvador  625
We found Major Rosales straightforward, honest, pro-Western 
and friendly but a complete babe in the woods. He admitted military 
on junta consulting with Osorio and that civilian side probably not 
under Osorio’s direction. Clear he has serious doubts about Doctor 
Fabio Castillo; he asked whether we could confirm he had extreme 
leftist leanings. Said decision junta taken by majority vote and no 
one leader. Admitted that if disagreements occurred and could not be 
resolved through discussion, they put aside for later. Saw dangers in 
this arrangement but for moment junta working well together.
Questioning brought out he totally ignorant re developments 
outside junta. When filled in he clearly taken aback and started tak-
ing notes. Said he did not know many of those appointed government 
positions, clarifying that Salazar Rodezno nominated for Information 
Chief Casa Presidential by junta member Falla Caceres. Asked whether 
intention existed apply any curbs Communist activities he parroted 
Osorio’s remark re strategy permitting open, unfettered operations until 
Communists identified. When asked who first presented the strategy he 
hesitated and then answered: “Rene Fortin Magana”. When pressed as 
to plans for controlling Communist movement Rosales reaffirmed that 
no plan existed. Said he was very inexperienced in this new assignment 
and would welcome any suggestions we might have to solve problem 
without being accused of curbing civil liberties. He stated that military 
members of junta felt that economic measures improve lot lower classes 
must be initiated immediately but that civilian members were standing 
firm in their position that political orientation of government must take 
precedence. He concluded that military members junta charged with 
security while civilian members dealing with political situation.
Colonel Escamilla arrived and Rosales gave him straight forward 
account our talk to that point, including our concern re Communist 
infiltration and activities. Escamilla inclined at first brush these off say-
ing most effective way handle these was through economic deeds rather 
than words or control measures. Turning to Quinonez he remarked that 
he and people he represented should immediately join government in 
these activities. Quinonez asked whether Escamilla aware type propa-
ganda now being put out by Communists. I called for tape recording 
(Embassy telegram 248) and for first time Quinonez himself, Escamilla 
and Rosales heard what Communists saying. Reaction electric with 
much shaking of heads. All agreed this pure Communism rather than 
nationalism and that action some sort seemed called for, but they con-
tinued expound difficulties taking any ­direct action under existing cir-
cumstances. I suggested good place to start was with Salazar Rodezno. 
Rosales and Escamilla departed saying they would look into matter.
Quinonez who in interim between Osario’s departure and Rosales 
arrival had made effort defend some of Osorio’s remarks made no
