March 27–December 31, 1979 917 285. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State1 Cairo, August 19, 1979, 1242Z 16863. For the President from Ambassador Strauss. Tel Aviv/Jerusalem for Ambassador Strauss. Subject: Strauss Meeting With Sadat. 1. (S-entire text). 2. I met for an hour and a quarter in Ismailia Saturday2 night with President Sadat, with only Vice President Mubarak and Atherton present. Sadat had clearly consulted with Mubarak and Khalil following my meetings with them earlier that day.3 I nevertheless reviewed briefly the background for my trip and the strategy we are pursuing to deal with the Palestinian rights issue in the Security Council, to make certain that Sadat understood our position and the reasons for it. 3. After a relaxed and somewhat rambling preliminary discussion, Sadat with increasing animation came directly and firmly to the point. He said he understood the need to do something to help Saudi Arabia “save face” but left no doubt he was deeply concerned that our decision to put forth a Palestinian rights resolution in the Security Council would “scare Israel” and upset the peace process. 4. As we talked, Sadat clearly stated that he fears our present approach for dealing with the situation in the Security Council will derail his strategy as he has described it to us on previous occasions. He reiterated very precisely that the way to bring Israel along is to move step by step, to show understanding of their security concerns, to give them time to work their way through their problems, and to proceed without hesitation to fulfill all commitments under the bilateral Egyptian/Israeli Treaty. He repeated several times that we must not “scare Israel” and at one point said, “let’s first complete this step with Israel.” He made clear that by “this step” he meant the present autonomy negotiations. Although at one point he reflected some anxiety about what would happen if no agreement were reached in those talks within the allotted 12-month period, Sadat basically exuded confidence that “we 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840163–2067. Secret; Cherokee, Niact Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Niact Immediate to Tel Aviv and Jerusalem. 2 August 18. 3 A summary of Strauss’s meetings with Mubarak and Khalil is in telegram 16856 from Cairo, August 18. A typewritten White House Situation Room note on the text of the telegram reads: “Per ZB’s instructions the summary portion of this cable was sent to The President.” The telegram was also initialed by Hunter. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Trips/Visits File, Box 115, 8/16–22/79 Strauss Trip to Israel and Egypt: 8/79)
