March 1952–February 1953
427
the Foreign Office sees virtually no prospect of an oil settlement with
Mosadeq and has little hope that his Government will be able to pre-
vent a Communist takeover.
The British do not appear to have a specific candidate in mind as
the leader of the suggested coup d’e´tat. Judging from our preliminary
discussions with them, they would be willing to settle on any one of
several, the list including both “old guard” politicians and the more
moderate of the nationalist leaders. They say that the organization with
which they are in contact is equally flexible in its views about a leader.
None of the men mentioned, however, sounds like a really strong
figure who could command general support.
CIA and NEA believe that the ability of a new Government to
maintain itself following a coup would depend upon the prompt avail-
ability of political and financial support from Britian and the United
States and the early conclusion of an oil agreement. We gather that the
British concur in this. The British Government, however, would prob-
ably not be willing to offer to the new Government anything substan-
tially better in the way of an oil settlement than the proposals it would
be prepared to make to Dr. Mosadeq. It would rely, therefore, on a
more reasonable attitude on the part of the new regime and on the mo-
bilization of moderate public opinion in Iran to induce that regime to
accept these proposals.
Discussion:
The talks on the British paper started out on an informal and
strictly exploratory basis, at the express request of the British. The
change in the British attitude regarding a coup d’e´tat has now con-
verted them into something much more immediate and definite and
seems to require serious attention at a high level. (Sir Christopher Steel
has requested an appointment with you to discuss the whole matter.)
At the moment, we are called upon to say whether we are willing seri-
ously to consider the suggestion, so that the covert operating agencies
may know whether it is worth their while to get into detailed study of
the technical aspects, (which would involve considerable exchange of
highly sensitive information,) or whether we think the project should
be dropped here and now. Two British intelligence representatives
have come to Washington especially for this discussion but will be
leaving early next week unless the subject is to be pursued.
We could agree seriously to consider the coup d’e´tat proposal
without committing ourselves to its eventual execution, but it must be
recognized that we would be making a considerable step in that direc-
tion. The final decision to attempt it or not might have to be made by
the first of January, since the covert agencies say next April or May
would be the best time to make the move and about four months of
preparation would be necessary.
