Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 3. To exploit the foregoing in the We have made excellent progress development of more accommopolitically; here especially notedating North-South relations, worthy is the breakthrough in both political and economic, Panama and the formulation of a thereby reducing the hostility new policy towards Latin toward the United States that in America, a policy no longer recent years has developed based on a single slogan but one within the Third World. which recognizes both the importance of bilateral relations with individual Latin American countries and the global character of many of their concerns. However, so far we have not done enough to formulate an economic policy dealing with North-South problems. 4. To push U.S.-Soviet strategic We have made progress on a arms limitation talks into strawide range of bilateral issues tegic arms reduction talks, to and are pressing to get SALT. At widen the scope of Americanthe same time, we have finally Soviet collaboration by engaging made the Soviets aware that we the Soviet Union in a wider patare concerned over their lack of tern of negotiating relationships, restraint in the use of military thereby making detente both proxies in Africa. We do not exmore comprehensive and pect the cold war to revive and reciprocal. we are prepared both to compete and to cooperate simultaneously. At the same time, we have developed more extensive relations with East European states—both those externally independent and those internally more liberal. 5. To normalize U.S.-Chinese re- We remain committed to such lations in order to preserve the normalization; in the meantime U.S.-Chinese relationship as a we are broadening the scope of major stabilizing factor in the our bilateral relations and have global power balance. recently held mutually useful global consultations. 6. To seek a comprehensive The last year has been one of re- Middle Eastern settlement, markable progress. We are diswithout which the further radiappointed with the most recent calization of the Arab world and Israeli answer, but will continue
