3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
252
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
agreement even earlier. But since the US side thinks in terms of that
timing it is necessary in any case to do everything possible to keep to
this schedule.
It is evident that concluding a new strategic offensive arms limita-
tion agreement remains for both sides the number one task.
These same ends would be served by achieving practical agree-
ments also in the ongoing negotiations, in which our two countries take
part, on other issues of disarmament—such as comprehensive cessa-
tion of nuclear weapon tests, prohibition of chemical weapons, banning
new types and systems of the weapons of mass destruction, limiting
military activities in the Indian Ocean. There is no lack of readiness on
our part to seek agreements on this set of questions and you are aware
of the constructive steps taken by the Soviet Union for finding appro-
priate solutions. Here again we would like to count on a higher degree
of reciprocity, on a constructive approach of the US side. We also ex-
pect a positive response to those of our proposals on which the US has
not yet given us any reply at all.
Quite a lot is to be done this year also in the domain of interna-
tional problems. Time and again experience confirms that practical so-
lutions to these problems cannot be found without close interaction
and cooperation between the USSR and the US. On the other hand, the
efforts of our countries aiming in the same direction, undoubtedly, help
the development of Soviet-US relations to have a beneficial influence
upon the world situation.
Recently I already expounded to you in detail our attitude toward
the developments in the Middle East and there is no need to go into
that again now. I would like only to say that the course of the latest
events in the area fully confirms the correctness of our appraisal of the
situation, i.e. the policy aimed at separate deals in no way brings closer,
but on the contrary, puts off the achievement of an effective compre-
hensive settlement. This policy is directed at circumventing key
problems without the solution of which there cannot be a just and, con-
sequently, a lasting peace in the Middle East. Therefore a sharply nega-
tive reaction of the majority of the Arabs to those deals is quite under-
standable. It cannot be any different. And the matter is not at all of their
extremism of some kind but of the policy and designs of those who re-
tain the occupied Arab lands.
In your letter you express disagreement with the point of view that
the latest US actions in the Middle East are in contravention with the
principles set forth in the Joint Soviet-US Statement of October 1, 1977.4
4 See footnote 2, Document 52.
