666  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
constructed. In view of the BPR’s choice of route the highway will 
be subject to unusual maintenance. With regard to the area of special 
difficulty on the highway, known as the Tapon, it was estimated that 
another $2 million would be needed before it could be completed and 
opened to traffic. The importance of this highway was pointed out to 
the Guatemalans in that it could lead to a great influx of American tour-
ists with consequent economic benefit to Guatemala. The President of 
the Bank of Guatemala commented that Guatemala would need assis-
tance over the next three or four years. Thereafter activities and pro-
grams would ease the balance of payments problem.
At a meeting with members of Congress the claim was made that 
the Wrigley Company discriminates against Guatemalan chicle, paying 
a substantially higher price for Mexican chicle in spite of the fact that 
the Guatemalan product is of better quality.
Members of the Railway Union complained of the practices of the 
International Railways of Central America. They pointed out that the 
prevailing wage of $1.50 for an eight-­hour day is insufficient to provide 
a decent living. They hoped that the United States could bring pressure 
on the IRCA to reach a settlement of the current dispute as this would 
have a great importance on the development of attitudes in Guatemala 
towards the U.S.:4
Guatemala students spoke of the need to “return” Belize to 
Guatemala or at least grant its independence. They also mentioned the 
fact that the University had been trying to seek a $15 million loan in 
the U.S. to complete the University City. Then the students spoke also 
of the need to develop the province of El Petén.
The market women who called on Dr. Eisenhower spoke of the 
difficult conditions of the poor of Guatemala and the need to make sure 
that U.S. assistance filtered down to the poor and the working class.
A delegation of the Central African Unionist Party called in an 
attempt obtain a U.S. declaration that it looks with favor on the re-­
establishment of a Central American federation.
At a press conference, Dr. Eisenhower was asked to comment about 
a Pro-Communist student communiqué which mentioned alleged U.S. 
tutelage of Guatemala. He replied that he regretted the fact that tech-
nical assistance, grant aid and loans might be interpreted by some as 
4 Guatemalans attributed the railroad’s policies to the United States because U.S. 
nationals owned and headed the company. An agreement, based on Guatemalan court 
decisions, ended the dispute effective March 1, 1959, in favor of the company’s posi-
tion. In despatch 487 of March 11, the Embassy pointed out that grievances persisted 
and “the men willing to exploit them are prepared to do so when the time seems ripe.” 
(814.062/3–1159).
