270  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
(3) Cessation of ballistic missile telemetry encryption and data 
denial.
(4) Ballistic missile reentry-­vehicle inspection. Each side would 
demonstrate its reentry-­vehicle inspection procedures on one of its mis-
siles chosen by the other side.
(5) Demonstration of the U.S. concept for tagging ballistic missiles 
and the Soviet concept of registration in order to facilitate technical 
exchanges on promising approaches.
In addition, I believe that we can benefit by agreeing to two addi-
tional measures that, while not a part of the START treaty, would 
enhance strategic stability.
(1) Following on your suggestion to Secretary Baker, the United 
States is prepared to address the problem of short-­time-­of-­flight 
(depressed trajectory) SLBMs.
(2) The United States suggests that the two countries implement 
the proposal to notify the largest strategic exercise each year that was 
discussed in an exchange of letters between then-Secretary of Defense 
Carlucci and Minister of Defense Yazov.
I am confident that if we can reach agreement and implement mea-
sures such as these, it would facilitate early agreement on the START 
treaty.
Finally, let me note that I remain committed to preserving U.S. 
options for development and deployment of strategic defenses when 
they are ready. We believe that defenses can enhance mutual security 
and stability, particularly when introduced at a measured pace and in 
a cooperative manner. Although I know you have disagreed with this 
view in the past, I hope that you will rethink your position and that we 
can continue to discuss the subject between the two of us. We need to 
narrow the conceptual gap that now divides us on this issue.
The United States will work hard to find creative approaches to 
address the problems outlined above. An agreement that contributes 
to a stable environment at the strategic nuclear level will enhance 
our joint security, that of our allies and of the international system 
as a whole. Personal communication between us will help bridge our 
differences.
Sincerely, With Respect,
George Bush
His Excellency
Mikhail Gorbachev
Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the  
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Moscow
End Text.
