138 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Dr. Brzezinski: Suggest that we leave the UN channel only for negotiating; and that we ask the French to carry the threat to Tehran. The President: I would prefer to tell the chargé, and we notify the French, British, Germans, etc. I want to stop the trials. You decide, Cy, how to get to Khomeini. My decision is as indicated above. Secretary Vance: Ambassadors will call on heads of government in Paris, London, Bonn to carry out. Who will tell Waldheim? Dr. Brzezinski: How do we convey it to Khomeini? Admiral Turner: Entezam could be a channel. Dr. Brzezinski asks should we separate the negotiating process from the Shah initiative? Both together might be too much. The President: The negotiating process won’t work. On diplomats, I feel strongly, but will defer to Cy. On punitive steps later, Jody’s idea of closing down their ports for how long the prisoners were held is good. Attachment Paper7 Undated Points Given Iranian Envoys by Rafi Ahmad 11/17/79 1. Release of personnel held in the United States Embassy in Tehran and permission to leave the country immediately for all U.S. Government employees. 2. Establishment of an international commission to enquire into allegations of grave violations of human rights in Iran under the former regime. 3. The Government of the United States will raise no objection to any legal recourse in the courts of the United States by Government of Iran in relation to its demand concerning assets which in its view have been illegally taken out of the country by the Shah. 4. Affirmation by the Government of Iran and the United States to abide strictly by the declaration on principles of international law concerning friendly relations and cooperation among states in accordance with the charter of the United Nations, and by the provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. [header and 4 paragraphs (21 lines) not declassified.] 7 Secret; Eyes Only; Highly Sensitive Sources. Carter initialed the first page.
