Chile  289
U.S. legislation, saying that with these two destroyers the position of 
the GOC vis-­a-­vis its armed forces would be much improved and that, 
therefore, U.S. assistances in obtaining these two destroyers and the 
one submarine still lacking is grandly desired.
Mr. Rubottom replied that our whole approach to inter-American 
military cooperation has been based on our support of hemispheric 
defense and not on bilateral problems between countries. With respect 
to the specific items mentioned by the Minister of Defense, the Chilean 
Ambassador in Washington has made this point well on several occa-
sions, he continued. Nevertheless, Mr. Rubottom added, we have a dif-
ficult budgetary problem and also the matter of Congressional interest 
in and attention to hemispheric military affairs, which seems likely to 
increase and which at times virtually ties the hands of the Department. 
Moreover, he went on, the naval legislation of 1958 had originally pro-
vided for the recipient nations to pay for the rehabilitation of the naval 
vessels involved, but the Department, feeling that such rehabilitation 
costs would be a burden to Latin American countries, had asked the 
Congress for authorization to assure responsibility for these rehabilita-
tion costs ourselves. This attempt to be generous has, in effect, delayed 
implementation of the program in Latin America for almost two years.
With respect to the credit to Argentina for military purchases, 
Mr. Rubottom said, it totaled 12.7 million dollars, of which 6 million 
was for aircraft, a small amount for the rehabilitation of our subma-
rines, and the balance of 3 or 4 million for army equipment. We have no 
Military agreement with Argentina, he continued, but we nevertheless 
felt impelled to grant this credit on a politico-­moral basis, considering 
that the [illegible in the original] of the whole continent is enhanced 
by the consistency of constitutional government in Argentina. He had 
hoped that with this minimum military assistance it might be possi-
ble to contribute to the continuance of Argentina on the constitutional 
path, he went on, noting that we do not consider that the GOA has any 
aggressive intent.
