Non-Proliferation
947
cannot manage. We believe it may be possible to deal with such ap-
provals on a generic basis within the framework of the restriction on re-
processing that we are now considering proposing.
Our approval right on reprocessing is the main issue in the renego-
tiation of our nuclear cooperation agreements. We have signed a new
agreement with Australia and initialed one with Norway.4 Our negoti-
ations are well under way with Finland and several other countries.
Reaching agreed conditions on reprocessing would allow us to move
forward with our renegotiation program in particular with EURATOM
and Japan.
Beyond the fuel cycle consensus we are seeking, we also face cer-
tain critical cases posing a high risk of proliferation. Pakistan’s sensitive
nuclear programs aim at achieving an explosives capability, directly
challenging efforts to restrain proliferation. We are working with other
suppliers to restrain sensitive exports to Pakistan, while exploring
internally and with other governments various approaches to the
problem.
At the same time, we do not believe that India will agree to place
all its peaceful nuclear activities under IAEA safeguards by March 1980
as the law requires for continued US cooperation, and the collapse of
the Desai Government raises new uncertainties about India’s future nu-
clear course.5 We have not been successful in gaining South Africa’s
agreement to adhere to the NPT or to accept IAEA safeguards on its en-
richment activities. Meanwhile, we believe South Africa is already pro-
ducing weapons-grade enriched uranium. Finally, the FRG contract
with Brazil for the transfer of sensitive nuclear technology, while en-
countering some delays and difficulties, remains intact with sensitive
facilities planned to come online in Brazil in the mid-to-late 1980’s. This
situation is complicated by Argentina’s plans for the indigenous devel-
opment of a reprocessing facility.
All these critical cases pose difficult challenges for us this year and
beyond. On other non-proliferation issues, we also foresee a difficult
1980 scenario that we believe we should signal to you. The following
sequence is likely:
—A final INFCE conference in February whose formal results are
extremely modest in comparison to the hopes we originally enter-
tained, but which may still discomfit many of our nuclear partners, es-
pecially the developing countries.
4 The United States signed an agreement concerning the peaceful use of nuclear en-
ergy with Australia on July 5 and initialed an agreement with Norway on nuclear cooper-
ation on May 11.
5 Indian Prime Minister Moraji Desai resigned, July 15, after Deputy Prime Minister
Charan Singh and Minister of Health Raj Narain withdrew from his ruling Janata Party.
