Human Rights Action Being Taken —The Deputy Secretary is asking IO to expand on the above for an “Agenda for US Action on Human Rights at the United Nations.” For HRCG review by April 5.39 At the Organization of American States (OAS), the US should capitalize on the significant potential of the Inter-American Human Rights Commission (IAHRC). ARA has come up with the following proposals. a. Budget Increase. The IAHRC would develop a program justifying a supplementary budget increase request from the OAS to increase substantially its present annual funding of around $463,000. OAS funding of the proposal would be far preferable to another US contribution since it would strengthen the multilateral credentials of the IAHRC and avoid the procedural problems which endangered acceptance this year of our special contribution. b. Program of Annual Visits. The IAHRC should use much of the money, members, and staff to schedule an annual visit by a memberor-staff team to almost every OAS member country. Obviously, visits to countries from which there are few if any complaints would be largely pro forma. If such a visit became an annual practice (at least while the present high level of human rights violations continues), the nations that are serious violators could not refuse to receive or cooperate with the investigating team on the basis that they are being singled out unjustly. We have checked with the Legal Adviser’s Office and confirmed that the US can and should cooperate with an IAHRC investigation of human rights complaints in the United States and such constituent territories as Puerto Rico and possibly the Canal Zone. c. Annual Investigations of Human Rights Complaints Against Cuba. For reasons of equity and to counteract the argument of right-wing governments that left-wing violators were being ignored, we would encourage an annual investigation of human rights complaints against Cuba. Of course, a visit to Cuba by the IAHRC would presumably be impossible as long as Cuba remains a non-participating member of the OAS. d. Annual Debate on Human Rights Situations. We would push strongly for debate on the human rights situation in each country reported on in appropriate OAS bodies, especially in this June’s annual General Assembly. Our OAS delegate would take care to acknowledge improvements, as well as to denounce violations. e. Educational Programs. We will push and flesh out a program of Inter-American education in the human rights area which we plan to 39 Christopher bracketed this point and wrote in the margin: “ok, WC.”
