Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Amb. Bogdan stated that he had attended a 10-member conference in Geneva at which Jules Moch5 had said that the question of troops was not difficult to verify. (C) Mr. Aaron replied that we might have agreed until we had run into this discrepancy. The Soviets hoped that we would set aside the question of data; however, this was an extremely important issue politically. (C) Amb. Bogdan reaffirmed his intention to stay in the States until the question of MFN had been resolved. (C) In closing, Mr. Aaron said that he hoped he would be able to see Amb. Bogdan again before he left. (U) 5 Former French politician, and member of the French Government in the Fourth Republic, as well as former French Representative to the UN Commission on Disarmament from 1951 until 1960. 217. Editorial Note On July 6, 1979, Matthew Nimetz, Counselor of the Department of State, met with Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Director for North American Affairs Corneliu Bogdan and Romanian Ambassador to the United States Nicolae Ionescu as well as with representatives of Jewish-American organizations. The Romanian officials informed Nimetz that they had reached an understanding with the Jewish-American organizations on Jewish emigration. The agreement, reported to Bucharest in telegram 177424, July 9, provided that the Chief Rabbi of Romanian Jewry would issue a statement to the community noting that it was “the policy of the Romanian Government to act expeditiously on applications of Jews who seek to be reunited with family members outside of Romania,” that Bucharest would “supply a list of Romanian Jews who make application and the date the applications are filed,” and that Romanian Jews who wished to emigrate could also write Israel to seek letters of support for their case which Jewish groups would use to make a list of people wishing to emigrate. Based on the understanding, Alfred Moses of the American Jewish Committee told Nimetz that the Jewish organization would now support extension of most-favored-nation status to Romania. While cautioning that the understanding was not an agreement with the United States Government, Nimetz noted that the administration was “pleased with and
