North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 863 c) an overdraft with the Bank or IMF would require changes in their respective Charter and Articles of Agreement; such changes could be difficult to obtain and would risk further undesirable amendments; d) establishment of such an overdraft facility could result in drawing away funds for economic development purposes in the case of the Bank and for anti-recessionary balance of payments financing in the case of the IMF, when the need for such financing would be greatest. “Other Measures” 13. Seek a commitment by developed countries to support increased attention by the World Bank to commodity problems in connection with the proposed general capital increase. This step—together with agreement by the developed countries that the objectives of ICAs could include financing of product improvement and R&D programs—would be a defensible answer to LDC insistence that a common fund finance other measures. The disadvantages are: a) we are not in a position to “earmark” a future general capital increase; b) the LDCs will argue they are destined to receive the benefits of a general capital increase in any event and that there is, therefore, no additionality; and c) they will view this step as a ploy to subvert their concept of a common fund, which directly addresses “other measures” and, therefore, contains something of interest to virtually every LDC. 14. Provide for an advisory role for the fund on other measures. Here, the fund’s membership would issue “recommendations” to other institutions to undertake “other measures” where traditional price stabilizing agreements are not feasible. While this might seem better than nothing to some LDCs and innocuous to many developed countries, it accepts a definite role for the fund on other measures, thus paving the way for pressure to move from “advising” to “financing,” and would almost certainly result in a new large international bureaucracy. 15. Provide for voluntary contributions to a second window for the financing of other measures. This would provide an outlet for any voluntary contributions, including those from OPEC, and also perhaps satisfy the LDCs that the fund would have a financing role on other measures. On the other hand, in addition to the disadvantages cited in 14) above, it would be difficult for the US to resist the inevitable pressure on us to contribute to the second window, which would become in effect a new aid institution requiring periodic replenishment. A second window is thus inconsistent with our position, and that of most OECD countries, that there is no economic justification for common fund financing of non-stabilization measures. 16. We should bear in mind that there is no certainty that changes in the US approach would bridge the wide gap between the industrialized countries and the LDCs. An arduous negotiation thus appears inevitable. Moreover, our support for consumer-country participation in
