46 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX some of the more “normal” aspects of relations such as increased cultural exchanges, reasonably normal commercial relations and political level visits without expecting major concessions from the GDR first. Humanitarian concerns and developments in Berlin would of course continue to play a role in determining the pace of the development of relations. Option IV would thus not mean any major steps forward with the GDR nor connote any effort by the United States to replace Soviet influence or destabilize the GDR. It would represent, in view of the GDR’s strategic importance to us, an effort to move the bilateral relationship along faster so as to: provide the basis for a long-term US presence in the GDR; develop a better understanding of it; and, by giving the GDR’s technologically based industry some stake in the Western market, give the GDR an additional stake in not raising the temperature in Berlin. Implications for trade policy Option III advocates would stress the leverage on human rights issues that resides in the decision to expand Eastern European trade. They would observe that Eastern European regimes place the highest value on increased economic efficiency and improved living standards as virtual requisites for relatively stable political situations. These regimes and their peoples see expanded economic relations with the West, including the US, as a major avenue toward those priority goals. But, from the US side, it is pointed out, Eastern European trade is unlikely to be a significant factor in US foreign trade. The GDR is the only country that now has significant market possibilities in the West for its engineering and high technology exports. Consequently, before opening the doors to expanded trade via MFN/credits, the US should exert the leverage involved to require greater liberalization by the more restrictive Eastern European regimes. The US can afford to wait. Option IV adherents observe that with the more massive imports of oil the US faces a mounting and continuing problem in achieving a reasonable balance in its foreign trade. While not a large item in US foreign trade, Eastern European trade can make some contribution to the balance of payments (and US employment), as our trade balance with Eastern Europe has been and is likely to continue to be favorable. Expanded trade also creates a tangible and increasing stake in continued good relations with the US and develops broadened contacts and points of influence which, over time, will make these countries more conscious of and attentive to our interests, including our human rights concerns. This follow-up paper has taken account of the problem of Eastern European indebtedness discussed in the original PRM–9 study. None-
