World Hunger and Food Policy
799
• Direct USDA to follow up on the action to increase farmer incen-
tives to assure that at least the minimum amounts of grain (wheat and
feed) mandated by the Congress are under loan by the required time so
that a farmer-held domestic market stabilization reserve will provide a
certain amount of much needed world food security for developing
countries.
• Pledge 25 percent of the next annual replenishment of the UN
emergency gain reserve. The U.S. contribution would be up to 125,000
tons, and could be supplied under the emergency relief provisions of
P.L. 480, Title II at no additional cost.
5. Improve the Management of Our Food Aid Program
Many Americans think of world hunger as simply a shortage of
enough food, and look to U.S. food aid to provide an immediate and
adequate response. Since 1954, when P.L. 480 was enacted, 265 million
tons, valued at $26 million, have been made available on grant or con-
cessional terms to various nations. There is little question that there is a
continuing need for U.S. food assistance for the foreseeable future.
In recent years, as world hunger has come to be perceived as a
chronic condition in the developing world, some have questioned the
desirability of continued massive P.L. 480 shipments. Others feel that
an expanded P.L. 480 program is needed, but much of this comes from
farm groups who want to see a market maintained for agricultural sur-
pluses. Significant legislative changes have been made in the last
decade to align P.L. 480 more effectively with the needs of the hungry.
Since 1974, U.S. food aid policy has moved in directions recommended
at the UN World Food Conference, although still further changes are
required if we are to realize progress in reducing hunger and malnutri-
tion and answer the criticism of development advocates that U.S. food
aid is no more than a commodity export program.
Major problems remain in ensuring that food aid reaches the most
needy, effectively meets emergency needs, and contributes to advance-
ment of LDC development objectives. In order to meet the President’s
mandate that our aid reach the poorest people, it will be necessary to
streamline the currently cumbersome decision making process used in
administering the U.S. food aid program. The President has made a
highly important decision in setting a minimum U.S. commitment
to contribute 4.47 million tons annually under the new Food Aid
Convention.31
31 See Document 243.
