Chapter 2, January–June 1989 139 DST 002—Deployment rights after a non-­withdrawal period. Our current position (option 1), would explicitly give the sides the right to deploy defenses after a non-­withdrawal period, upon giving six months notice. The rationale behind this position is that we are trading our non-­withdrawal pledge for freedom to deploy defenses after the non-­withdrawal period. This quid pro quo was worked out between President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev at the Washington Summit. Option 2 is to reevaluate our Defense & Space objectives at the Cabinet level, and not to resume negotiations until we have done so. This option reflects the concern of some that the current U.S. position could imply to the Soviets that the U.S. will go beyond the ABM Treaty on a certain date, and push them to do the same, when in fact the U.S. may not then be prepared to deploy ABM defenses for political, technical, or budgetary reasons. In that event, we could find ourselves in a situation in which the Soviets deploy defenses but we do not. Others believe that the only practical effect of our current position would be to relieve the U.S. of the political burden of withdrawing from the ABM Treaty, which does not apply to the Soviet Union. The Soviets now could withdraw from the ABM Treaty on 6 months notice. 2. START Reductions and Stability. Our goal in START should be stability and reduced risk of war, not reductions per se, but our shift in emphasis from “reductions” to “stability” needs to be handled in a way that recognizes the political risks of appearing to abandon “deep reductions.” The discussion paper2 concludes that present START reductions (to 1600 missiles and heavy bombers; 4900 ballistic missile warheads; 6000 total accountable warheads) are acceptable. There are two issues in the discussion paper: ICBM Warhead Sublimit. Should we retain the 3000–3300 ICBM warhead sublimit, which the Soviets have not accepted? At issue is whether the negotiator should indicate flexibility to the Soviets and seek a trade. On the one hand, this limit probably would not impose additional constraints on Soviet forces as long as we get the other warhead and throwweight reductions the Soviets seem prepared to accept. Others believe, however, that such a subceiling may limit future Soviet options to field a first strike ICBM force. Heavy ICBMs. We will discuss this in greater detail at a subsequent NSC meeting. The Soviets already have agreed to reduce their “heavy” SS-18 ICBM by 50 percent. At issue is whether to satisfy our political and legal requirement for U.S.-Soviet equality, originally articulated in the SALT I Jackson amendment, by seeking the elimination of all heavy 2 Attached but not printed. See Tab B, Document 24.
