National Security Policy  897
overseas. The President commented that he has not pressed the Army 
for cuts this year. He added that other nations are profiting from the 
presence of our forces and building up their reserves while we serve 
as the world’s banker.
The President said he realized the problem of the individual Chiefs 
before Congress. They demand the “personal views” of the Chiefs. 
General Lemnitzer said they frequently ask what was the original rec­
ommendation made by the Chiefs.
The President then turned to the question of the B–70. General 
White showed charts showing the declining trends in major aspects of 
the Air Force program. He said the Air Force is cutting personnel and 
units in order to maintain modernization. The President said that he 
had approved the B–58 program going ahead at a reduced level as part 
of our interim defense measures. He said the B–70 left him cold in terms 
of making military sense. General White conceded that there are great 
questions involved, but thought we would be going too fast and too 
far to eliminate it at this time. He said it is the only aircraft left in the 
Air Force under development. He had dropped the F–108 a short while 
ago. Both of these were intended to be mach 3, 2,100 mile per hour air­
craft. He weighed carefully which one to drop. The primary deterrent 
to date has been the manned bomber and he did not feel we could rely 
wholly on missiles, none of which have ever been used in combat, at 
this time. Unless nuclear testing is resumed, we would find ourselves 
in the position of never having fired the one weapon we are completely 
dependent upon. The President said he would have no objection to 
testing a missile with a live warhead less the nuclear core—the TNT 
could be fired. General White said that the missiles give the President 
no options. Bombers could be gotten aloft to await orders, but mis­
siles cannot be called back. Bombers give the enemy a difficult defense 
problem since he must defend against several kinds of attack. There is 
also the psychological effect of manning static weapons like the Coast 
Artillery of olden days, where training was done with the blitz cloth. 
He said that bombers can be seen by friend and foe alike and that they 
have a powerful psychological impact. If the Soviets were to produce 
an aircraft of this kind it would create great problems for us. He said 
he would beg that the B–70 be carried as a bare minimum research and 
development program at the level of $200 million this year. He said this 
is a very different aircraft from anything that has gone before. It must 
pass through the heat barrier and the shape of wing and fuselage must 
be studied out. The President said he understood the Hounddog mis­
sile is very successful and that it can be fired from a B–52 several hun­
dred miles away from the target. The B–70 will not be in production 
before a date eight to ten years from now. He thought that was getting
