Chapter 2, January–June 1989 55 two sides would negotiate a new agreement (separate from START but commencing simultaneously with it) that would commit each party to abide by the ABM Treaty and not exercise its right of withdrawal from that Treaty for an agreed length of time. In the two years following Reykjavik, however, minimal progress was made on the terms of such an agreement. Following are brief discussions of the key issues. Permitted Activities. The most important and contentious issue has concerned what ABM activities, particularly space-­based testing, would be permitted during the ABM nonwithdrawal period. The Soviets, who originally proposed a ban on all SDI scientific research (which would be far more restrictive than any interpretation of the ABM Treaty), later offered two alternatives, both of which they claim are based on the “narrow” interpretation (as they put it, the ABM Treaty “as signed and ratified in 1972”): — Arguing (with justification) that the ABM Treaty’s applicability to advanced technologies requires clarification, they proposed a package of technical parameters that would limit the characteristics of ABM devices that could be tested in space. Some of their parameters seemed reasonable; others seemed more restrictive than the narrow interpretation. — Alternatively, they are prepared simply to incorporate into the D&S agreement the ambiguous formulation on testing that was adopted at the 1987 Washington summit to paper over differences. Their willingness to settle for ambiguity suggests that, having failed to gain U.S. acceptance of explicit restrictions on SDI, they may intend to pursue a strategy of relying on domestic pressures rather than legal limits to keep SDI in bounds. Under such a strategy, a D&S agreement containing an ambiguous testing provision would be concluded, together with a START Treaty. Then, hoping to stimulate public and Congressional opposition to any future SDI tests that even approached the ambiguous area, the Soviets would threaten to terminate START if the U.S. violated the limits on testing. The U.S. has sought, without success, to gain formal acceptance of the “broad” interpretation (which would allow realistic testing in space of fully integrated, advanced ABM systems and fully capable components of such systems—­not just tests of reduced-­capability sub-­ components of such systems which would be allowed under the “narrow” interpretation). We have rejected the Soviet idea of negotiating technical thresholds that would divide permitted from prohibited tests. Although State supported this idea (and believed thresholds could be worked out that would meet SDI requirements and resolve the interpretation controversy with Congress), the President ruled against it on the grounds that it would be hard to verify and that we should not compromise any of our testing rights under the broad interpretation.
