1956 969 some evidence to point to to show it is not being “unreasonable” in its opposition to Communist China. 4. Our Tactics Vis-­a-­vis New Draft—Wang’s new draft has a lot of bargaining room built in. We can exploit this for two or three months, at least. Here, however, is a point: in order to get the most mileage out of the new draft, it would be a tremendous help to have some idea of the Department’s thinking on strategy. One approach on the new draft, designed to get mileage, would be to go through the thing paragraph by paragraph. The first paragraph alone, for example, would be good for three or four meetings. However, in planning this kind of approach, it would be helpful to know more about our objectives. If we are going to be really adamant on the first paragraph as per our April 19 draft, for example, we should save discussion of the paragraph until the last, since once we start insisting on ICSD without “mutual respect” we have put a term to the mileage we can get out of the new draft. What would enable us to get the most mileage would be if we had a “minimum position” draft towards which we could work point by point and paragraph by paragraph—such a draft would, of course, not be tabled until all possible mileage had been squeezed out of Wang’s new draft. 5. A “Minimum-­Position” Draft—In the enclosure, I have tried my hand at such a draft. This does not represent my opinion of what would be desirable in the way of a declaration if we had carte blanche. It is merely a sample of the kind of thing that would be a very useful guide for us in getting mileage out of Wang’s draft. In drafting the enclosure, I have tried to protect our position on three points: (a) no sacrifice of self-­defense right; (b) renunciation of force applicable to Taiwan; and, (c) U.S. control over whether and when FMC to be held, with implication in any event not until ­Americans released. The last paragraph in particular is rather treacherous ground, but in any case, the whole enclosure is purely illustrative and not intended as a concrete suggestion. As to whether Wang would “buy” the enclosed, I have my doubts, but I think it is at least conceivable. He would certainly look darn unrea­ sonable if he turned it down. Whether or not he would buy it, such a draft would at least help us get mileage out of Wang’s draft. Hope I haven’t presumed too much on your time. Regards to Doug, Steve, Joe, Allene, Irene, Elaine. Regards and sincere thanks to Walter and Mr. Sebald—and Cappy. Sincerely yours, David L. Osborn
