1000  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
far been too successful. Nor do I expect to be successful. The only real 
way that I can be successful in forestalling their going to the public and 
keeping things rolling along here would be to counter their drafts with 
drafts of our own or being given some flexibility in impliedly or specifi­
cally discussing changes in their drafts and thus keep the situation fluid 
and confused. My flatly rejecting his drafts and he flatly rejecting my 
drafts does not give me very much room for manuveuring.
I greatly appreciate being consulted on our proposed action in 
regard to Chinese prisoners and yesterday sent off my thoughts in my 
1928. I should perhaps have made it clear in there that my thought 
with regard to not giving publicity to the matter applies only to the 
initial stage and a suitable period to see what response it brings from 
the Communists. I also think that we ought to wait and see what the 
actual results are in terms of numbers, etc. before giving it any public 
buildup. If the results are justified and response from the ­Communists 
is not satisfactory, we could then profitably pull out the stops on 
publicity.
With regard to the fourth paragraph of your Letter No. 43, 
I should think it would be preferable to have O’Neill wait on any note 
not only till we see if Clifford and Phillips are released and until we 
see what results our action with regard to the Chinese prisoners seems 
to be producing. I would hope that at the minimum it would produce 
fairly prompt action on the part of the Communists to tell O’Neill 
that he can see the remaining American prisoners. If it does not, then 
I believe O’Neill should by all means follow up with a full represen­
tation which would point up the disparity between the United States 
and ­Communist actions.
[text not declassified]
As I wrote Bill Sebald from Prague, I have for many reasons 
accepted an invitation to give the commencement address at the 
­Nurnberg Army High School on Thursday, June 14. If you are agree­
able back there I am thinking of skipping the meeting for that week 
unless, of course, there are developments which would make this 
clearly undesirable. In view of Wang’s previous requests to which 
I have agreed, I think that I could do this without any special implica­
tions being read into it by them. I have not decided whether I would 
do it by canceling the meeting by telephone as he has done or by put­
ting it to him straight at the previous meeting. Let me know if you 
have any thoughts or views on this.
Regards to all.
Sincerely yours,
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
