members of the Morgan firm (Messrs. Morgan and Lamont, as the
Chancellor tells me). The story, as I hear it, is that Mr. Montagu Norman8
… established contacts for him with Mr. Morgan and his partners. The
invitation followed. The Austrian Minister sails tomorrow, I believe, for a
three weeks’ visit, and will be in the United States at an opportune moment
around the middle of October, when it is anticipated that the necessary
sanctions will have been obtained or assured. Franckenstein, so Dr. Seipel
informs me, does not go to the United States with any power of attorney
whatever. There have been printed reports this last week (the Stunde had an
article on Thursday the 15th, and the Neues Wiener Journal on Friday the
16th) to the effect that an “Austrian personality”, whose identity does not
seem to have been discovered, is about to sound the big New York banks in
the matter of a federal loan. The Neues Wiener Journal says that
negotiations are pending for a 120 million dollar loan for Austria, a 50
million dollar loan for Bulgaria and a 45 million dollar loan for Greece.
In this connection, the investment program referred to on page 4 of my
before mentioned despatch No. 1508, which will be presented to the
Austrian Control Committee on October 11, is herewith enclosed.9 This
document contains:
I. An expose of the Austrian Federal Household for the years
1923–27;
II. Investment requirements for the years 1928–32;
III. An analysis of the Reconstruction Loan;
IV. A table showing the amount of bonds issued in liquidation of
outstanding obligations.
This exhibit can hardly be further profitably summarized, but it should
prove a useful aid to the State and Treasury in passing upon questions
relating to the new proposed loan. It will perhaps be helpful in any
exhaustive study of this matter, to compare annex I (Expose of the Austrian
Federal Household for the year[s] 1923–27) with some of the tables given
in my despatch No. 1120 of July 31, 1926,10 reviewing the Zimmermann
Control. Exhibit 1 is so far a confidential document. It is not desired that
