Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
745
you will see that our recommendations encompassed about 80% of
what the Administration finally decided to do about Afghanistan.5 We
are in complete agreement with that policy. (C)
The President. Did you get a copy of my letter to Gromyko? (C)
Ambassador Watson. No, I don’t think so. (U)
The President. You ought to see it. (U)
Ambassador Watson. I have not seen it as yet, but I have been out of
Moscow for some time. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski. Unless you have had an advance copy, you prob-
ably have not seen it, because Warren Christopher will be taking it to
Europe with him to discuss with our allies. But the letter will be deliv-
ered through you in Moscow.6 We think it is important that the Em-
bassy be used more in the future than it has been in the past, when we
relied too much on Dobrynin. You should know that it is the NSC that
has been urging greater utilization of Embassy Moscow. (C)
The President. We will be greatly minimizing our use of Dobry-
nin. (C)
Ambassador Watson. I think that is important. Thank you very much.
I certainly appreciate all the support which you have given me. (C)
The President. Has there been any change in the way they have been
treating you since the Afghanistan crisis began? (C)
Ambassador Watson. Nothing at all. They treat me with the greatest
respect. And I have instant access to high level Soviets. It was for this
reason that I thought it important to see you. I wanted to demonstrate
the importance which you attach to the work of my Embassy. And I in-
tend to go out now and get our message across to every member of the
Politburo. (C)
(The President walked across the room to his desk, took a copy
of his Philadelphia speech from the desk and handed it to the Ambas-
sador.) (C)
The President. This is a basic document. Ed Muskie worked on it.
You ought to take a careful look at it, if you have not read it. (C)
Ambassador Watson. I have not seen it as yet. I think it may have
been given when I had already left Moscow. I will study it carefully.
Thank you very much for your time. I hope that someday we will have
a chance to see you in Moscow. Mrs. Brement has been there recently,
but we have not had many other visitors and no high level visits. (C)
5 Possibly Watson is referring to telegram 28126 from Moscow, December 29, 1979.
In it, he listed various options for U.S. counteractions to the Soviet invasion of Afghani-
stan. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840150–2177)
6 A letter from Muskie to Gromyko about Afghanistan, dated June 5, was delivered
on June 12 by Watson. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Documents
282 and 283.
