Arms Control and Disarmament  1437
375.	 Telegram Secto 13 From John Foster Dulles at USUN1
New York, August 21, 1958, 4 p.m.
Secto 13. For Acting Secretary from Secretary. You may find it use­
ful to have my views on the importance of the inclusion in our proposed 
draft statement on nuclear testing of the sentence: “The agreement 
should also deal with the problem of detonations for peaceful pur­
poses, as distinct from weapons tests”.
I do not believe that any agreement to suspend the “testing of 
atomic and hydrogen weapons” should deny to mankind, perhaps for­
ever, the possibility of using this vast new power for human betterment 
as in creating new harbors and waterways, making available under­
ground sources of water, oil, minerals, etc. To attempt this would be to 
fly in the face of all human experience.
There may or may not be a mechanistic difference between the 
devices which are used for military purposes and the devices used for 
peaceful purposes. Surely there is an immense difference in the moti­
vation. I believe that that difference in motivation justifies a distinction, 
although I recognize that there may be difficulty in implementing this 
criterion in a suspension agreement. Nevertheless it must, in my opin­
ion, be attempted. Also I believe that during the period of self-­denying 
and unsupervised suspension, we should be allowed in good faith to 
exercise our own judgment as to whether the motivation of a nuclear 
explosion by us is militaristic or peaceful. I believe that the statement 
referred to is important because it recognizes that there is a distinction 
between the use of nuclear power for peaceful purposes and for the 
purpose of testing weapons.
Once a distinction is pointed out and so long as our voluntary 
denial is limited only to weapons, then I believe that we can in good 
faith conduct explosions for purposes which are demonstrably peaceful 
and economic.
I realize that this creates a possible loophole for the Soviets during 
the one-­year period. I understand, however, that it is the judgment of 
those who work in this field that they would rather take this chance 
than to forego the peaceful uses, and I, myself, would concur in this 
conclusion.
I should emphasize again my thought that this whole statement is 
designed as a public document which we hope will contribute to our 
prestige and influence in world opinion. It must therefore, in my view, 
1 Source: Transmits Dulles’ views on draft statement on suspension of nuclear test­
ing. Confidential. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700/5611/8–2158.
