110
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
I stress these dangers and these difficulties because I want all of us
to dedicate ourselves to a prolonged and persistent effort designed first
to maintain peace and to reduce the arms race; second, to build a better
and a more cooperative international economic system; and third, to
work with potential adversaries as well as our close friends to advance
the cause of human rights.
In seeking these goals, I realize that the United States cannot solve
the problems of the world. We can sometimes help others resolve their
differences, but we cannot do so by imposing our own particular
solutions.
In the coming months, there is important work for all of us in ad-
vancing international cooperation and economic progress in the cause
of peace.
Later this spring, the leaders of several industrial nations of Eu-
rope, North America, and Japan will confer at a summit meeting in
London on a broad range of issues.3 We must promote the health of the
industrial economies. We must seek to restrain inflation and bring
ways of managing our own domestic economies for the benefit of the
global economy.
We must move forward with multilateral trade negotiations in
Geneva.
The United States will support the efforts of our friends to
strengthen the democratic institutions in Europe, and particularly in
Portugal and Spain.
We will work closely with our European friends on the forth-
coming Review Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.4
We want to make certain that the provisions of the Helsinki agreement
are fully implemented and that progress is made to further East-West
cooperation.
In the Middle East we are doing our best to clarify areas of dis-
agreement, to surface underlying consensus, and to help to develop
mutually acceptable principles that can form a flexible framework for a
just and a permanent settlement.
In southern Africa, we will work to help attain majority rule
through peaceful means. We believe that such fundamental transfor-
mation can be achieved, to the advantage of both the blacks and whites
who live in that region of the world. Anything less than that may bring
a protracted racial war, with devastating consequences to all.
This week the Government of the United States took action to
bring our country into full compliance with United Nations sanctions
3 See footnote 4, Document 26.
4 See footnote 6, Document 16.
