Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX renewed by even a small success will also propel dissident actions. [classification not declassified] The authorities may calculate, perhaps with reason, that time is on their side in the contest. The psychological and personal financial price that dissidents have to pay is difficult for most to bear for a sustained period. Their failure to get results not only adds to their personal discouragement, but makes it difficult to maintain popular interest. [classification not declassified] At least in Poland, however, the dissidents can already claim to have accomplished much, and are working to secure more. If they continue to be allowed relative freedom, their activity could give rise to the claim that a new norm of what is allowable has been wrested from the regime. This, in turn, could encourage other dissidents in Eastern Europe to emulate the Poles, a prospect that could be destabilizing for the area as a whole. A prolonged period of active Polish dissent would increase the risk that chance and miscalculation could lead to violence and possibly to a Soviet intervention. [classification not declassified] At present, East European dissidents can be seen most properly as a small hard core of political “radicals” who do not have the popular support or political leverage to force a change in any of the East European states or to effect a national uprising. Unlike many of the “revisionists” and dissidents of the past, they do not have access to the official media, and are not operating in an environment of acute political discord. The motive force for abrupt political change has most frequently been political factionalism within the establishment (Nagy versus Rakosi; Gomulka versus Ochab; the Slovaks versus Novotny). Dissidence, when it preceded such change, was an indicator of existing political disarray and, frequently, a tool of factional maneuvering. If history is any guide, dissidence will come to play an important role in forcing political change only when it combines with economic problems that acutely affect the consumer and at a time of political upheaval within the ruling elite. [classification not declassified] [Omitted here are the country-specific Table of Contents and country studies for Poland, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, and Romania.]
