1532 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement were only seventy targets, the destruction of which would bring the Soviet Union to defeat. Mr. McCone pointed out that we have the authority and the funds for this new reactor as a result of last year’s legislative action. The President asked if plutonium is useful for fueling power reactors. Mr. McCone indicated it had a certain usefulness but could not replace U–235. The President said he is more worried about the unrealistic atti­ tude of our top military men than the specific proposal he was consid­ ering, and Mr. McCone acknowledged that they talk about megaton explosions as though they are almost nothing. The President asked whether, with more efficient weapons, the trend is toward using less plutonium. Mr. McCone said this trend is offset by the trend towards small and clean weapons which take more plutonium. Finally, the Pres­ ident said he supposed that we have to go ahead with the construction of the reactor. Mr. McCone pointed out that he has not funded the con­ vertible feature; he is trying to get that out of the proposal. He had had this studied by Stone and Webster, and they had recommended against it. The President said he is against the convertible feature. By the time we were ready to make use of that, he was confident that our technol­ ogy would be advanced so far that we would no longer want to use this particular model. He asked Mr. McCone to try to get this provision out. Mr. McCone then turned to the subject of power reactors. Four or five big ones are now being built. The electricity being produced by them will run 12–18 mills per kilowatt hours, in cost. In Mr. McCone’s view, best progress will be found through testing out a lot of technology in prototypes; he doesn’t want to build big plants, but would like to build four or five small ones to prove out and advance the art. At the present time the Government gives R & D assistance and waives fuel costs. The prototypes should be on existing power lines and should be built by power companies. He proposed that we give them some assistance on capital costs on a few prototypes but that we not help on large plants. For our own economy, with but few exceptions, we do not need atomic energy power in the foreseeable future. But to keep the United States in the race industrially and internationally we do need to carry out development, and this would be a good program for the purpose. The President asked what kind of money would be involved. Mr. McCone said he did not know precisely. He is trying to work this out. A prototype producing 50,000 kilowatts, costing about $8 million, seemed to be in the order of magnitude. He said he was talking only in a preliminary way at this time, but that he had received an excellent report, in which Mr. James Black as well as others had participated. The President said he was a little disturbed over the suggestion, since it seemed to be another venture in the direction of public power, and was fearful that Congress would want to put these power plants into the
