. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France doesn’t intend to repudiate any contracts she has made, and her
signature always will be held sacred. But she is convinced that an appeal to
the sentiments of justice which grouped so many nations around her in the
war will not be in vain, and she is convinced that her allies and friends will
respond to the hopes she places in their conscience and their sentiments of
justice and solidarity.”
M. Clémentel is also reported as advancing the argument that France should receive
due compensation for the fact that her soil was the common battle ground; that
inasmuch as the Governments of Britain and the United States collected large sums in
taxes by virtue of expenditures which France made within their borders, the total of
these taxes should be deducted from the French debt; and that advances made by
France to her Allies of some fifteen billion francs should be taken into consideration.
France’s debts to Great Britain and the United States are spoken of as so-called
political debts.
2) Senator Reed, of Pennsylvania, whose friendship for France is well known,
discussed the Clémentel statement in the Senate yesterday. After stating the amount of
the advances to France, Senator Reed pointed out that in order to pay the current
interest which French tax payers should have paid, we have taken from our tax payers
approximately eight hundred million dollars in the last 6 years. He said:
“We have a full understanding of France’s difficulties. We understand how
hard it is for her and for Italy and for Belgium and these other countries to
collect what is coming to them from Germany, and that is why our people
have not wished us to press unduly for the payment of these foreign debts;
but the debtor nations have taken no steps toward refunding the debts, they
have paid no interest upon it, and they have not even given authority to any
of their official representatives to come to any terms with our country toward
refunding.
Mr. Parmentier came here in 1922 absolutely naked of authority to come to
any settlement, or even to recommend any settlement to his own Government
as far as we were able to learn. The French ambassador—Mr. Jusserand—has
done the best that his great talent enables him to do, but he is without
authority. He has done much to keep the situation placid. He deserves the
gratitude of his country to an extent that I believe few of his own countrymen
as yet understand, because his efforts have gone far toward preventing this
question from becoming acute. But now, Mr. President, from France itself,
and from Paris, and from the cabinet of the present administration, comes a
step which our people can not fail to regard as being some evidence of an
