February 1951–February 1952
43
such as assassination of the Shah. In such circumstances the opportu-
nity might be created for an attempt by the Tudeh Party to seize power,
or even for armed intervention by the USSR.
Discussion
The Background of the Crisis
4. The assassination of Premier Razmara by a religious fanatic on 7
March and the ensuing period of uncertainty are direct results of the
agitation for nationalization of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, which
has been building up ever since the rejection by the Majlis in December
1950 of a revised concession agreement offered by the company. This
agitation has been led by a very small group of ultra-nationalists in the
Majlis known as the National Front. One of its leaders, the violently
anti-British religious figure, Mulla Kashani, was reportedly implicated
in the assassination, also by religious fanatics, of another high official in
1949.
5. Tension over the oil issue increased sharply in the period just
preceding the assassination. The National Front stepped up its de-
mands for nationalization, using that issue as a club to attack Razmara,
whose attempts to provide strong government had run counter to its
own attempts to gain a controlling influence. The National Front re-
portedly approached the British with an offer to drop the nationaliza-
tion issue entirely if the British would help get rid of Razmara in favor
of a more acceptable Premier. The British, irritated with Razmara’s
failure to line up support for their position, delivered strong official
warnings against any attempts at nationalization, meanwhile, how-
ever, indicating to Razmara that they were willing to grant a more gen-
erous concession agreement along the lines of that recently concluded
by Saudi Arabia and the Arabian-American Oil Company. Razmara
was persuaded to go before the Majlis Oil Commission with a state-
ment prepared for him by the British emphasizing the practical diffi-
culties of nationalization. In his presentation on 3 March, Razmara (to
the irritation of the British) was careful to label the statement as one
prepared by technical experts rather than his own. The statement, how-
ever, still brought down the wrath of the ultra-nationalists upon him
and may well have furnished the immediate incentive (or pretext) for
his murder.
The Development of the Crisis
6. The assassination produced no immediate repercussions.
Tehran was quiet, with the public evidently unconcerned. The pro-
Soviet Tudeh Party was evidently taken by surprise. The Shah, after
briefly considering the invocation of martial law, decided against such
a move and contented himself with the designation of an innocuous
elder statesman as acting Premier.
