National Security Policy  925
b. The probable future development of the US nuclear retaliatory 
force.
We have assumed for the Soviet ICBM the performance characteris­
tics estimated for it at various dates in NIE 11–5–59, “Soviet Capabilities 
in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles,” dated 3 November 1959. Soviet 
planners may expect a better performance, in which case their esti­
mates of the numbers required would be lower than ours. However, 
we would expect them to use conservative assumptions in making so 
vital a calculation.
With respect to Soviet targeting, we have assumed that existing 
approved US military programs will be carried out. Explicit information 
on these programs is presumably not available to Soviet planners, but 
we believe that they have enough general information from open sources 
to be able to estimate them with fair accuracy. These US programs are, 
of course, subject to change—as is the Soviet ICBM program also. The 
present Soviet ICBM program, however, must be based on the present 
Soviet estimate of the probable future development of the target system.
It is beyond the scope of this estimate to consider what political or 
military courses of action the USSR might adopt if the development of 
its strategic attack capabilities were to be as estimated herein. Such mat­
ters will be considered in the forthcoming NIE 11–4–59, “Main Trends 
in Soviet Capabilities and Policies, 1959–1964.”
CONCLUSIONS
A. The Soviet rulers probably regard their present strategic attack 
forces as capable of devastating US and Allied concentrations of popu­
lation and industry, but incapable of preventing, by military action, the 
nuclear devastation of the USSR. (Para. 26)
B. The ICBM presents the best prospect of being able to deliver a 
heavy weight of attack within the least time after a decision to attack, 
and thereby to prevent the launching or reduce the weight of a US stra­
tegic attack on the USSR. Hence, we believe that the future develop­
ment of Soviet intercontinental attack capabilities will be primarily a 
function of the development, production, and deployment of ICBMs. 
Soviet ICBM capabilities will be supplemented by the development of 
a submarine-­launched missile capability and by the maintenance of a 
substantial long-­range bomber capability. (Paras. 30–33)
C. Our analysis shows that a crucial question for this estimate is 
whether the Soviet rulers would consider it feasible to achieve in 1961, 
through a rapid deployment of operational ICBMs, such a military, 
political, and psychological advantage over the US as would enable 
them to impose their will. After 1961 the numbers of semihardened and 
hardened US ICBM sites programmed to become operational would 
result in a steep increase in Soviet ICBM requirements. (Para. 36)
