968 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Further diplomatic consideration common to all potential sites is the reaction to the employment of nuclear explosives for construction. The problem of creating the proper psycho-­political atmosphere will require an exhaustive testing and development program in the continental United States to prove that no harmful effects would be suffered by local populations. Moreover, our commitments under any future international agreements on nuclear controls would have to be considered. In the light of these considerations, I believe it is premature to attempt within the near future to select a location for a sea level canal replacement of the Panama Canal. The Report of the Panama Canal Company which the Cabinet has considered estimates that if its recommendations are accepted we have approximately ten years to prepare the way for negotiations on a location of our own selection. While I believe there are strong advantages in your making a decision in principle in favor of a sea level canal—­should the National Security Council so recommend—I believe the location should be deferred until we have had an opportunity to formulate and implement policies which might considerably improve the prospects of long-­range stability within both Panama and Colombia. DOUGLAS DILLON Acting Secretary PM–49. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, Prepared in the Office of the Secretary of State1 Washington, August 9, 1960. MEMORANDUM OF TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH THE PRESIDENT The President telephoned and said normally he never sends any message to the Secretary by one of his Ambassadors, but the President said he had just been talking to our new Ambassador to Panama2 about the problems still there and that Ambassador Farland brought up something the President never knew, i.e. he said that Harrington started the custom of flying our flag only 37 days a year over our Embassy. The President said he told Farland that with Harrington 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers, Telephone Conversations. The conversation began at 12:10 p.m. 2. Harrington was Ambassador to Panama until July 14, 1960. Joseph S. Farland was appointed Ambassador on June 24 and presented his credentials in Panama City on August 29.
