Chapter 5, May–June 1990  787
this is a question that requires a series argument. It isn’t possible to rely 
on passionate appeals. We are moving ahead with our American friends 
and all of a sudden. We must involve the British and French after we 
sign this treaty. It is important to emphasize interrelationships—­the 
future treaty, the 1972 treaty from which we reiterated certain state-
ments in 1987. We are about to reiterate a major issue. (S)
Now speaking to intentions for the future. We will surprise our 
people if we in our statements outline and define specifically and 
clearly what we will do in the future when we haven’t even begun dis-
cussions. To already be saying that we will do this or that would be 
illogical. We should raise, as we did in Reykjavik, the level of the dis-
cussion. There we agreed on 50% reductions and stated that the mix of 
strategic arms depended on geography and other things that had made 
our forces develop differently. We said yes, you have concerns about 
our heavy ICBMs, we have concerns about some of yours too. Let’s 
reduce equally—­but keeping the same correlation. I think this is the 
approach we should use now. We should look at all elements of strate-
gic arms. You are concerned by some of ours but we are too. SLCM has 
brought new life to this. Let us get more in the spirit of doing it this way. 
If we do it differently, we will generate all kind of speculation and the 
scholars and experts will start offering proposals and analyses. Here we 
should be reaffirming a general approach. Our experts are putting forth 
their concerns and yours are too. Let the Ministers work and we will 
welcome the results of that work. (S)
The President: I accept the suggestion that the Ministers should do 
this. Anything to add? (S)
Ambassador Bartholemew: No, Mr. President.2 (U)
[Omitted here are discussions not related to START.]
2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, on June 2 Bush met Gorbachev at the 
North Portico of the White House at 9:42 a.m. and escorted him to the South Grounds, 
where they flew via Marine helicopter to Camp David. Memoranda of conversation of 
their meetings at Camp David are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–
1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts.
