Human Rights
125
42.
Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, May 11, 1977
IMPACT OF THE US STAND ON HUMAN RIGHTS
Initial international skepticism about the seriousness of the Carter ad-
ministration’s commitment to the fostering of human rights has been dispelled
by presidential statements and US initiatives in bilateral relations and inter-
national forums. Considerable confusion and suspicion over US motives per-
sist, however, and despite recent statements by Secretary Vance and other offi-
cials there still is apprehension over the lengths to which the US may be
prepared to go in pursuit of human rights objectives. This memorandum
surveys reaction to the US stand. A regional listing of significant develop-
ments is provided at annex.2
Introduction
The US stand on human rights has prompted a number of gov-
ernments to move toward bettering their human rights performance.
This has occurred principally where the regime has been anxious to
preserve cooperative relations with the US, has not felt publicly chal-
lenged or specifically prodded by Washington, and is relatively confi-
dent about its internal security situation.
Even in these cases, however, there has been a notable reluctance
to accept the US stand at face value. Public expressions of under-
standing about US concerns have been matched by private assessments
of Washington’s emphasis on human rights as a ploy designed to pres-
sure other countries into comporting themselves in accordance with US
policies generally.
Attribution of such ulterior motivation, the connection of human
rights to other issues, and a marked propensity to interpret US pro-
nouncements and actions in egocentric terms have been characteristic
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Human Rights: Trends: 5/77–1/79. Secret. Drafted in the
Office of Regional and Political Analysis (ORPA). Brzezinski wrote at the top of the mem-
orandum: “RI—JT to consolidate into one negative & positive table.” An earlier version,
contained within an April 20 “International Issues” paper, is in the Department of State,
Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, 1979 Human Rights Subject Files,
Lot 82D102, unlabeled folder.
2 Attached but not printed is a 15-page annex entitled “Significant Developments
Related to the US Stand on Human Rights,” subdivided by geographical region and/or
country. In addition, an 11-page paper prepared in INR entitled “Improvements in
Human Rights Since January 1977” is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Staff Material, Global Issues—Bloomfield Subject File, Box 17, Human Rights: Trends:
5/77–1/79.
