326
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
by several countries.4 Mike will brief you on the outcome of our recent
discussions with the Japanese Government about its efforts to achieve
more rapid growth. I hope that you will share with him your view as to
future prospects and policies regarding German economic growth, and
that both of you can exchange thoughts about how to generate more
growth in other countries.
Timing is of the essence, since it is important for all our countries
that prospects for broad-based economic growth improve before our
Summit meeting. German and American close concert in this endeavor
could be the key to its success.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter5
4 Apparently a reference to Schmidt’s January 19 policy address before the Bun-
destag. (John Vinocur, “Schmidt Rebuffs U.S. Anew on Calls to Spur Economy,” The New
York Times, January 20, 1978, p. D1)
5 Below his signature, Carter added the handwritten note: “Best wishes—J.”
104.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, February 9, 1978
SUBJECT
Ambassador Warner’s letter on U.S. Treasury borrowing of Swiss Francs
You asked for my comments on a letter to you from Ambassador
Warner.2 The Ambassador’s letter reports on an offer by private Swiss
bankers to make a Swiss franc loan to the U.S. Treasury.3
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency
File, Box 17, State: 2–3/78. No classification marking. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the
page.
2 Attached but not printed is a February 3 letter from U.S. Ambassador to Switzer-
land Warner to Carter. Carter wrote at the top of Warner’s letter: “Schultze—I see you
have a copy—any comment?”
3 Warner explored this offer more fully in a January 31 letter to Blumenthal and in-
cluded a copy of telegram 491 from Bern, January 30, which provided further details. The
proposal involved a $2 billion loan by the four largest Swiss banks to the United States,
repayable at 3½ percent interest over a 5- to 10-year period. Blumenthal replied to Warner
in a February 22 letter: “The specific suggestions in your letter troubled me however. The
question of sale by the U.S. Government of foreign-currency-denominated securities is
