Honduras 807 had at last leveled off and managed to govern effectively. In the case of Honduras, Mr. Stewart went on to say, we have seen some indications just within the last few weeks that the Villeda Administration had become fully aware of the magnitude of the dangers and problems facing them and had taken some important first steps toward effecting a remedy. He discussed the IMF program, which the Government now has under consideration and expressed the view that if the Honduran Government agrees to the conditions which the IMF program would impose, Honduras would have made a long step toward stability. Mr. Stewart then reviewed the events by which Honduras had instituted constitutional, democratic government in Honduras for the first time and recalled what a favorable impression this made throughout the hemisphere. He went on to say that he hoped that the understandable impatience of the Hondurans for more evidence of progress would not lead them to any act of force or violence, because, he said, that once such means were adopted, not only would Honduras lose a great deal of esteem in the eyes of the world but it might also precipitate a chaotic situation from which nobody would benefit. Colonel Lopez agreed that it would be unfortunate for the Villeda Administration to fail and he said that he intended to do everything he could to help it succeed. He then went on to describe what he conceived to be the role of the military as a guardian of Honduran democracy. He claimed that it was essential for the military to stand behind the Government to insure its stability. Mr. Stewart said that the role of the military in Honduras during the past year had indeed been highly constructive and said that he hoped it would continue its splendid record of maintaining order until the Villeda Administration could solve the current pressing problems. HO–5. Editorial Note February 9, 1959 On February 9, 1959, Honduran rebels, under the direction of Armando Velásquez Cerrato, the former Chief of Staff of the Honduran Armed Forces, initiated a revolution against the government of President Villeda Morales and invaded the Honduran province of Santa Barbara. Reacting to the attack, Honduran authorities dispatched elements of the Honduran Army to Santa Barbara and ended the rebellion. Documentation on the incident is in Department of State file 615.17 and
