452
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
156.
Draft Telegram From the Department of State to the
Embassy in the United Kingdom1
Washington, January 10, 1980
Subject: Letter From President to Prime Minister on Afghanistan.
For the Ambassador.
1. S—Entire text.
2. You should request appointment with Prime Minister Thatcher
at earliest opportunity to deliver letter personally from the President
concerning coordinated Western response to Afghanistan crisis (text
at para 4 below). (FYI: Similar messages are being sent to Schmidt,
Giscard, Cossiga, and Clark.)
3. In delivering letter, you may draw as appropriate on follow-
ing points:
—President Carter asked that I request this appointment with you
to deliver a personal message from him concerning the situation in
Afghanistan and to convey to you his views regarding the Western
response to that crisis.
—We completely share your view of the Soviet invasion as a serious
threat to peace, and we intend to follow through vigorously on the
measures announced by the President on January 4.
—The President has asked that I pass on to you his very great
appreciation for the public support you have given to our position.
—We have valued our close consultations with you, both at the
London and Brussels meetings last week, and in our discussions
together, and we look forward to continued close cooperation. We have
been particularly grateful for your vigorous démarches in Third World
capitals, urging those countries to join in condemnation of Soviet
actions.
—Now that the focus of world attention has shifted to the upcoming
UN General Assembly debate on Afghanistan, we must continue to
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Office File,
Country Chron File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1/80. The draft telegram was attached at Tab
C to a covering memorandum (not printed), January 10, from Brzezinski to Carter. Also
attached but not printed are draft telegrams containing similar messages from Carter
to Giscard d’Estaing (Tab A), Helmut Schmidt (Tab B), Francesco Cossiga (Tab D), and
Joe Clark (Tab E). In the covering memorandum, Brzezinski noted: “The telegrams lay
out our appraisal of the strategic consequences of the Soviet invasion and convey our
conviction that a strong and united Allied reaction will be necessary both in Southwest
Asia and in Europe.” Brzezinski recommended that Carter approve the telegrams. Carter
placed a checkmark beside “Approve,” and wrote “All ok.” in the right margin. The
message was sent as telegram 8257 to London, January 11. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, P880030–1295, N800001–0589)
