1400 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Enclosure Proposed Revision of NSC Policy Paper on Disarmament 5. a. All parties will agree, independently of agreement on other provisions of section I, (1) to refrain, as of the effective date of the agreement, from nuclear testing until 36 months thereafter. (The suspension would not continue beyond a 12-­month period unless satisfactory progress was being made in the installation of the inspection system in (2) below.) (2) to cooperate in setting up during the first 24 months, or earlier if mutually agreeable, an effective international inspection arrangement to monitor tests. b. The U.S. will announce that it will resume nuclear tests at the end of 36 months if agreement to an adequately inspected cut-­off of the procution of fissionable materials for weapons purposes has not been achieved. c. The U.S. will announce that it will refrain indefinitely from nuclear tests if the monitoring system referred to in paragraph 5a(2) is operating to the satisfaction of each party concerned and if the inspec­ tion system for the cut-­off has been put into effect. d. The U.S. will announce that if tests are resumed, it will give notification in advance of dates and approximate yields of such tests; provide reciprocal limited access to tests; and conduct such tests underground. e. Provision will be made for the continuation, under international auspices, of any nuclear explosions necessary for the development of peaceful application of such explosions. Enclosure Proposed Policy on Nuclear Tests Discussion: 1. We believe that with the Geneva talks approaching a conclu­ sion, early policy decisions must be taken on the question of nuclear tests. Dr. Fisk, Ambassador Thompson and Embassy London have also expressed this view within the past week. In your letter to Prime Minister Macmillan on June 13 you indicated that we hoped to be able to approach the UK shortly on this matter in the light of information developed in the Geneva talks; and the UK reminded the Department last week of its desire to discuss the question with us upon conclusion
