December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 731 West Bank and Gaza letter proposed by Dayan, Vance met with Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Harold H. Saunders, Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L. Atherton, Jr., Ambassador to Israel Samuel W. Lewis, and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Michael E. Sterner, to draft the new treaty clause. “By early morning [March 13],” Vance wrote, “we had an acceptable draft, which we took to the president. He approved.” (Vance, Hard Choices, page 250) The following morning, March 13, Vance again met with Dayan and presented him with the U.S. draft of the oil agreement; the two then adjourned to join the breakfast meeting between Carter and Begin. (Vance, Hard Choices, page 250; Dayan, Breakthrough, pages 276–277) The oil agreement was prepared as an attachment to Annex III of the treaty text, the section that addressed the normalization of Egyptian- Israeli economic relations. For Carter’s breakfast with Begin and the subsequent quadripartite meeting with Vance and Dayan, see Document 202. The final text of the agreed minutes on oil stated, “The treaty of peace and Annex III thereto provide for establishing normal economic relations between the parties. In accordance therewith, it is agreed that such relations will include normal commercial sales of oil by Egypt to Israel, and that Israel shall be fully entitled to make bids for Egyptian-origin oil not needed for Egyptian domestic oil consumption, and Egypt and its oil concessionaires will entertain bids made by Israel on the same basis and terms as apply to other bidders for oil.” (Telegram 64008 to Tel Aviv and Cairo, March 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850050–2651) A draft version of the memorandum of agreement on oil between Israel and the United States proposed by Vance, along with two alternative draft versions produced on March 16, is in the National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 8, Oil. Shortly after 1:30 p.m. on March 13, the U.S. delegation left Israel for Egypt, where Carter met with Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat at the Cairo airport. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) The substance of their meeting is in Document 202.
