20
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We need to reorder our diplomatic priorities. In recent years, we
have paid far more attention to our adversaries than to our friends, and
we have been especially neglectful of our neighbors in Latin America.
Coordinate Our Policy With Friends
It is important to continue to seek agreements with the Russians
and the Chinese, especially in the control of weapons. Success there
could mean life instead of death for millions of people. But the divi-
sions between us are deep. The differences of history and ideology will
not go away. It is too much to expect that we can do much more in these
relationships than reduce the areas of irritation and conflict and lessen
the danger of war.
Our nation should coordinate its policy with our friends—coun-
tries like the democratic states of Europe, North America and Japan—
those countries who share with us common goals and aspirations. We
should work in concert with them. Ours are the fortunate countries of
the world. But our continued prosperity and welfare depend upon in-
creased coordination of our policies. If we can work together on goals
which reflect the common needs and shared values of our people, we
can make our societies the strong and stable inner core around which
world cooperation, prosperity and peace can develop.
If we believe in the importance of this effort, we should make some
changes. We must both lead and collaborate at the same time. We must
consult with others more about our plans. The days of “Nixon Shocks”
and “Kissinger Surprises” must end.4 Our goal should be to act in con-
cert with these countries whenever we can.
And we must have faith in their commitment to democracy. We do
not need to preach to the western Europeans about the dangers of com-
munism as the Secretary of State did last week.5 Their traditions and
political good sense are not inferior to ours.
Our policies toward the developing countries also need revision.
For years, we have either ignored them or treated them as pawns in the
big power chess game. Both approaches were deeply offensive to their
people. The oil embargo taught us that even the least developed nation
will eventually have control over its own natural resources and that
4 A reference to Nixon’s 1971 decision to institute a 90-day wage and price freeze
and a 10 percent import surcharge and suspend the direct convertibility of U.S. dollars to
gold, thus removing the United States from the gold standard. Also a reference to the U.S.
“opening to China” in 1971 and 1972, which caught the Government of Japan by surprise.
5 Reference is to Kissinger’s instructions to the Embassy in Paris to deliver a “spe-
cific cautionary verbal message” to French Socialists about the dangers of cooperating
with Communist politicians. (Jim Hoagland, “French Socialists Scorn U.S. Advice,” The
Washington Post, March 3, 1976, p. A–19)
