548 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III position or leave such a residue of bitterness in this country as to prejudice our ability to move quickly to far-reaching follow-on negotiations. (C) 2. Prosperity. The second test of a successful foreign policy is whether it helps or hurts our economic well-being. (U) You worked out a strategy with our partners at Bonn that is bearing fruit: Germany and Japan have taken stimulus measures; the US is giving fighting inflation top priority; and these policies are creating a convergence of economic policies that Jacques de Larosiere, head of the IMF, believes portends a steadily improving world economic situation. (U) We have also taken a stagnant Multinational Trade Negotiation and brought it to the verge of success. (U) Energy remains a problem, but we’re moving in the right direction—toward deregulation, which will allow market forces to reduce oil imports and spur oil production. Your recent anti-inflation decisions have strengthened OPEC confidence in the dollar and thus moderated pressures for price increases.4 (C) These achievements create a good prospect for a strong dollar and a continuing reduction in the US external deficit. To fulfill this prospect, we will need in the next two years to: (U) —press Japan to adopt a more stimulative domestic policy (de Larosiere considers Japan’s failure to fulfill its 7% growth target world economic problem #1);5 (C) —ratify and implement an MTN agreement (an effort that Bob Strauss says will make the Panama Canal look like a picnic);6 (C) —allow the US oil price gradually to rise to world levels, as pledged at Bonn; (U) —press your export promotion program, even when this conflicts with other US objectives; (C) —make our exports more competitive, by increasing US investment and productivity—even if this means tax changes and cutting back on otherwise desirable government regulations. (C) 4 Blumenthal reported on his November 16–22 trip to Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Iran, and Kuwait in a November 24 memorandum to Carter. He noted that “for virtually all Government leaders I saw, the single most important economic event of the recent past has been the dramatic reversal of the fortunes of the dollar. This action has made a deep impression. It is seen as a major event, a specific Carter initiative, greatly benefiting each of the countries involved. Without it, a major (15% or more) price increase might well have been inevitable.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 22, Treasury Department: 4/78–2/79) 5 See Document 182. 6 Carter underlined the phrase “make the Panama Canal look like a picnic” and wrote in the adjacent margin: “nothing could do this.” See footnote 4, Document 163.
