1957  1361
804.	 Letter 69 from Clough to Johnson1
Letter No. 69
Washington, May 10, 1957
Dear Alex:
Walter McConaughy has gone off on a short trip to Alabama 
and expects to be back early next week. The Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee, after twice postponing his appearance before them to dis­
cuss his appointment as Ambassador to Burma, has indicated that they 
will call him late next week. Naturally he is anxious to complete this 
procedure and receive his confirmation.
Since you have not had a letter from CA for some time I will try 
to include here mention of the principal developments relating to 
your talks during the last month. We intend to begin preparation of 
instructions for your next meeting today and will probably meet with 
Mr. Robertson on Monday to put them in final form. We do not antici­
pate any new departure.
1. Appearances of Department Officers on Hill on March 23: Bill Sebald 
and Walter McConaughy appeared before the Far East Subcommittee 
of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs to answer questions about 
the ban on correspondents travel to Communist China. The members 
of the Subcommittee were quite sympathetic to our position, with only 
two or three members appearing to question it seriously. The majority 
appeared to take the position that the central question was whether or 
not a distinction between newsmen and ordinary citizens for the pur­
pose of travel was justified. We have sent you separately the record 
of the proceedings. On April 2, Mr. Murphy went before the Senate 
Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights. He made a very forceful pre­
sentation of the Department’s policy, which was put out as a press 
release by the Department, and a copy of which has been sent you. 
The Senators were somewhat less sympathetic and understanding 
than the Representatives had been with Bill Sebald and Walter. Their 
questions were sharp and the hearing was rather lengthy. Following 
the hearing, Senator Fulbright sent over an additional list of some 35 
questions to be answered by the Department. The questions were for 
the most part along the same lines as the ones asked in the hearing 
itself, but some of them were very trickily worded. One of them, for 
example, was the question whether the fact of non-­recognition itself 
made it more difficult for the Department to extend protection to 
Americans traveling in Communist China. As you can imagine, it is 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal.
