Preface
XI
its approach to North-South economic relations and commodity policy.
It covers the issues of foreign aid and the United States’ involvement in
the various development-focused international financial institutions; it
also documents the creation of a new entity, the Common Fund, a
mechanism designed to stabilize the prices of primary commodities in
order to help encourage less developed country (LDC) income stability.
Also included are documents covering the problems of world hunger
and the U.S. position on LDC debt relief, as well as the administration’s
LDC technology transfer initiative. A theme that emerges from these
documents is the politics of U.S.–LDC economic relations, seen in, for
example, the way in which its relationship with the Soviet Union af-
fected the United States’ policies towards LDCs and in U.S. efforts to
leverage the provision of foreign aid to secure greater respect for
human rights.
Like all recent Foreign Relations volumes, the emphasis of this vol-
ume is on policy formulation, rather than the implementation of policy
or day-to-day diplomacy. As in other volumes in the Carter subseries,
the National Security Council and the Department of State play impor-
tant roles in the policymaking process; in this volume, however, they
are joined by the Department of the Treasury, the Office of the Special
Representative for Trade Negotiations, and, on certain issues, the
Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers and the President’s As-
sistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy. Policymaking on foreign eco-
nomic issues was firmly centered in Washington; as such, internal
memoranda, records of discussions among U.S. policymakers and be-
tween U.S. and foreign officials, and correspondence with foreign
leaders comprise the bulk of the documents in the volume, while very
few telegrams are printed.
Acknowledgements
The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the
Jimmy Carter Library, especially Ceri McCarron, Brittany Parris, and
James Yancey. Thanks are also due to Nancy Smith, the former Director
of the Presidential Materials Staff at the National Archives and Records
Administration, and to the Central Intelligence Agency for arranging
access to the Carter Library materials scanned for the Remote Archive
Capture project. The Historical Staff of the Central Intelligence Agency
were helpful in arranging full access to the files of the Central Intelli-
gence Agency. The editor also thanks the staff at the National Archives
and Records Administration facility in College Park, Maryland, partic-
ularly the now-retired Herbert Rawlings Milton, for their valuable
assistance. Finally, thanks go to Veronica Marco and Steve Milline at
the Department of the Treasury for arranging access to the files of Sec-
retaries of the Treasury W. Michael Blumenthal and G. William Miller.
