450  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
we have the benefit of hindsight in making this observation. Mr. Rob­
ertson commented after reading the letter that your exposition of the 
probable Chinese Communist reasoning constituted the best possible 
reinforcement of the argument for pressing vigorously our demand 
for a bona fide renunciation of force declaration, with specific inclusion 
of the area of Taiwan.
Presumably Wang’s draft represents only an opening bargaining 
position, but I personally am skeptical as to how much “give” is built 
into the draft. I am inclined to think that the PRC would not accept 
any language clearly at variance with its position that Taiwan is a 
domestic issue. We find Wang’s draft to be solidly based on the con­
stantly reiterated Chinese Communist position. On analysis it reflects 
no concession whatever, although it is so cleverly drafted as to give 
the impression to the superficial observer that it represents a reason­
ably complete renunciation of force. We fear it would commend itself 
to a lot of unthinking and partially informed people and therefore 
may spell trouble for us.
The instructions for the next meeting which we are drafting will 
point out, in very general terms, the respects in which paragraphs two 
through five are unacceptable to us. We haven’t yet made up our minds 
as to when a U.S. draft should be submitted. The thinking is that it 
should be very soon. Wang has in a sense already stolen the ball from 
us and made a run with it, by getting in his draft ahead of ours. He has 
to some extent seized the initiative on our own item. We don’t have 
final agreement yet on the language of our draft, but we should have it 
soon. The willingness of Wang to debate the renunciation of force item 
provides a lot of grist for the mill, even though the grinding may be a 
trying process.
We have given the British Embassy here the text of Wang’s draft. We 
decided that it would be helpful to have O’Neill’s estimate of Chinese 
Communist tactics in the light of this document. His comments so far 
have impressed us as shrewd and perceptive. We have kept the British 
very fully informed on the discussions regarding the Agreed Announce­
ment. This has tended to let them in on other aspects of the discussion to 
a somewhat greater extent than would normally be the case.
Enclosed is the full text of the telegram from O’Neill giving the 
PRC rules and regulations governing visits to the imprisoned Amer­
icans, together with O’Neill’s report of his conversation with Chang 
Han-­fu on October 26, when the rules were handed to him. This is as 
promised in our 1031. In my conversations with Joy here I have encour­
aged the British to take a somewhat stronger line in opposition to any 
such rules and regulations as applied to the Americans covered by the 
Agreed Announcement. The British are somewhat inclined to regard 
these rules as representing a rather satisfactory advance in the situation.
