394 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 vide all three rings of security at the outset, but that the Shah was free to bring in his own private security personnel as the inner ring whenever he wished. Armao said Col. Giambini (the Iranian Colonel who is the Shah’s principal security advisor) has advised against doing this, since the private personnel would be Americans and there would be friction between them and the Panamanians. 14. I said that the problems troubling Armao seemed to arise for the most part from an excess of security caution by the Panamanian security personnel. I said it is understandable that they do not want to run any risks with respect to the Shah’s safety. Armao conceded that “the security is excellent”. 15. Armao said there is another major problem on the horizon. He explained that in three weeks the Shah must go into a hospital for tests. General Torrijos’ doctor had said it would not be politically acceptable in Panama if the Shah were to go to the American Military Hospital (Gorgas) rather than the leading Panamanian hospital in Panama City (Piatilla). Armao said Gorgas is clearly preferable, with superior facilities and staff. I asked whether there are objective reasons why the Shah’s doctors from New York would be able to function more efficiently and effectively at Gorgas. Armao said there were such reasons, and I urged that these reasons be used in discussion with the Panamanians so as not to injure their pride. Lloyd suggested the possibility of dividing the tests between the two hospitals or some similar approach. 16. With respect to the Shah’s medical condition, Armao says the size of the Shah’s spleen has diminished somewhat and that his “blood count” is holding reasonably stable. He said that the prognosis for the Shah is that his cancer could at anytime metastasize and lead quickly to death. The doctors’ best guess, Armao said, is that the Shah has perhaps another two to three years, but they readily concede that the period could be much less. 17. Armao said that the Shah’s wife is extremely unhappy in Panama. He noted that the visit of the Shah’s children over the Christmas vacation went extremely well and thanked us for assisting on the travel arrangements. 18. Armao asked whether the Afghanistan crisis may have led to a change in Chancellor Kreisky’s unwillingness to accept the Shah. Lloyd said he would guess not. Jackson asked whether there is another country to which the Shah could go. Lloyd said we knew of none and that we had certainly checked throughout the world. Jackson said, “we want to get the Shah out of Panama as soon as possible”, but acknowledged that no other possibilities appear ripe at this time. 19. Armao reiterated that he did not trust Torrijos. He said that deep down, he worries that “they’re trying to get their hands on the
