International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
547
184.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, December 8, 1978
SUBJECT
Two Years Down; Two to Go (U)
After each half year in 1977, I sent you an appraisal of the Adminis-
tration’s foreign policy record.2 Two years since you took office may be
an even better time to review both the record and the tasks ahead. I
haven’t tried to examine the whole field—focusing only on a few sa-
lient areas. (U)
1. War and Peace. The main accomplishment of the last two years
was in reducing the chances of war in the two most dangerous areas of
possible US-Soviet conflict: (C)
a. In the Middle East, there is a greater chance of setting in motion a
process that could lead to peace than at any time since the creation of
Israel. (C)
b. In Central Europe, a NATO buildup has been launched, which
seems likely to restore the military stability that had been called into
question by Soviet military programs in the mid-1970s. (C)
These are big improvements. There are still a lot of risks ahead,
particularly in unstable countries on the periphery of the USSR, but
we’re clearly better off than in December 1976. This improvement was
made possible because we had our priorities right: During the cam-
paign you said that the main focus of US foreign policy should be on
constructive cooperation with our friends. What we have done to this
end in Europe and the Middle East has been more important in re-
ducing risk of war than anything that has been, or could have been, ac-
complished in direct dealings with the USSR. (C)
Substantial progress has also been made in those dealings, how-
ever; the main advantage of SALT–II3 may be in paving the way for a
more ambitious SALT–III agreement, in which we can get at the prin-
cipal cause of nuclear instability: technological change. This argues for
seeking a SALT–II whose ratification will not provoke such intense op-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 59, Administration’s Policy: General: 1978. Confiden-
tial. Sent for information. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Generous. J.” Brzezinski
also initialed the memorandum.
2 See Document 91.
3 Reference is to the ongoing second round of U.S.-Soviet Strategic Arms Limitation
Talks.
