3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
670
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
saying. We, that is, the U.S. Administration, continued to fight for
SALT ratification because we believed that the Treaty was in our in-
terests as well as in the interests of the Soviet Union. As a practical
matter, as he had said earlier, our ability to win that fight will be made
much more difficult or impossible—not because of us, but because of
the absence of enough votes in the Senate. The Secretary had not stated
that as a threat, but simply as a description of concrete facts.
Gromyko said that to that he could only say: “Why try to rectify
the situation at the expense of Soviet interests?”
The Secretary said he would respond to that later; he did not be-
lieve that what he had suggested was against Soviet interests.
Gromyko said that the Secretary had implied that Soviet personnel
in Cuba can be used for something that should not even occur to any
individual with common sense, with respect to Latin America and else-
where. That was surely quite a fantastic speculation. The Soviet side
could only express total surprise that such thoughts could even occur
to the Secretary. If the U.S. government had advisers or experts or
anyone else who suggested such possibilities, Gromyko could only say
that they do not know the Soviets, that they do not know Soviet policy.
Consequently, they were bad advisers, indeed, bad experts. If such
ideas were shared by those who guide U.S. foreign policy in terms of
U.S./USSR relations, he could only express regret. Was it not possible
to live in Washington without constantly inventing and placing in mo-
tion something or other against the Soviet Union and its foreign policy?
At present this concerned the Soviet Union and Cuba, but Gromyko
could not recall even a brief period of time in which some legend or
other, hostile to the Soviet Union and its policy, was not current in the
United States. Why was this being done? He recalled that when they
had been in Vienna, Brezhnev, Gromyko himself, the Soviet Minister of
Defense and others, all had the impression that the fundamental
matters of both sides were prevailing, and that both sides recognized
the necessity of searching for agreed solutions leading to detente and to
safeguarding world peace. And yet, after the Vienna Summit and after
the two heads of state returned to their respective countries, there had
surfaced all sorts of hostile legends aimed against the Soviet Union.
Perhaps those who invent such legends and myths are extremely well
paid for doing so. Such was certainly not the situation in the Soviet
Union.
In essence, Gromyko wanted to emphasize that there was no need
to correct anything with respect to Soviet personnel in Cuba. The So-
viets harbor no malicious intentions against the United States and do
not undertake anything against the interests of the United States or any
other nation. They did not engage in any nefarious activities and have
no malicious plans of any kind. The Secretary could rest assured that
