Options Identified
313
tion” have in fact been agreed upon. The French have not yet formally
agreed to this, but Vance has sent a message to Giscard3 and believes
that the French will agree. (C)
4. IMF. Mr. Solomon alerted the SCC to the possibility that the
Saudis and others may vote against us—or at least abstain—on the
question of whether or not our freeze of Iranian assets is permitted
under the IMF Charter. The reason for the Saudi and Arab position is
that Egypt made the same argument about paying interest to Saudi
Arabia after the Arab cutoff of funds. Although this may be somewhat
embarrassing to us, Mr. Solomon was certain that we have the necessary
votes to win in the IMF. (C)
5. Hostages. State has prepared a chart showing when each hostage
was seen or contacted since the takeover of the embassy.4 This is
extremely sensitive, since it tends to identify particular individuals as
suspect. A single copy was made to be attached to the notes of the
SCC meeting. The seven missing hostages include [less than 1 line not
declassified] four Foreign Service Officers. There is one hostage, a Mr.
Blucker who was on temporary duty to Tehran as an economist, who
has not been seen or heard from since the first day of the takeover.
The fact that the students today claim that only 49 hostages are in
custody—as opposed to our firm count of 50—is worrisome from that
perspective. Hodding Carter at the noon briefing today will make clear
that any confusion about the total number of hostages is not confusion
on our part but rather because of the poor information coming out of
the students5 and others in Tehran. Secretary Vance will meet with the
American clergymen for half an hour after their return. (S)
Political-Military Issues:
1. AWACS. Dr. Brzezinski informed the SCC that the President had
approved the proposal from the previous meeting. The AWACS flew
yesterday as scheduled and will return to the base in Egypt today. (S)
2. Intelligence Finding. Dr. Brzezinski noted that the intelligence
finding as revised and approved by the President would be sent to
the President for signature today. The finding is attached, with the
President’s comments and changes incorporated.6 (S)
3. Covert Action. The SCC agreed that the small covert action sub-
committee would meet on Monday7 to review options. The entire ques-
3 Not further identified.
4 Attached but not printed. In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Examined & returned.”
5 Carter underlined the word “students” and, at the top of the first page of the
memorandum, wrote: “Zbig—Please do not call them students—otherwise ok. J.”
6 See the attachment to Document 110.
7 Monday, December 31.
