Yugoslavia esteem for Tito as a world leader. You might mention in this connection your extended correspondence with Tito, to which the Yugoslavs attach great importance. While there are no major bilateral problems between Yugoslavia and the United States, the Yugoslavs are likely to focus on two issues in particular: —Terrorism: In the wake of Tito’s death the Yugoslavs are understandably nervous about an upsurge of terrorism by emigre groups operating in the U.S. and Western Europe. Their concern has been heightened, moreover, by the bombing of the house of the Yugoslav Charge here in Washington, Vladimir Sindjelic, on June 3. Over the past three years—and particularly recently—we have taken firm efforts to curb terrorist acts by emigre groups in the U.S., but the Yugoslavs will undoubtedly press you to do more. In response to their pleas, I suggest you reaffirm the pledge not to tolerate terrorist acts against Yugoslav personnel and facilities, which you made in your public statement issued on the occasion of Tito’s death. You can also point to the Administration’s good record regarding the arrest and prosecution of emigre terrorists (some 17 arrests and/or prosecutions) as proof of your determination to pursue a toughminded policy against emigre terrorists. (C) —Economic Assistance: The health of the Yugoslav economy will be a key factor—perhaps the key factor—in determining how successfully the new leadership will be able to manage the challenges it will face in the difficult transition period ahead. At present the economy is beset by major problems, which if not arrested, could seriously undermine political cohesion and stability. Inflation is over 20 percent and the Yugoslav foreign debt is nearly $13 billion. While a stabilization program has been introduced, the Yugoslavs will have to obtain large-scale economic assistance to avoid a further downturn in their economy. (C) Economic assistance therefore is likely to be high on the list of topics that the Yugoslav leaders will want to discuss with you. They have already approached Bill Miller about U.S. Government assistance in obtaining a large loan from U.S. banks, and they will consider our willingness to be helpful as an important test of the sincerity of our past pledges of support. I recommend that you convey a generally sympathetic attitude to the Yugoslavs without giving the impression that the United States Government can provide large-scale credits. You might mention that you have already personally discussed the Yugoslav financial situation with Bill Miller. He, in turn, has talked to U.S. commercial bankers, particularly David Rockefeller, about putting together a syndicate for a loan.4 (C) 4 Eagleburger also detailed the offer made by Rockefeller to the Yugoslav Government in a June 23 memorandum to Carter. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Lawrence S. Eagleburger Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Ambassador to Yugoslavia, Under Secretary of State for Management (1967–1984), Lot
