236
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
SHARAF: How much is this now a framework for other parties?
VANCE: The document provides a broad solution which would
include even Golan Heights. On the Palestinian issue there is as much
in this for Syrian interests in that respect as for others.
SHARAF: If agreement is not reached and Jordan does not take
part in the negotiations, what is the situation regarding Israeli inten-
tions on self-government on the West Bank?
VANCE: Israel would like to proceed with the Begin Plan’s imple-
mentation, but Egypt does not accept this. The agreed procedure is that
negotiations on this would start soon. Also, Egypt has an interest in the
Palestinian issue in Gaza.
KING HUSSEIN: The people in Arab Jerusalem would fall under
what category? Do the people there exercise independent rights or are
they considered Israeli citizens?
VANCE: This was a problem we labored over for hours. How do
you suggest we address it?
MAJALI: At the end of the agreement, it calls for open borders,
diplomatic relations, etc. In such a case, Jerusalem is no longer a
problem since the door is open for the full exercise of the rights of its
Arab population. No one would put up barbed wire.
VANCE: This is a good point. Everyone agreed on free access to
the Holy Places, that the Holy Places would be fully administered by
each respective faith and that the city would no longer be divided.
There was also agreement on free movement within Jerusalem. The
hangup was on sovereignty. The U.S. position is that the status of Jeru-
salem must be negotiated by the parties. We have our own view but we
can not compel the Israelis to accept it. We have stated that annexation
was illegal but to enforce our view is a different story.
KING HUSSEIN: This is a crucial question for us.
VANCE: We recognize that.
CROWN PRINCE: Why was Jordan mentioned as participating
in the local police force, particularly since this would set a precedent
for Jordan with respect to other aspects of the West Bank governing
authority.
VANCE: Jordan was included because of your expertise and the
feeling that it would be necessary to have Jordan help operate the po-
lice force. This, however, is not mandatory and Jordan might not
choose to take part.
CROWN PRINCE: During the transition period would inhabitants
of Arab Jerusalem perhaps become gradually acceptable as voters?
VANCE: This was argued at Camp David and it could be possible
after two years or so.
