734
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
plexity of the policy issues we have just now completed this review.
The project involved very extensive private sector input, including
some 250 letters from trade associations, individual exporters, labor
unions, and others, six conferences on topics affecting our export pos-
ture, and input from Commerce’s field offices and about 50 Foreign
Service posts. Finally, we met with the President’s Export Council lead-
ership of Reginald Jones, George Busbee, C. William Verity, and Harry
Gould.2
U.S. exports have grown strongly over the last decade and our
share of industrial country exports rose in real terms, even though our
share declined somewhat in value terms because of the depreciation of
the dollar. Our export growth was not adequate to keep up with rising
oil import costs, so we ended the decade with a 1979 trade deficit of
$24.7 (f.a.s.) billion. The prospect for continuing price-induced in-
creases in our oil import bill—even if we reduce the volume of oil—
makes it imperative we improve our export performance in the future.
Our review found that certain Government programs are having a
serious detrimental effect on the ability of American companies to com-
pete in global markets. While this impact cannot be precisely quanti-
fied, it is our best judgment that the ability of American companies to
compete in world markets is being weakened substantially by the im-
plementation of measures to achieve other policy objectives. What is
needed is to tailor the operation of these measures and programs so
they do not have excessive or unintended effects on our exports.
During the course of our review, we found a great deal of skepti-
cism in the business community about whether the Administration is
actually concerned with exports. Most are of the view that the Admin-
istration does not consider exports significant, and that the National
Export Policy statement of September 19783 constituted a statement of
worthy objectives which the Administration has not pursued effec-
tively. The business community and most interested legislators were
critical of your February 1980 interim report on export disincentives4 as
having avoided the tough issues. In releasing that report you said you
would consider additional actions and would convey your views on
export promotion and disincentives in your July report to Congress.
2 Reginald H. Jones was the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of General Elec-
tric. George D. Busbee served as the Governor of Georgia. C. William Verity, Jr., was the
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Armco, Inc. Harry E. Gould, Jr., was the
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Gould Paper Corp.
3 See footnote 2, Document 164.
4 The interim report was included in Carter’s February 27 statement on the reduc-
tion of export disincentives. See footnote 4, Document 230.
