1190 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin said that they can do without it (i.e. a formal reference), and agree on it . . . in general terms, we need guidelines. Ambassador Linowitz said that we want to deal with difficult problems. We are at a critical time, and near agreement. But the big issues have not been dealt with effectively. We can agree that there will be no agreement. The point now is that we have a formula with which Egypt can agree. The U.S. urges Israel to think seriously on what we can try to do with the Continuing Committee. If we can’t agree on principles or details, they can go to the Continuing Committee. Israel’s rights would be preserved in the interim; Israel should have no concern for it. Egypt proposed that the United States be in the Continuing Committee. This provides an added dimension to its discussions. It would be useful to Israel and to Egypt that the U.S. would be closely involved. The U.S. is not pressing; but Egypt wants the U.S. in badly. If Israel does not want that, it should tell Egypt. The President said that this is the role the U.S. would play. Where issues are not resolved, the Continuing Committee could function for a while, and maybe resolve issues with experience. Exclusion of the U.S. is what Egypt is trying to avoid. If Israel feels that on unresolved issues—economic relations, water—if Israel and Egypt and the Palestinians want to do this without the U.S., then Israel should decide. Egypt wants to get us past May 26th, before there is an impression of failure. The Continuing Committee, with the U.S., goes ahead and works as the Self-Governing Authority is set up. Minister Burg said that the U.S. is a full partner. This Continuing Committee is set up after the elections and the setting up of the Self- Governing Authority. This is not the answer for May 27th. Ambassador Linowitz said that Egypt proposed that the U.S. be a member of the Continuing Committee. The President said that this is so that the Continuing Committee can go on working on issues that are not resolved. Minister Burg said that the Continuing Committee is for after the inauguration and the elections. Is something further needed for after May 26th? The President said he thinks so. Prime Minister Begin said: maybe yes or no. The President said that if all issues are resolved, then the Self- Governing Authority can deal with water, etc. Security for Israel, therefore, is not concerned here, except for definitions. All he wants is that there be no failure on the 26th. The negotiating group can continue under Camp David. Minister Kubersky said that it (the Continuing Committee) cannot be established on May 27th.
