1955  567
401.	 Telegram 1355 to Geneva1
Washington, December 7, 1955, 3:39 p.m.
1355. For Johnson. Your 1260.
1. Department did not intend that you place primary emphasis on 
“welfare” aspect Agreed Announcement. You should continue as in past 
placing primary emphasis on Communist failure release ­Americans 
expeditiously using Bradshaw case as glaring example not only failure 
release, but refusal to transmit letters, pointing out this forces conclusion 
that remainder imprisoned Americans are receiving same treatment as 
Bradshaw.
2. Secretary believes time has come to demonstrate stiffer attitude 
on failure Communists live up to commitments. Three months passed 
since Agreed Announcement and only five of nineteen released. Wang 
has come to regard our weekly protests this subject as routine. Best 
way of convincing him we take this seriously is concentrate exclusively 
this subject for one meeting, basing your protest on fact you have been 
instructed by your Government do so.
3. Bradshaw release before or simultaneous with meeting does not 
change situation. This would not prove that Communists are carrying 
out declaration but only that in this case had done so because facts 
were fortuitously revealed. Bradshaw case is merely example of course 
of conduct by Communists which is continuing as to remainder still 
imprisoned. You can point out that Washington felt so strongly on this 
subject that your instructions were to deal exclusively with it for this 
meeting and that future progress on renunciation force is of necessity 
dependent on showing good faith in implementing Agreed Announce­
ment already made.
4. While above tactics may not immediately assist Bradshaw, 
our conclusion is that from overall standpoint, bearing in mind that 
ninety days have now elapsed, time has come to take stronger line than 
heretofore.
5. It is important to show relationship between Communist perform­
ance under first Agreed Announcement and question participation by 
US in second one. This point should receive strong emphasis in your 
presentation.
Dulles
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/12–755. Secret; Limit Distribu­
tion. Drafted by McConaughy, Clough, Sebald, and Phleger; cleared in draft by Robertson.
