612
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
JP said we should repeat our denial.
The Pres said he had discussed this with the five guys last night.
CV said the Swiss are prepared to make a further statement.
JP said the problem is that if we say there were no such messages,
then the Swiss will say there have been messages from the President.
If we say nothing for one day, people will be skeptical.
The Pres noted that the Swiss claim they did not know the content
of the messages.
HJ said that is not true.
CV quickly read the second message which had been sent to Bani-
Sadr,8 which welcomed his reassurances, noted the things we had done
to improve the negotiating situation, that we had tried to make the
Shah stay in Panama, that we had not objected to the proposed Senate
Foreign Relations Committee study, and that the U.S. had been scrupu-
lous in maintaining its responsibilities under the scenario and hoped
that Iran would do the same.
HJ noted that this was the follow-up message sent on Saturday,
March 29.
The Pres said there had been a stream of messages from the U.S.
to Iranian officials using the UN, the French lawyers, the Panamanians,
etc. They had described U.S. attitudes toward Iran and indicated we
would not stand as an obstacle against Iran presenting its grievances.
Ghotbzadeh said (in the so-called letter)9 that we understand why the
militants took our hostages. The Pres had seen that for the first time
in the text of the letter in the New York Times. Apparently, Ghotbzadeh
had contributed a written answer, using bits and pieces of things we
had conveyed and adding embellishments, then delivered it to Kho-
meini and Bani-Sadr. When the Swiss told Bani-Sadr, he was shocked.
This was a Ghotbzadeh contrivance, perhaps in good faith and con-
trived to be helpful. Calling him a liar and going beyond our present
statements could destroy his credibility—if he has any. He had
explained this to the papers last night. Today we should repeat our
position and read a statement. If there is nothing overnight from Iran,
the Pres would make a statement.
HJ suggested 7:00 a.m.
The Pres said it should get on the morning talk shows.
HJ said we must say that joint control is not acceptable, then indicate
that here is what we will do tomorrow.
8 Reference is presumably to the March 29 message; see Document 227.
9 Carter thought Ghotbzadeh was responsible for the “bogus” letter. (Carter, Keeping
Faith, pp. 502–503)
