January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1133 Ambassador Linowitz said that Begin was taken aback. He had had messages from Begin that this is not what he had meant. Because of that, Begin may want to show some flexibility, but it won’t be much of substance. Therefore he would come back with appraisals and suggestions. The President asked how long the Ambassador would be in Israel. Ambassador Linowitz said he would be three days in Israel and three in Egypt: one and a half days for meetings and one and a half days in the plenary. In Israel, he will have lots of meetings, and wants Begin to know about it. He will see Peres and others.8 The issues are still there but they are solvable. He had repeated to Burg that if he is worried about security, then we are willing to be responsive (?). Sadat has said that he would be prepared to say publicly that there will be no Palestinian state. The President said that if the Ambassador would write down items like these, that suit Ehrlich, Dayan, Weizman, etc., then this would be helpful. Ambassador Linowitz said that he had tried ideas like that; he had tried ideas like absentee ballots for East Jerusalem—which were foreign to the Israelis. But it could keep them from worrying about the Jerusalem issue. Sadat has problems, for example, the poor communications within his government. The President said he thought that this was deliberate, except for Mubarak, who is not very much involved in this. Sadat trusts and likes Mubarak, unlike Khalil and Ghali. Sadat stays away from the nitty gritty—the President envies the Ambassador sometimes. Ambassador Linowitz said that Sadat will talk with him on particular issues. He (the Ambassador) asks him to tell his Prime Minister, since he doesn’t accept these positions. Sadat agrees, then doesn’t do it, and Khalil takes a different position. The President said that he had to be cautionary on this. There are times when Sadat says things he shouldn’t. If he goes to Al Baz, to ask him what the Palestinians think, Al Baz will say that they disapprove. He (the President) needs to keep Sadat flexible. Sadat doesn’t think enough of what the other Arabs think. Sometimes he (the President) has to protect Sadat. There are reasons to have positions acceptable to Saudi Arabia, Morocco and the other moderates—though not Iraq and Syria, etc. Therefore Sadat must be protected, so that he does not get too far out in front of Al Baz. Some movement, yes, but not so far out of line with the moderate Arabs. 8 A report of Linowitz’s March 24 meeting with Peres was transmitted in telegram 277 from Alexandria, March 26. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P900086–0437)
