February 1951–February 1952
111
36.
Memorandum for the Record1
New York, June 29, 1951.
The following points were made by the Qashqai brothers at a lun-
cheon party June 27 and a dinner party June 28. I have added my per-
sonal comments:
1. Ten members of the Qashqai ruling family and tribe arrived in
New York June 25. The purpose of the trip was stated to be to establish
a home for Mrs. Nasser Khan, the wife of the Il-Khan, and her children
as well as for the pregnant Mrs. Mohammad Hosein Khan. This home
will be in Santa Barbara, California. The Khans have deliberately
planned that Mrs. Mohammad Hosein Khan will give birth to an Amer-
ican citizen. In my opinion this indicates that the Qashqais have chosen
sides already in any eventual conflict between the Soviets and the West
in Iran. Their dependents already are being “evacuated” to friendly
territory.
2. It appears that one of the four Khans (on a rotating system) will
be in the United States at all times. This, in my belief, looks like the be-
ginning of a liaison arrangement.
3. Khosrow Khan is here as an emissary of Prime Minister Mos-
sadeq. One of his missions is to influence American public opinion in
favor of Iran. I have seen the letter from Mossadeq to Khosrow Khan in-
structing him to carry out this mission.
4. The Khans believe there are two stable forces in Iran; one the
Tudeh Party and the other the Qashqais. What they appear to mean is,
two well-organized forces who can count on disciplined followings. In
their opinion the Western world would do well to cultivate the only
one of these two forces available to them, namely, the Qashqais.
5. Khosrow Khan states that the Iranian Army’s effectiveness was
shattered by the bullet that killed Razmara.
6. They believe that for $3,000,000 the four most important army
garrisons in Iran could be purchased by any bidder. And for
$10,000,000 the entire army could be bought. I detected in these state-
ments the desire that some wealthy uncle place these sums at the
Qashqai’s disposal when such purchases became desirable; namely, if
there were a Tudeh coup in Tehran or other cities.
7. The Khans seem alarmed at the prospect of disorders in Abadan
when the workers remain unpaid. They think that Tudeh might make
quick capital of such a situation.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/6–7951. Top Se-
cret. Drafted by Gerald F.P. Dooher.
