236 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Attached at Tab A is a statement condemning the Soviet action, which I asked State to draft.2 It has been cleared by Christopher. BBC has already issued a statement and I think we should release ours immediately. State agrees. I also think it should be released by State. Al Friendly concurs. RECOMMENDATION That you approve release by State of the attached statement.3 (U) 2 Not attached. The Department released the statement on August 20 and sent it to Moscow as guidance in telegram 221806 to Moscow, August 20. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800398–0167) 3 Aaron approved the recommendation. On September 19, ICA Director Reinhardt sent a memorandum to Brzezinski on the status of Soviet VOA jamming as well as VOA attempts to counter Soviet actions. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 9, Board for International Broadcasting (RFE, RL, VOA): 2–9/80) 80. Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 13, 1980 SUBJECT Radios—Seabury Memorandum to Reagan Transition Staff Paul Seabury has sent me a copy of a brief memorandum he wrote to the Reagan Transition Staff on the evening of election day recommending an approach to the RFE/RL–BIB problem.2 Combined with the Freedom House report which should be released any day now, it gives the new Administration a good workable set of proposals for coping with this problem which has proved beyond the capacity of the present Administration.—We have at least achieved these two results from our otherwise abortive effort to draw Leo Cherne and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special, Box 5, Chron File: 10–12/80. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Larrabee, Brement, and Griffith. 2 Printed below. Paul Seabury was a professor of Political Science at University of California, Berkeley, and a specialist in foreign policy and intelligence.
