Radio Free Europe, Radio Liberty, VOA
203
Generate a Proposal for finding MONEY for Azeri sooner
3
PUSH the transmitter problem
4
TELL VOA/ICA to be more adventuresome in seeking extra
funds
(C)5
3 David Aaron approved the recommendation.
4 David Aaron approved the recommendation.
5 David Aaron approved the recommendation. He added a handwritten comment
at the bottom of the page: “Also push and above all Persian facilities. DA.”
65.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, September 7, 1979
SUBJECT
Soviet Propaganda Broadcasting (U)
CIA has recently put more effort into studying Soviet propaganda
radio. Here are some of the results. There has been an enormous increase
in recentyears inboth quantityandqualityof broadcasts andtransmitter
power. Soviet stations, e.g., broadcast 62 hours per week to the Arab
world. An improved English-language service, which deliberately imi-
tates the BBC, blankets the whole eastern hemisphere with transmitter
strengthmuchgreaterthanVOAorBBC.Byrelayingbroadcaststhrough
Cuba,theSovietshaveadded55hoursaweektotheirpreviousschedules
in Spanish, Portuguese, Arabic and English. Most interesting, perhaps,
are the changes they have made in clandestine broadcasts. They have
dropped broadcasts in Spanish, Italian and German to concentrate on
Turkey and Iran. Two stations broadcasting to Turkey have increased
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of
America: 1–9/79. Confidential. Sent for information. Carter initialed the memorandum,
indicating he saw it. In an August 15 memorandum to Brzezinski, Henze reported that,
at his request, the CIA had undertaken a study of Soviet clandestine broadcasting.
Henze recommended that Brzezinski inform the President of the conclusions of the
memorandum to underscore the importance of strengthening RFE/RL and VOA broad-
casting. Brzezinski asked Henze to draft a memorandum for the President. Henze for-
warded the draft to Brzezinski for signature on September 5. (Ibid.)
