776  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
resistance. Under present policy, our forces can enter an engagement 
against overwhelming numbers of Soviet proxy troops with confidence 
in the outcome, because the atomic firepower can be used if needed, 
and can be used before our own forces are decimated. To actually 
apply the suggested new policy would reduce our tactical flexibility 
and capability in one stroke to the level which the Soviet Union would 
like to see. This is not to say that we are completely powerless with­
out nuclear weapons. We have demonstrated twice within the last year 
that we can react quickly and with effective results in local and limited 
actions. However, at Lebanon the first unit in the area was a Marine 
BLT with organic atomic capability, the Sixth Fleet was offshore with 
atomic capability, and the U.S. Air Force units at Adana had an atomic 
capability. Similarly, during the Taiwan incident the atomic capability 
of our deployed tactical forces was always in the background. These 
two operations might have come off differently, in a tactical sense, short 
of general war, if the atomic backup had been absent, or if the enemy 
knew we would hesitate to use it.
5. There are times when political considerations are overriding. 
There are also times in which military realities must be the basis for 
political decision. In this case, any serious attempt to change the pres­
ent policy on the use of nuclear weapons would have to be phased over 
a period of years, and we would have to be willing to double or triple 
the budget, over a period of years, to provide any semblance of the lim­
ited war combat capability which we possess today.
STRATEGIC FORCES
6. The second major implication bears on our strategic nuclear 
forces. Under a budgetary and personnel ceiling roughly approximat­
ing what we now have, the power of our strategic nuclear forces would 
progressively decline as “conventional” capability and “limited war” 
capability, in consonance with the revised policy, demanded more and 
more of the resources available. This is the specific objective of some 
elements of the military establishment.
7. Under the assumption of no major increase in available resources, 
within a few years we could be in the following tragic condition:
a. Having a capability for attacking only a restricted strategic target 
system, as opposed to Soviet capability to attack thousands of targets, 
we would have no effective strategic deterrent. We would have little 
counter-­force capability, no strength in foreign policy as engendered by 
Soviet knowledge of a preemptive capability, and no possible strategic 
military response to any Soviet action, short of a Soviet-­initiated attack 
on our population centers, and, even in this event, it would be doubtful 
that a retaliatory capability geared to a few hundred cities could sur­
vive to perform its task.
b. Paralleling this decline in the strategic capability we would have 
increased “limited war” and “conventional” capability to some degree,
