3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
652
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
The Secretary explained that one of the reasons the combat unit is
so sensitive for us is that people associate combat units with the mis-
siles that were present in 1962, because combat units were associated
with those offensive weapons.
Dobrynin said what the Soviets have in Cuba does not possess of-
fensive capability. He asked rhetorically whether the US wanted the
Soviet Union to declare that the troops now in Cuba are not the same as
those present in 1962. He asserted that there are no troops there to
guard missiles.
At this point, the Secretary handed Dobrynin an oral note about
the Soviet brigade in Cuba. (Oral note is attached—Tab B.)5
Dobrynin’s reaction after carefully studying the note was to ex-
press somewhat emotionally the conclusion that “we have a crisis on
our hands.” If the Soviet Union presented such questions to the US
about its installations around the world, the US would tell the Soviets
to go to hell. These questions do not lead to a way out—they lead to a
deadlock. The Secretary responded that the US was open in dealing
with its troops abroad and we have no hesitation in answering ques-
tions similar to those posed to Dobrynin.
Dobrynin continued that the current publicity and the Congres-
sional hysteria are not of Soviet makings. Today it is one issue; to-
morrow they will raise other questions, based on the broadening of the
1962 understandings the US is now seeking. He said the USSR did not
want to create a new precedent.
He particularly reacted to the sentence at the outset of the ques-
tions which repeated the point that “the presence of a Soviet combat
unit in Cuba cannot be accepted,” pointing to this as an indication that
the questions are not intended to lead to a solution of the present
problem.
Dobrynin was doubtful that Moscow would supply answers to the
questions submitted. He said he may be wrong, but he thought these
questions would appear to Moscow to be a broadening of the problem.
Dobrynin then stressed the main point he had made in the paper
he handed over: the Soviet Union sees this as an effort to broaden the
1962 understanding. The US has made no claim that the 1962 under-
standing has been violated, but is creating new grounds for its objec-
tions. The US appears to be trying to create a new “1979 under-
standing,” which will be the basis for a series of additional challenges
in the future.
Dobrynin said the Soviet Union considers that it has answered the
question raised by the U.S. It has stated categorically that this is not a
5 Not found attached.
