Peru  1037
have come to Catholic University and found that there is such freedom.” 
During meeting Communist demonstrators from San Marcos set up rival 
loudspeaker but students severed wires.
In meantime, Communist agitators led group from San Marcos 
to Plaza San Martin where they marched around Plaza changing “no 
se vende Peru.” Police kept crowd from hotel and it gathered around 
statue San Martin. Crowd took floral offering VP had placed hour 
earlier and tore off U.S. flag done in flowers as well as part of center 
depicting U.S. leaving only Peruvian flag and SA. Police made no effort 
prevent desecration U.S. flag. Wreath was replaced by government at 
7:30 p.m. under police protection.
VP party returned hotel from Catholic university 11:30 a.m. and 
crowd upon seeing his car broke from statue and surged toward hotel. 
Traffic prevented VP car proceeding to hotel and he descended and 
walked remaining 200–300 yards. Crowd shook fists, spit and threw 
leaflets and some fruit, while shouting and waving placards. Police 
conducted VP hotel and demonstration continued another 15 minutes 
when assault guard finally moved in swinging clubs and crowd scat-
tered. Possibly 50–75 students represented nucleus demonstration with 
maybe 400–500 more curious onlookers. Police chased leaders all way 
back to San Marcos.
Remainder VP schedule rearranged because these events. At press 
conference VP said he was advised not go San Marcos but decided he 
should because important not allow minority element deny freedom 
expression in great university. Stated principal concern safety innocent 
students and had cautioned police against pushing students. Said he 
was touched by Peruvian expression regret including Foreign Minister, 
VP, etc., and desire of Rector San Marcos apologize. Said no official 
protest made and none necessary. Had not had contact as yet with 
President. Said it was not personal affront but demonstrators were spit-
ting on Peru, on ideals of San Martin and millions who have fought for 
liberty. Regretted effect on San Marcos because no university great that 
cannot assure freedom of expression. Said the day will live in infamy 
in history San Marcos. Demonstrators he said [illegible in the original] 
not physical but intellectual cowardice because they are afraid of truth. 
They thought they had won victory [illegible in the original] suffered 
defeat because they had shown [illegible in the original] they [illegible 
in the original]. Peru now knows what would [illegible in the original] 
most [illegible in the original].
