1278  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Relative to identification of the “detected” events, the annual num­
ber of earthquakes within the USSR-­dominated area which are larger 
than a given yield is shown in Figure 8. This relationship is derived 
from statistical data on world-­wide distribution of earthquakes from 
Gutenberg and Richter, “Seismicity of the Earth,” and AFOAT–­1 mea­
surements of seismic wave amplitudes from subsurface explosions. 
From this curve the number of earthquakes in the USSR and China 
which produce energy in the earth equal to subsurface explosions of 
1–5 KT is found to be 2100. The areas of most frequent occurrence of 
these earthquakes are shown in Figure 9. The indicators mentioned in 
par. 2b permit identification of about 85% this number as natural earth­
quakes provided there are at least three stations within 400 miles of the 
burst. There remain about 300 earthquakes per year in this yield range 
which cannot be distinguished from explosions by scientific means.
Considering all of the above factors, it is believed that it will be 
necessary to install about 43 seismic stations with improved arrays and 
ultra low frequency seismometers within the USSR and China. Possible 
locations of such stations are shown in Figure 10. The stations shown 
are concentrated near seismic regions to obtain the maximum amount 
of information leading to the diagnosis of natural earthquakes. Any 
shock originating in the vast aseismic areas of the USSR and China 
would be strongly suspected of being man-­made. It is believed that 
this network of stations would permit a 3-­station fix on a completely 
tamped subsurface shot as small [text not declassified] in about 90–95% 
of the area of the USSR and China.
It is estimated that about 300 earth shocks in the range of 1–5 KT 
would occur each year which could not be distinguished from sub­
surface nuclear tests. It would, therefore, be necessary for inspection 
teams to investigate most of these sites for the purpose of determining 
whether or not the seismic indications were from an explosion or from 
an actual earthquake.
b. Acoustic Net. It is estimated that about 30 acoustic stations within 
the USSR and China (see Figure 11) placed roughly on a 700 nautical 
mile square grid will provide an excellent (90–100%) capability to 
detect shallow subsurface, surface, and air bursts with a yield as low 
as [text not declassified] any place in the USSR and China and immediate 
surrounding water and island areas. This estimate is based on a study 
of the actual detection results obtained on all U.S. shots (29) in the yield 
range from .1 to 10 KT. These results indicate a reliable detection range 
of at least 700 nautical miles for a yield as [text not declassified]. This 
detection range, coupled with the requirement for detection by a least 
two acoustic stations in order to determine the location and time of 
explosion, established the grid pattern stated above.
c. Electromagnetic Net. Data available on electromagnetic detection 
of small U.S. surface or tower bursts indicate that a 1000-­mile range
