decided to be in Tientsin to meet Sun Yat-sen to see if he could
associate himself with Sun. This is not likely.
3. Out of all the welter of rumors and the few facts, straws in the
wind, such as Chang Tso-lin’s sudden departure, the ex-
Emperor’s unexpectedly seeking refuge in Diplomatic Quarter,
Feng Yu-hsiang’s continuing to remain at or near Peking,
although having stated he wishes to go abroad, and Sun Yat-sen’s
imminent arrival, a grave apprehension arises that extreme
Kuomintang and Soviet influence may dominate Peking. Except
by good fortune and unless the foreign powers are able to devise
some defensive action in the circumstances, the chances seem to
be that the radical wing of the Kuomintang Party and the Soviets
are to have their day in Peking. Tuan Chi-jui’s continuance in
power seems dependent upon his ability to control allegiance of
the various discordant factions. The mere fact, of course, of
Chang’s withdrawal to Tientsin does not necessarily spell his
abandonment of Tuan, since if Chang desires to oppose Sun Yat-
sen and the Red element in China he can do so very effectively
from Tientsin as a base. However, as I observed, the outlook is far
from bright.
4. Feeling, I believe, even more pessimistic than I do in the above
regard, the British Minister called upon me yesterday to suggest
an informal meeting of the representatives of the Washington
Conference powers for the purpose of discussing and exploring
into the question of the advisability of recommending to our
respective Governments the immediate joint issuance of a
statement. This statement would inform the Chinese authorities
and people of the continued desire of these powers, as evidenced
at Washington Conference, to make [take?] up with China, at the
very earliest moment that she puts her house in order, the question
of treaty revision, and that these powers to this [end?] would
support in every proper way any government in China which
would show a capacity for undertaking the task of restoring law
and order in the country. At the same time the statement should
definitely disclose the decision of the powers concerned not to
