466  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
accordingly my presentation focused around our formulation renunci­
ation of force.
Wang did not attempt force issue of his draft and I would charac­
terize his discussion as somewhat desultory, giving an impression of 
willingness to “mark time” for today. Believe this probably related to 
maneuvers reported Deptel 1052.
With respect missing military personnel suggest consideration 
be given to making fresh approach to MAC which takes account my 
exchanges here with Wang on subject. I might drop subject for meeting or 
two here while we see whether any progress can now be made in MAC.
Gowen
339.	 Telegram 1056 from Geneva1
Geneva, November 3, 1955, 9 p.m.
1056. From Johnson.
1. I opened twenty-­fourth meeting today by presenting prepared 
statement on implementation of item one, as follows:
A. Mr. Ambassador, I was pleased to learn after our last meeting 
that two imprisoned Americans had been released—Miss Harriet Mills 
and Father Armand Proulx. It is encouraging to see that appropriate 
measures have been taken to permit return of two of 19 Americans. I ear­
nestly hope and expect that release of these 2 will be followed by expe­
ditious release of the remainder as provided in agreed announcement.
B. I was also gratified to learn that day before our last meeting 
British Charge in Peking was informed that he could, in accordance 
with agreed announcement, visit and correspond with Americans in 
prison. This is another gratifying indication that some steps are being 
taken to implement agreed announcement and to enable UK Charge to 
undertake his functions.
C. I must add, however, that I was surprpsed that British Charges 
visits and correspondence with imprisoned Americans is to be in con­
formity with “rules and regulations governing prisoners’ receiving 
and corresponding with relatives.” Of course, British Charge is not 
relative but official of his govt charged under agreed announcement 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–355. Confidential; Priority; 
Limited Distribution.
