North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
935
(1) U.S. opposition to tabling the US/EEC proposal and to taking
any other initiatives.
(2) U.S. support for tabling the US/EEC proposal, but opposition
to taking any other initiatives.
(3) U.S. opposition to tabling the US/EEC proposal, but support
for an initiative on retroactive terms adjustment.
(4) U.S. support for tabling the US/EEC proposal, and for an initia-
tive on retroactive terms adjustment.
I recommend Option (4).
US/EEC Proposal
The US/EEC proposal, although a relatively weak reed, should be
tabled.
—Even if the United States does not agree to table the US/EEC
paper, other OECD countries probably will table it, perhaps with
changes that we would find objectionable.
—Agreement to table the proposal does not commit the United
States to any specific action, but merely to further discussion of the pro-
posal and to consideration, in consultation with the Congress, of
various means of implementing the proposal (see Discussion Paper,
p. 5).
—Failure to table the proposal would divide the OECD and leave
the initiative on debt entirely with the Group of 77 developing coun-
tries. Even if the G–77 rejects the proposal, as it is likely to do, the US/
EEC paper would remain as an element of subsequent discussions
(Note: there is a risk here because we cannot agree, at this time, to major
revisions in the US/EEC paper).
—Failure to table the proposal would give an impression that the
US was backsliding on the debt issue.
Retroactive terms adjustment
I recommend that the United States agree to retroactive terms ad-
justment on a case-by-case basis for the least developed countries
(LLDCs—15 of which owe the United States debts on past Foreign As-
sistance Act and PL 480 loans) plus those IDA eligible countries with
outstanding loans on harder than current U.S. terms. This course of ac-
tion—sub-option #3 on p. 7 of the Discussion Paper9—would affect a
total of $1.5 billion of debts outstanding on U.S. loans, at a real cost to
the United States of less than $500 million. The reduction in annual debt
service receipts would be less than $50 million in 1987. (See table on p. 8
of the Discussion Paper.)
9 Reference is to suboption 3) under Section C of the attached Discussion Paper.
