3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
7
added that his Inaugural Speech2 and his recent letter to Secretary
Brezhnev3 expressed his views on U.S.-Soviet relations.
SALT
Ambassador Dobrynin asked if the President had a timetable for
SALT. The President was non-commital.
Cruise Missile, Backfire, and Missile Reductions
The President asked how Dobrynin felt about the cruise missile
and the Backfire bomber in relation to SALT II. Dobrynin responded
that the cruise missile should be included within the SALT II frame-
work. With respect to the Backfire, Dobrynin said that the aircraft does
not have a strategic capability. The President asked if the Soviet Union
had tankers to refuel the Backfire. Dobrynin replied that he was not
prepared to answer the question. He did, however, add that the Soviets
would not go “intercontinental” with the Backfire. Secretary Vance
asked if that meant the Soviets would not deploy the Backfire so that it
would have a return capability. Dobrynin responded by asking “where
would we put them?”
The President said that he preferred to separate the cruise missile
and Backfire issues from SALT II. He indicated he wanted to confine
SALT II to numbers, but that other issues would be open to negotiation
later. Following a successful conclusion to SALT II, the President said,
he would like to move quickly to reduce the size of our respective nu-
clear arsenals. The President said he would like to see the total number
of nuclear missiles reduced, to several hundred. He added that we
could, at that time, decide which would be sea-launched, land-based,
etc.
The President stated his desire to reach a minimum number of mis-
siles, one that would allow each nation to feel secure from a preemptive
strike. He wanted the remaining missiles to be easily monitored and se-
cure from destruction.
Dobrynin raised the question of ceilings on MIRV and the
numbers of ICBMs. The President said he would like to see ICBMs re-
duced to 1,000 with one warhead apiece (100 kts).4
Dobrynin asked about range limitations for sea-based cruise mis-
siles. The President explained that our population is located on the sea-
2 For Carter’s Inaugural Address and his remarks to other nations on U.S. foreign
policy, see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 1–5. See also Foreign Relations, 1977–
1980, vol. I, Foundations of Foreign Policy.
3 See Document 1.
4 An unknown hand wrote, “emphasized—Just as one tentative possibility” imme-
diately following this paragraph.
