Human Rights
227
Final Act3 and other international instruments and by furthering the
goal contained in U.S. laws authorizing foreign assistance that our for-
eign policy promote increased observance of internationally recog-
nized human rights by all countries;
(c) substitutes, in determining our attitude toward Third World
governments, a standard based on governmental behavior toward
people for an increasingly outmoded Marxist-non-Marxist standard,
and assists in the philosophical debate with the Soviet Union over the
type of society worth developing;
(d) strengthens domestic support for our foreign policy by re-
flecting the moral and ethical values of our people;
(e) promotes the fundamental long-term American interest in a
world of nations whose systems of government and societies reflect in-
dividual freedom and dignity.
C. Intermediate Objectives.
In order to attain the overall objective set forth above, we should
seek to achieve the following broad intermediate objectives:
(a) heighten international and national awareness of human rights
concerns in order to steadily increase the norms of acceptable conduct
in the human rights field;
(b) attract international support for our efforts;
(c) demonstrate that countries which violate basic human rights do
so at a cost in their standing in the international community. Con-
versely, that countries with positive records or significant improving
performance benefit tangibly and intangibly from their efforts;
(d) promote and strengthen the efforts of international institutions
as well as non-governmental organizations to protect human rights;
(e) ensure that our own conduct measures up to the same stand-
ards we apply to others;
(f) seek a rapid end to patterns of gross governmental violations of
the person, particularly murder, torture, and lengthy imprisonment for
political offenses;
(g) seek to increase U.S. resources available for alleviating human
suffering, particularly with regard to refugees.
D. Specific Objectives.
Achievement of the overall objective and the broad intermediate
objectives set forth above will entail pursuit of specific objectives in
particular countries and international institutions. The identification of
these objectives requires detailed analysis of the human rights situa-
3 See footnote 14, Document 4.
