564  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
established with authority to cut across administrative barriers, and 
planning is being centralized under the State Planning Committee, 
which heretofore has had only a passive role in science planning. 
Scientists are being given more voice in planning and Soviet policies 
in science and technology are likely to reflect their point of view more 
fully. Concurrently with the centralization of planning and coordina­
tion, operational authority over research is being decentralized and 
directors of institutes are being given more administrative authority.
77. Applied research will continue to receive great emphasis in the 
USSR, although the importance of adequate fundamental research is 
well understood at the planning level. Highest priority will continue to 
be accorded to military-­industrial research and development, but the 
rapid expansion of Soviet scientific resources will now permit greater 
flexibility. Greater individual initiative within assigned tasks of research 
will probably be encouraged, basic research in new fields undertaken, 
and somewhat more scientific and technical effort allocated to the con­
sumer sector of the economy.
Scientific Manpower, Training and Facilities
78. The number of scientifically and technically trained people in 
the Soviet Union has increased approximately three-­fold in the postwar 
period. We estimate that as of mid-1958, about 1,625,000 graduates of 
university level scientific and technical curricula are actually employed 
in all scientific and technical fields, about 15 percent more than in the US. 
Although US graduations in scientific and technical fields are expected 
to increase, the USSR will continue to enjoy a numerical advantage. 
Based on current trends, by 1963 the USSR will probably have nearly 
35 percent more graduates employed in scientific and technical work 
than the US, as indicated by the accompanying table.8 It should be noted 
that the bulk of Soviet numerical superiority will continue to derive 
from graduates employed in industrial and agricultural production. 
The number of Soviet scientists engaged in research and teaching in the 
physical sciences has remained substantially smaller than in the US, and 
is perhaps half the US total at present. However, Soviet emphasis on 
research in military and basic industrial fields probably results in a near 
numerical equality between the two countries in scientific manpower 
devoted to these critical activities.
8 Such numerical comparisons provide only a rough measure of relative scientific 
and technical strength, since: (a) the professional categories are not precisely equivalent 
in the two countries; (b) the figures do not reflect the broader US supply of scientific 
and technical personnel who hold no degrees; and (c) they give no weight to qualitative 
differences in training and experience. [Footnote is in the original and repeated in table 
title that follows.]
