260 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 90. Memorandum From the Chief of the National Foreign Intelligence Center, Central Intelligence Agency ([name not declassified]) to the Deputy Director of the Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State (Gilmore)1 RP M 79–10075 Washington, February 6, 1979 SUBJECT Could Bulgaria Go the Way of Romania? [classification not declassified] Dear Harry, 1. The notion that Bulgaria might strike out on a course independent of the Soviet Union is a titillating one. Geographically separated from the USSR and with no Soviet troops stationed on its soil, the country would seem to be in a felicitous position to do so. One can further argue that, economically faring no better and receiving no greater economic help than Moscow’s other East European allies, Bulgaria would seem to have been ill-rewarded for its fealty to the USSR over the years. Its current disagreement with the USSR over the future direction of its economic development would be a motive for striking out on its own now. [classification not declassified] 2. A number of factors, nevertheless, argue that the Zhivkov regime would have less inclination to dispute the Soviets than had the three Balkan communist states who now shun Soviet hegemony. The Bulgarian leadership was placed in power by the Soviets; it did not assume power by virtue of its only military prowess (Albania & Yugoslavia), nor did it achieve power only after purging those leaders the Soviets imposed upon them (Romania). The Bulgarians have no latent territorial disputes with the USSR (Romania). To the contrary, Russia has usually been seen as a protector of the Bulgarian state against its traditional enemies (Romania, Turkey, Greece). The USSR is now probably viewed as its protector against the Serbs who—when viewed from Sofia—are probably seen as coveting Pirin Macedonia. [classification not declassified] 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services (DI), Job 82T00150R, Production Case Files, Box 6, Folder 63, Could Bulgaria Go the Way of Romania?. Confidential. The salutation is handwritten. Telegram 555 from Bucharest, January 27, is attached but not printed. In the telegram, the Embassy reported on a meeting between the Deputy Chief of Mission and the French Counselor. The French diplomat, discussing the results of Brezhnev’s visit to Sofia, suggested that Bulgaria might be in position similar to early 1960s Romania, when increasing disagreements with Moscow over the direction and pace of development led Bucharest to distance itself from Soviet policies. The Embassy concluded that, if disagreements between Sofia and Moscow existed, they would be evident in Bulgarian policy toward the Balkans.
