Chemical and Biological Weapons 183 f. The Secretary of Defense shall continue to develop and improve controls and safety measures in all chemical warfare programs. (C) g. The Director of Central Intelligence shall continue to maintain surveillance of the chemical warfare capabilities of other states. (S) h. An Ad Hoc Committee chaired by the NSC shall conduct a periodic review of United States chemical warfare programs and public information policy, and will make recommendations to the President. (C) 3. With respect to Biological Research: a. The United States renounced the use of all methods of bacteriological/biological and toxin warfare in accordance with the terms of the Biological Weapons Convention.4 (U) b. The United States has destroyed all stockpiles of bacteriological/biological and toxin materials and associated weapons systems. (U) c. The United States bacteriological/biological programs will be consistent with the provisions of the Biological Weapons Convention. (U) d. The Secretary of Defense shall continue to develop controls and safety measures in all defensive biological research programs. (C) e. The Director of Central Intelligence shall continue to maintain surveillance of the bacteriological/biological warfare capabilities of other states. (S) f. An Ad Hoc Committee chaired by the NSC shall conduct a periodic review of United States biological research programs and public information on policy, and will make recommendations to the President. (C) NSDM 355 is hereby rescinded. Zbigniew Brzezinski 4 The draft text of the Biological Weapons Convention is available in Department of State Bulletin, November 1, 1971, pp. 508–511. The United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union signed the Convention on April 10, 1972, and it entered into force on March 26, 1975. 5 National Security Decision Memorandum 35, “United States Policy on Chemical Warfare Program and Bacteriological Research Program,” November 25, 1969, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. E–2, Documents on Arms Control and Nonproliferation, 1969–1972, Document 165.
