Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
711
“—Our diplomacy in troubled regions and our ability to pursue
our global economic goals are strengthened by pursuing a sixth in-
terest: broadening our ties to other nations—with China, for example,
and throughout the Third World.
“—The advancement of human rights is more than an ideal. It, too,
is an interest. Peaceful gains for freedom are also steps toward stability
abroad and greater security for America.
“—And finally, we cannot disregard our interest in addressing en-
vironmental and other longer term global trends that can imperil our
future.”
Vance then discussed in greater detail these eight elements of a
broader American foreign policy before offering his concluding
remarks:
“I know that no one is more acutely aware of the breadth and com-
plexity of our challenges than the members of this committee. We face a
broad agenda. It requires constant, hard choices among compelling yet
competing interests. In a dangerous world, it requires a willingness to
defend our vital interests with force when necessary and a diplomacy
of active and constructive engagement to reduce the dangers we may
confront. It requires sacrifice in resources for our defense and help for
other nations, in reduced consumption of energy, and efforts to control
inflation. It will test our wisdom and our persistence.
“We will be badly served if we fail to understand a world of rapid
change and shy away from its complexity. The flat truth is that complex
problems can seldom be resolved by simple solutions.
“Some have said that we are trying to do too much. I say that we
cannot afford to do less, in our own national interest.
“Some say that in trying to do too much, we have accomplished
too little. I say that in strengthening our military posture, in reempha-
sizing and strengthening NATO, in negotiating the SALT II Treaty, in
normalizing relations with China, in helping to achieve peace between
Israel and Egypt and a framework for a comprehensive peace in the
Middle East, in advancing peace in Zimbabwe, in the Panama Canal
treaties, in the successful multilateral trade negotiations and other im-
provements in the international economic system, in closer ties to de-
veloping nations, and in promoting human rights—in all these areas, I
say we are on the right road, even if it is a long and difficult one.
“Some say that in seeking peaceful change toward human justice
in every area of the world, we encourage radicalism. I say that the
world is changing, that human beings everywhere will demand a better
life. The United States must offer its own vision of a better future, or the
future will belong to others.
“Some have said that the executive and legislative branches cannot
collaborate effectively on foreign policy. I say that the record over the
past few years has been a good one.
