660  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
GT–6.	
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in 
Guatemala1
Washington, June 5, 1958, 6:22 p.m.
618. Guatemalan Ambassador2 informed Dept today GOG had 
info from two good sources in Mexico and Belize that Guatemalan 
exiles from Mexico were planning invasion of Guatemala through 
British Honduras. Said exiles planned land at Punta Gorda, British 
Honduras, and from there would attempt enter Peten through Fallabon 
and possibly move also against Puerto Barrios.
Ambassador said that because of these reports GOG was consider-
ing moving troops to Puerto Barrios and Fallabon areas as precaution-
ary measure, and that he hoped Dept would understand reasons for 
troop movements when made. He inferred landings of exiles would be 
made with connivance of British authorities. DEPT discounts possibility 
British connivance.
Dept has no info to confirm Guatemalan reports and consid-
ers this official démarche by Guatemalan Ambassador to be further 
indication Ydígoras intends continue policy of arousing nationalism 
of Guatemalan people and exacerbating relations with UK by delib-
erately creating situations conducive to incidents over Belize. Dept 
deeply concerned this policy of Ydígoras may lead to eventual clash 
with British, and believes Ydígoras being strongly influenced by 
Garcia Granados.3
Unless you perceive objection, you are instructed to seek immedi-
ate interview with President, inform him of Guatemalan Ambassador’s 
action here and state that 
1) U.S. so far has no information to confirm that British are abetting 
reported passage of exiles through British Honduras and while matter 
not discussed with British believe they would cooperate prevent any 
such attempt by exiles, 
2) movement of troops to British border might well be considered 
provocation by them, 
3) U.S. is deeply concerned at possible threat to peace of area if 
presence of troops on border should provoke incident, 
4) Even if in unlikely event exiles should be able invade Guatemala 
at any point, OAS and UN offer effective machinery for handling this 
kind problem, 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 714.00/6–558. Secret; Niact. Drafted by 
King and signed by Rubottom.
2 Col. Carlos S. Antillón Hernández.
3 Jorge García Granados, adviser to President Ydígoras.
