International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 719 firms and workers because most U.S. small cars (compacts and subcompacts) were already selling virtually as fast as they could be produced (also, the lack of explicit legal authority to restrain trade). Since your decision in March, there have been a number of significant developments which have a bearing on the auto import situation and on public perceptions thereof. These include the following: (1) As described in the first section of this memorandum, worsening economic conditions and tight credit have severely depressed second-quarter car production and sales (including U.S.-produced small cars), employment, and auto company financial results. (2) Before March, the domestic producers’ weakness was concentrated in their large car sales, with small cars being produced at or near capacity and sold at record rates. After March, idle capacity in some small car lines and a general lagging of sales of small cars appeared as well, even though U.S. small cars have held their share of the small car market against imports. (3) The import share of the U.S. market has continued at record high levels (it actually increased slightly—from 26.4 percent in the first quarter of 1980 to 28.4 percent in May). Due to weakened demand, absolute sales of imports declined after March (from an annual rate of 2.8 million units in the first quarter to 2.1 million in May). High import penetration, in conjunction with depressed sales, poor financial results of the auto firms, and major new layoffs have given impetus to demands for trade restrictions. (4) In May, Treasury decided to reclassify cab chassis, thereby raising the tariff from 4 to 25 percent, effective mid-August. This decision affects $1.4 billion in U.S. imports, mostly from Japan, and should produce some relief for the domestic industry (see separate decision memo by Ambassador Askew).8 While this change was made for legal reasons, if you do not decide to modify it, it will benefit the domestic automotive industry through increases in sales and employment and you can take some credit domestically for leaving it in place (this is of particular interest to Ford). (5) Since October 1979, the trade adjustment assistance program has certified over 370,000 autoworkers as eligible for assistance (where imports have been found to be a cause of unemployment)—170,000 have been certified since February. The Administration has had to request an additional $1.5 billion largely to meet the needs of these workers—with considerable public attention—and this amount is likely to increase further. 8 See Document 245.
