98 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 But —The risk of civil war and complete disintegration is serious. —The danger of Soviet intervention in the north is increased. This is likely to be a partition option. What assets do we have? —[3½ lines not declassified] —[2½ lines not declassified] —[1½ lines not declassified] —Exile groups are begging for a signal from us. There are some good people (Amini, Bakhtiar) outside Iran that can have an impact there, but they would need a lot of help to become a significant factor. —Ultimately, direct overt U.S. intervention could be required. The extent of our commitment should be no greater than our willingness to play it out to the end. This is particularly important the more we involve the Saudis and Egyptians. —The Iranian military at present belongs to no one. Although our capability to swing it to our support is limited, neutralizing it is a realistic objective. Our liabilities: —Khomeini is viewed as a saint by much of the Iranian population and the embodiment of the national will. Opposing him directly may only strengthen his appeal. He is ruthless and thrives on confrontation. —Khomeini controls Tehran and the streets. It is hard to visualize any leader or organization taking him on on his own turf. —There is no obvious alternative leader. Most have been tainted by association with the Shah. This is particularly true of the exiled military. Three alternative assessments: 1. The only way to find out how much strength Khomeini really has is to test it. That means we have to take some action, e.g. [less than 1 line not declassified], probing weak spots in the military and political structure, and increasing our level of contacts with tribal elements and exiles. We are never going to be able to work with the Khomeini regime. We might as well recognize that fact and begin a systematic effort to build an alternative infrastructure. Letting nature take its course in fact means abandoning the field to the left as the only viable alternative. The longer Khomeini remains in power, the more tempting it will be for the moderates to move to the left or be crushed. A center coalition will emerge only if we encourage and support it. 2. Although we do not like Khomeini, [less than 1 line not declassified]. By opposing him directly, we play into his hands and strengthen his appeal. Khomeini is his own worst enemy. Left to his own devices, he will destroy himself. We should prepare for that event and [less than 1 line not declassified]. But we should not get ourselves committed to
