630 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Brooks: Notification would be made regardless of how long they were outside? Koltunov: Right. Brooks: I am confused on the size questions. For each 10 launchers, the restricted area would be no more than 250 square kilometers and not less than 125 square kilometers. But if five years from now you wanted a smaller restricted area, why should that not be allowed? Koltunov: It is not excluded even now. Brooks: One more question on size. The size of each restricted area would be specified in the MOU and limited by the size outlined here. Koltunov: Absolutely right. Horne: Please explain why notification only takes place after 50% of the launchers are outside the restricted area. Koltunov: The reasoning is simple. We believe that with the existence of deployment areas and restricted areas, and with all training activities taking place within those boundaries, verification would be effective. But since the U.S. side insisted on this notification approach, we have come forth with this proposal. Horne: My understanding of the 100 kilometer square restricted zone was that all the launchers would be there, and that notification would occur when they moved outside that area. Help me to understand why, with a larger restricted area, you could not notify of all movements outside the restricted area. Koltunov: We have lots of options: a 5 square kilometer restricted area, 25, 100—­a complete spectrum. Our original option is still on the table, i.e., a restricted area of 100 square kilometers is still on the table. Horne: So there is no military reason for the inability to notify all movement under the last proposal? Koltunov: We are not dealing with military reasons, but with what should be verified under the limits of the treaty we are working out. All of the options are based on the goal of keeping mobile systems mobile and establishing effective verification. That is why there are various options. Burt: We will return in Geneva to this subject.
