Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 252. Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, April 11, 1980 SUBJECT Iran and the Soviets (U) I am concerned about the evidence we continue to get of steady, quiet build-up in the Transcaucasus for a Soviet military move into Iran. While I do not question current intelligence assessments that there is no indication that the Soviets are actually preparing to move, I am fearful that we are in danger of wishfully turning this rational assumption into a conviction that they will not move. I worry about the kind of mind-sets that afflict intelligence estimators and comfort policymakers and which led to conclusions, e.g., that the Soviets were not putting nuclear weaponry into Cuba in 1962 or that the dynasty was secure in I am worried also about the impact of increased pressure by us on Iran or punitive measures if the hostages are harmed. Given the utterly irrational state of mind that dominates elements in Tehran, and the intense hatred of Khomeini for America, a seemingly rational action such as a naval blockade could conceivably provoke an Iranian invitation to the Soviets to come in to protect them. Khomeini could give such intervention his blessing with a doctrine of “the lesser Satan.” The Iranian left, certainly capitalizing on current tensions to improve its position, could abet such a move. (C) [1 paragraph (4½ lines) not declassified] Do the Soviets want to invade? In the final analysis, I find it impossible to believe that the Soviets could resist temptation to take over most or all of Iran if the opportunity presented itself to them in a form where they could get themselves invited in as a protecting power. For more than 150 years, the Russians have aspired to advance in this area. Afghanistan has whetted their appetite; but Afghanistan will continue to cost with little prospect of return. Iran could be a paying proposition with its vast oil and gas reserves—the first really profitable territorial acquisition for the Soviets. It could help pay for Cuba and Ethiopia and help 1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Intelligence Files, Logged INT Files, Box
