Covert and Overt Operations
929
9. Alternatives to Desert One
As the Report indicates, the road traffic at Desert One made com-
promise during the following day highly probable. An alternative,
without this road problem, would have been preferable, but the intelli-
gence does not readily reveal an alternative. The road problem was
evident from the OTTER reconnaissance flight, but the JTF assessed
the risk as acceptable—wrongly.
10. Handling the Dust Phenomenon
The Report is comprehensive in exploring ways to anticipate and
deal with the dust. Had any of a number of other weaknesses been
absent—communications among the helicopters and with other aircraft,
with the air weather service, inadequate navigation aides, the lack of
a reconnaissance pre-run flight, or a pathfinder—the dust would not
have caused at least one abort. I find the lack of a pre-run for weather
reconnaissance surprising given the conditions.
11. C–130 Pathfinders
In the Son Tay raid,5 C–130s flew with the HH–53s, using all-
weather navigation aids to guide the helicopters. The failure to include
such pathfinders in this operation is surprising, and in my view wholly
inexcusable. It violated basic tactics for moving a force anywhere,
ground or air.
Where Does the Fault Lie?
The Report puts lots of emphasis on flaws in command procedures,
particularly OPSEC being excessive and rigid, in training, and in air
operations planning. The finger is pointed unambiguously at Vaught.
The Report also, however, gives a thoughtful reader enough evidence
to infer a number of other culprits as well.
First, the Navy component of the JTF is no credit to the Navy. I
suspect some strained relations between Vaught and the Navy are
hidden. The Navy’s initial fear of a “witch hunt” is now more under-
standable. There really is a “witch” in this case.
Second, Gast’s role, the confusion in air operations responsibility,
and Gast’s relations with Jones are other places the fault may be shared.
Third, the DCI and the Intelligence Community share some of the
blame. They dragged their feet, and they hid behind interagency bar-
riers in the early phase.
5 The 1970 failed rescue mission of 50 American POWs from Son Tay prison near
Hanoi was the first joint military operation run by the JCS Chairman.
