World Hunger and Food Policy
793
(3) An Administration initiative on world hunger must be tied to a
major effort to build public support. The Presidential Commission will
help to do this, as will Richard Harden’s efforts with the President’s
mother and Shirley MacLaine.20 If done skillfully, we can gain spillover
effect for the larger foreign aid issue.
(4) Although our recommendations do not address the continuing
problem of hunger and malnutrition within the U.S., we feel that a
world hunger initiative must be combined with stepped-up efforts to
deal with the needs of the malnourished poor in our own nation. This is
in part reflected by the President’s commitment to establish a Commis-
sion on Domestic and International Hunger and Malnutrition. Never-
theless, any statement on this subject should address the domestic
aspects.
Issues and Recommendations
1. Presidential Commitment
Nothing is more important than explicit Presidential leadership
and commitment to demonstrate political will and ensure that appro-
priate priority is given by the agencies to overriding development con-
siderations, and to encourage other nations to support integrated rural
development aimed at the small farmer and landless laborer. It is
equally important that the President communicate the priority he at-
taches to this issue personally to national leaders in those countries
where hunger exists. They have to believe that their stature in our eyes
is tied to their willingness to deal with hunger as a priority issue and
transmit the same message to other leaders in their governments.
Recommendation
Make an explicit Presidential commitment to the reduction of
hunger, malnutrition and poverty as a major foreign policy initiative of
the U.S., and in this way mobilize public support behind this initiative
in particular, and development cooperation overall.
2. Food Production and Consumption Strategies
Anticipating a food deficit of between 95 and 108 million tons by
1985, poor countries must significantly increase their current annual 2.7
percent food production rate. The World Food Council meeting in
197721 reaffirmed the 1974 World Food Conference’s target of a 4 per-
cent food production growth rate in the developing world as desirable
and achievable.
20 See footnote 13, Document 242.
21 See Document 221.
