continued and completed, if the result aimed at, namely to secure for
Austria’s economy a permanent adequate position in the ensemble of the
various European economies, is to be attained.
My Government therefore finds itself obliged to proceed to the issue of an
investments loan for which the basis is given through the said decision
taken by the Committee of Control in accordance with Article 7 of Protocol
II dated Geneva October 4th, 1923 [1922].13
To be able, however, to contract the loan under suitable conditions, Austria
requires her assets to be freed from the lien imposed upon them under the
terms of Article 197 of the Treaty of St. Germain14 for purposes of
reparation, as well as under the terms of the relief bonds issued by Austria
for the relief credits granted to it. Likewise a further postponement for this
purpose is required of the payments to be made in accordance with the
stipulations of these bonds.
My Government has at the same time addressed to the Reparation
Commission the request to defer in favour of the intended loan and for a
period of 30 years i. e. up to 31. december, 1957, the charges laid upon all
the assets and revenues of Austria by virtue of Article 197 of the Treaty of
St. Germain. It now ventures to ask also the Government of the United
States of America to grant the suspension of the lien, and the postponement
up to 31 december, 1957, of the payments due for the relief credit granted to
Austria to the amount of about 24 million Dollars plus interest.
In view of the nature of the proposed investments my Government deems it
indispensable that the loan to be contracted should be for 30 years at least,
lest in the next few years that are devoted to further reconstruction work,
Austrian economy be charged with too heavy obligations for the repayment
of the loan.
In bringing the above request of my Government to your knowledge, I
should be greatly obliged if Your Excellency would kindly forward it to the
Government of the United States and advise me, at the earliest possible
date, of the decision taken by them in the matter.
I avail myself [etc.]
