768  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
this repetition of this position could advance in any way discussion by 
both sides on issuance of announcement.
34. Wang said with regard to statement I made this morning, there 
seemed to be three points on which we must be clear. In first place, my 
statement tended to confuse aggression with self-­defense.
35. Wang said it quite true that they endorse and do not dispute 
right every country, in accordance United Nations Charter, to individ­
ual and collective self-­defense, and that this includes United States. 
However, such right of self-­defense can only be used in protecting and 
defending territory of own country against external aggression and 
attack. This right of self-­defense has nothing in common with armed 
aggression against other countries. So these two things must not be 
confused with each other.
36. Wang said I had pointed out that they had self-­defense arrange­
ments beyond their borders. It true that they have exercised that right 
of self-­defense. If there had not been foreign forces threatening their 
border and foreign military aircraft violating their airspace, they would 
not have exercised that right. Chinese exercised that right of self-­
defense simply in order protect their territory from being violated by 
foreign powers. However, action of foreign forces in starting aggressive 
acts on foreign territory cannot be termed exercise of self-­defense.
37. Wang said let him put it more concretely and with respect dis­
putes between China and US in Taiwan area. Present grave hostilities 
between China and US in Taiwan area chiefly result of US action in 
forcible seizure Taiwan, which Chinese territory. No amount talk, argu­
ment, or sophistry can turn Taiwan into state or territory of America. 
Therefore action of US in forcible seizure of Taiwan can only be termed 
aggressive action and can never be termed act of self-­defense. Same 
is true other way around—Chinese forces would have no right speak 
about self-­defense if they should forcibly occupy American territory of 
San Francisco.
38. Wang said I had stated this morning that if American forces 
were attacked they would not forego right to self-­defense. However, 
present situation is not one in which US forces being attacked, but is one 
in which US forces have used force against Taiwan and have attacked 
China. [garble] logic seemed to be equally absurd as that of man who 
beats up another and while beating him still claims it is self-­defense. 
How can this action be termed self-­defense?
39. Wang said from this it should be clear that we should not try 
confuse aggressive acts with self-­defense. These two acts should be 
clearly separated from each other. By this he meant we should not try 
explain aggressive action as action of self-­defense.
40. Wang said as he had said, they have full right to expel pres­
ent occupation of Taiwan by US forces. Nevertheless, they still propose
