600
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
unlocking this case. Raising the issue with Ceausescu could make him
uncomfortable and may not immediately secure the release of Rau-
ta’s family.
This would give the Romanian President an understanding of the
U.S. view that, three years after the granting of MFN, there should be
progress in even the most difficult of the divided family cases with
Romania. A number of longstanding cases will have been resolved in
the weeks before Ceausescu’s arrival here, clearly as a result of a
Romanian attempt to put its best face forward. Indications are that
there is little high-level Romanian receptivity to bargaining for the
Rauta family’s release. A high-level U.S. reaffirmation to Ceausescu
that the Rauta matter is a humanitarian issue which can be resolved
will maintain the momentum we have generated in pressing the case
with Romanian authorities. There has been no confirmation to us that
the Romanian President is even aware of our heightened concern for
the Rauta wife and child. (HA supports.)
2. Secretary Raises the Issue with the Foreign Minister
This course would also make clear very strong U.S. interest in
resolving this case, without producing a confrontation during the
Ceausescu visit. It could be taken up as one of the “delicate problems”
referred to by the President. (S/P support this option, as does HA, if
the issue is not raised by the President.)
3. Issue is not Raised by the President or Secretary
We have already raised this issue at high levels this year. Our
Ambassador raised it with Deputy Foreign Minister Pacoste in January
and delivered a note. We raised it with Presidential Counselor Pungan
in Washington. Just recently, on March 30, our Ambassador made a
strong pitch to Pungan to find some solution and Congressman Vanik
made an equally strong pitch to the Foreign Minister on April 1 at our
prodding. (EUR supports.)
Recommendations:
1. That the President confirm U.S. interest in the Rauta affair as
humanitarian and seek Ceausescu’s agreement to allow the wife and
child to join Mr. Rauta here. (HA supports.)
2. That the Secretary raise the issue with Andrei. (S/P supports,
as does HA, if the President does not raise.)7
3. That the issue not be raised. (EUR supports.)
7 Christopher approved Option 2 on April 8.
