606  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
alleged effect of action his government was going to take. If this was 
case, he could not agree to recess because it would not reconcile with 
spirit of making efforts find common ground between us. However, if 
recess proposal was motivated merely by consideration of holidays, he 
would consider suggestion and reply later.
101. I said I did not feel move his government will be helpful find­
ing common ground between us. It was one of reasons leading me to 
suggest recess. However I did not desire to press point.
102. Wang said as I had stated, he would not agree to recess on 
first grounds, relating to action his government. If I insisted on recess 
on those grounds his side compelled make further statement to clarify 
its position. However, if second reason were in mind, if motive were 
purely the approaching holidays, then he would consider matter and 
give reply later.
103. I said my specific suggestion was for recess until January 12. 
If he preferred some other period I would consider it. I was not trying 
to be arbitrary.
104. Wang said he would reply after consideration. I asked when 
that would be and whether before December 22. He replied he couldn’t 
say but would make it as soon as possible. In reply to my query as to 
what we would say to press he suggested we inform press next meet­
ing would be December 22, the usual date. In case of change we would 
announce it later to press.
105. I pointed out I was leaving for Prague Friday and would 
appreciate if possible an answer before I left. He said he would try but 
could not promise.
Gowen
418.	 Telegram 1294 from Geneva1
Geneva, December 16, 1955, 4 a.m.
1294. From Johnson.
1. Text of press statement PRC Foreign Affairs Ministry was made 
available to correspondents here by Chinese Consulate General. Wang 
refused correspondents request for interview, and officer handing out 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/12–1655. Official Use Only; 
­Priority. Repeated to Paris for the Secretary only as telegram 291.
