Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1021
Brazil’s nuclear plants so that there would be no need for reprocessing
and enrichment facilities. Finally, the Secretary emphasized that the
concern with nuclear proliferation was global and in no way directed
at Brazil. The control of proliferation is very important to future
peace and order and a matter of general concern to the United States
Government.
Ambassador Pinheiro said he wished to express his government’s
appreciation for this early initiative to resume the bilateral dialogue
and said that he was aware of the content of the Crimmins-Silveira con-
versation. He welcomed the Secretary’s statement of the importance
that the United States attaches to relations between the two countries.
Brazil, he said, totally reciprocates the importance accorded to relations
between the two countries; Brazil takes pride in being a faithful friend
and ally of the United States. There are differences on some issues but
this is not true in the case of proliferation. Brazil has demonstrated its
similar preoccupation with this problem by signing the guarantees
which cover its agreement with Germany—guarantees which go be-
yond the NPT in renouncing peaceful nuclear explosions. In addition,
Brazil has signed the Treaty of Tlatelolco. Brazil, he emphasized, is
equally concerned about proliferation but the problem must be ad-
dressed in relation to all aspects of the matter and must include those
countries which already have the pertinent technology. When Brazil
did not sign the NPT it was in protest against vertical proliferation.4 It is
to be hoped that those who have the technology will be equally circum-
scribed because the danger is the same.
Ambassador Pinheiro said he did not intend by these preliminary
remarks to get into the kinds of details that would arise in the fruitful
discussions he hoped would take place. Nevertheless, Brazil has certain
limitations on the actions it can take. Brazil cannot subordinate its
sources of essential energy to the control of even friendly countries
such as the United States because attitudes depend upon the political
winds. For example, he said, in spite of the belief that certain institu-
tions should consider projects on their merits, the United States condi-
tions loans on other issues such as human rights performance. Brazil
cannot be dependent on one source outside Brazil’s control. This be-
came evident with relation to the oil exporting countries. Brazil will be
only too happy however to explore all areas of mutual interest and con-
sultations will strengthen the mutual purpose of the two countries. He
pointed out that in view of its growing specific weight, Brazil is inter-
ested in a broad range of issues including North-South relations and
4 Vertical proliferation is an increase in the capabilities of the existing nuclear
powers while non-nuclear weapons states were prohibited from developing nuclear
capabilities.
