1666  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
470.	 Telegram Tosec 144 to Herter at Geneva1
Washington, May 29, 1959, 8:57 p.m.
Tosec 144. For Herter from Dillon: From Acting Secretary. Next 
following telegram is draft tactics paper for resumption nuclear test 
negotiations June 8 which was developed by interagency working 
group and which I have authorized as basis initiating consultations 
with UK.
Objective proposed tactics is to follow-­up probing Soviet position 
technical aspects and veto requirements for inspection as initiated by 
Wadsworth just before recess and in particular to resume pressure on 
Soviets for discussion technical issues identified in conversations you 
and Lloyd had with Gromyko.
We anticipate Soviets will continue to be unwilling to engage in 
discussion underground detection and our tactics contemplate exerting 
pressure by tabling at outset conclusions Berkner Panel studies outer 
space detection and supporting study documents. To avoid appearance 
of raising new obstacles to agreement we would table these technical 
findings to demonstrate value US–UK proposal in present draft Annex 
I for inspection of all unidentified events of 5 kt and above, and 20 
percent of those under 5 kt. This would have advantage of not REPEAT 
NOT appearing retreat from past treaty proposals and yet supporting 
our position on need for substantial number of inspections and for 
building some flexibility into treaty in view of uncertainties present 
knowledge and likelihood improvement in system.
Important consideration in planning introduce technical studies 
immediately on resumption negotiations is increasing pressure here 
from Congress and the press for publication studies on underground 
and outer space testing and detection. Pressure arises from both those 
alleging State Department hiding information showing detection such 
tests impractical and those believing studies lead to conclusions sim­
plifying detection problem. Much of substance of studies is coming 
out in garbled form in view of access of large number panel members 
as well as key Congressional committees. We believe that introduction 
into negotiations and subsequent release will give us best chance of 
putting proper interpretation on results these studies. Still unresolved 
is question whether concept of “perfect hole” for concealment under­
ground explosions should be tabled and published. While we are 
reluctant to reveal this concept in view possible usefulness to Soviets, 
1 Source: Negotiating tactics for resumption of nuclear test ban talks. Secret; Limited 
Distribution. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/5–2959.
