1956  817
2. My analysis their actual present position is that they willing 
“renounce force” with specific reference Taiwan if we agree Foreign 
Ministers meeting but they would not consider any such renuncia­
tion valid beyond point Foreign Ministers had met and failed achieve 
peaceful settlement on substantially their terms of “problem of reduc­
tion tensions Taiwan area.” It possible they would consider even such 
a limited renunciation not applicable offshore islands. I do not consider 
this necessarily implies any immediate intention attack offshores but 
only that they not willing even in this limited sense bind themselves 
with respect to them.
3. Foregoing is of course poles removed from our position on 
renunciation of force and unless further outside influences are brought 
to bear on them makes possibility of any agreement on declaration on 
our terms very remote. Difficult to see how any further progress can be 
achieved solely on basis discussion in meetings.
Gowen
512.	 Telegram 1577 from Geneva1
Geneva, March 1, 1956, 10 p.m.
1577. From Johnson.
1. In view Wang’s evident reluctance open, I opened 39th meet­
ing by saying that in thinking over our discussion at last meeting, it 
seemed to me we were still tending to get away from principal and 
immediate task before us, that is question of declaration. Details of 
our respective substantive positions with regard our various disputes 
seemed to be obscuring real object at this stage in our talks. To use a 
vernacular English phrase, we seemed to be getting into position of 
not seeing forest for trees.
A. I continued from prepared statement, what we ought to be try­
ing to do is to agree on declaration renouncing use of force. That is 
where agreement is essential at this stage. It would be fine if would 
agree on everything else too, but past weeks have shown that we have 
difficulty enough without borrowing more. Can we not at this stage 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/3–156. Confidential; Priority; 
Limit Distribution.
