858 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 devising their own scenarios with the Majlis. Some tentative channels of communication have been established. Others may appear as activity intensifies in the Majlis. I have raised with Dave Newsom the possibility of a restricted PRC to review our present situation on the diplomatic front and State is now considering it. (S) We really have very few assets for preventing or managing the last three contingencies. The UN could again become a useful forum in some circumstances. For example, a Security Council resolution expressly prohibiting trials might be more effective if trials appeared imminent than it would be as an abstract warning. A UN conciliation or peacekeeping effort of some sort might be helpful in some circumstances, although the UN is not equipped to deal with a purely civil war. The UN could be used to impose additional penalties on Iran, and it could provide the forum for an international signal to the Soviets not to intervene. However, judging from our experience over the past eight months, it would be unrealistic to expect the UN to play more than a hortatory role, which Iran is free to ignore. (S) Otherwise, our options are essentially in the realm of self-help. How do we respond if we learn that a hostage has been killed? What if Iran ignores the warning signals and begins to hold a show trial of several hostages? What if Khomeini dies and/or public order collapses, leaving the hostages at the mercy of a small faction of fanatics? These and other contingencies may never occur, but it would be helpful to have a high-level and restrictive review of our options in advance to identify political, diplomatic, and military planning factors in the event we should be required to react on short notice. (S) 319. Memorandum From Gary Sick of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron) Washington, July 22, 1980 [Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office Files, Box 87, For President or Brzezinski Only File, Iran Sensitive 5/80–10/80. Secret. 2 pages not declassified.]
