1956 737 30. I said what it should lead to is establishment of conditions under which solution of these difficulties by peaceful means can be achieved. It not proper to regard this declaration as of itself effective solution of these disputes. 31. I said as I pointed out this morning, it hard for me to reconcile his objection to self-­defense clause with genuine intent not to use force to settle our disputes. If both sides say they will not use force to settle their disputes and genuinely carry that out, there would be no need to call into operation by either side of the self-­defense clause. It would only be if one party did not carry out statement it had made regard­ ing not using force that self-­defense clause would become operative. Therefore, if his govt really intends to declare that only peaceful means will be used in settlement of our dispute, it can have no objection to self-­defense clause. 32. I said I shared his concern over time we had spent still without settling these problems between us. I certainly have not taken any rigid attitude on this question. I simply trying make certain that we thor­ oughly understand each other. If there could be real understanding and agreement regard to this question of use of force without reservations, we could have long ago have said so and proceeded to discussion those other matters. I continue hope that it will be possible for us do so. 33. I said, however seemed be that we still faced with lack real agreement between us on this subject. I still in doubt whether his govt agrees that only peaceful means will be used in settlement disputes between us. If I wrong, hope he will correct me. 34. Wang said they had always held that we should employ peace­ ful means and by means negotiations should settle Sino-­US disputes in Taiwan area. If not been for purpose peacefully settling these disputes, he would not have been sitting with me and engaging in these talks. 35. Wang said position his side on settlement of disputes in ­Taiwan area has been made clear repeatedly. Their position is liberation of ­Taiwan and exercise of their own sovereign rights. 36. Wang said I had set forth views of US Govt in this respect. He shocked by my statement, which seemed extremely absurd and which entirely distorts history on question of Taiwan. I had stated that Taiwan and offshore islands have never been part of Chinese territory. This entirely a self contradictory statement. 37. Wang said he understands that in US there are two parties in politics. But existence of different parties in any state does not represent existence different governments within that state. What been done by Republican or Democratic parties cannot be argued away as not done by US.
