Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 255 7. Specific Agenda The above could serve as a point of departure for a discussion of more specific issues, and I would assume that you would wish to deal with them in the following sequence: —SALT —CTB —The Middle East —Southern Africa —Other Items (Secretary Vance suggests human rights issues in the USSR) 56. Address by President Carter Before the United Nations General Assembly1 New York, October 4, 1977 Mr. President, Mr. Secretary General, assembled delegates, and distinguished guests: Mr. President, I wish to offer first my congratulations on your election as President of the 32d General Assembly. It gives my own Government particular satisfaction to work under the leadership of a representative from Yugoslavia, a nation with which the United States enjoys close and valued relations. We pledge our cooperation and will depend heavily on your experience and skill in guiding these discussions which we are beginning. Mr. President, I would also like to express again the high esteem in which we hold Secretary General Waldheim. We continue to benefit greatly from our close consultations with him, and we place great trust in his leadership of this organization. 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book II, pp. 1715–1723. The President spoke at 10:20 a.m. in General Assembly Hall at the Headquarters of the United Nations. Prior to the address, the President met with Waldheim and General Assembly President Lazar Mojsov. Additional documentation concerning Department of State and White House efforts in preparing the President’s address is in the National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981: Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 7/16–31/77; Carter Library, Office of the Staff Secretary, Handwriting File, Presidential File, Box 52, 9/28/77 [1]; and Carter Library, Hertzberg Donated Historical Material, Speech Files, Box 1, UN Speech September 1977. The President believed that the speech was well-received, commenting in his diary: “There’s a different attitude among the nations of the world toward us, brought about by our own new policies and by the influence of Andrew Young.” (White House Diary, p. 112)
