882 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement commitment this respect.4 Department releasing appropriate statement to press.5 Assume USIS will publicize. Dulles 4 Under the terms of the Treaty of Mutual Understanding and Cooperation and Memorandum of Understandings Reached, which representatives of the United States and the Republic of Panama signed on January 25, 1955, the United States agreed to seek the legislative authorization and the necessary appropriations for construction of a bridge over the Pacific end of the Panama Canal at Balboa, Canal Zone. For the text of both the Treaty and the accompanying memorandum, see United States Treaties and Other International Agreements (UST), vol. 6 (pt. 2), p. 2733. 5 For the text of the Department of State press release announcing the enactment of this legislation, see the Department of State Bulletin, July 14, 1958, p. 68. PM–3. Memorandum Prepared in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs1 Undated. SUMMARY OF DISCUSSIONS IN PANAMA DURING DR. EISENHOWER’S VISIT2 July 12–16, 1958 In Panama contacts between Dr. Eisenhower’s Mission and the Panamanians were limited to Government officials and labor unions. Principal discussions took place in a meeting with President Guardia, members of the Cabinet and Ambassador Arias in the Presidential Suite at the El Panama Hotel. The Panamanians made a series of requests for financial assistance and appeared to be just a little confused as to which credit agency they should apply to for the various loans they were hoping to obtain. President Guardia and some of the other ministers who spoke apparently attempted to secure a special position for Panama, saying that the other Latin American countries realized that a special relationship existed and that anything done for Panama would have favorable repercussions throughout the Continent. 1 Source: Department of State, ARA Special Assistant’s Files, Lot 66 D 513, “Eisenhower, Milton Nicaragua 1958.” Neither the drafter nor the date is indicated on the source text, which is a carbon copy. 2 For additional documentation concerning Dr. Milton Eisenhower’s trip to Central America, July 12-August 1, 1958, see Document NI–4, footnote 4.
