Articles imported by commercial travelers as samples shall, in the
territories of each of the Contracting Parties, be temporarily
admitted free of duty on compliance with the Customs regulations
and formalities established to assure their re-exportation or the
payment of the prescribed Customs duties if not re-exported
within the period allowed by law. But the foregoing privilege
shall not extend to articles which, owing to their quantity or
value, cannot be considered as samples, or which, owing to their
nature, could not be identified upon re-exportation.”
As to Article VII, there was a conference in relation to it yesterday
afternoon between officials of the Foreign Office, Ministry of Finance and
Ministry of Commerce. I am led to believe this morning that the opinion
was unanimous that it would be difficult to ascertain the “normal volume of
trade” referred to in my above mentioned telegram No. 56, and that these
words just quoted would, if adopted, lead to unending difficulty, if not with
the United States, then with other countries, by virtue of the application of
the most favored nation clause. It is obvious to me that Schüller regards the
insertion of the word “restrictions” after “prohibitions” in line 18, page 5, of
my despatch No. 1468 of July 11, as mentioned in my telegram under
reference as really accomplishing what the American Government seeks to
obtain, namely unconditional favored nation treatment in the matter of
rations or quotas being established by either of the High Contracting Parties
for the importation or exportation of articles restricted or prohibited.
Furthermore the insertion of the word “conditions” in lieu of “formalities”
in line 21, page 6, is certainly a great improvement. The officials of the
Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Commerce do not view these
changes with enthusiasm, but they will not veto their insertion. This
language in paragraph 4 of the revised American draft of Article VII is the
nub of practically the sole outstanding difficulties in the way of complete
agreement upon the phraseology of the treaty, and I venture to ask the
Department to review the suggestions in this regard contained in my
telegram No. 56 to see whether they do not to all intents and purposes
secure what we desire. I am persuaded that Schüller desires to come to
some agreement and to find some acceptable formula, but he does very
much object to the words “equitable treatment” and “normal volume of
trade” as being vague and lacking the desired precision. My fear is that if
