832
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
lation growth, and the fulfillment of basic human needs. If we do not
begin to examine these problems in their aggregate and in their
linkages to one another, we may well miss the opportunity to find “si-
multaneous” solutions which detailed study of each issue in isolation
will not produce.
4. Finally, and for reasons detailed below, the Administration
should make a major commitment to a Basic Human Needs (BHN) ap-
proach in its support of development progress bilaterally, together
with OECD associates, and through such multilateral institutions as the
World Bank and the International Development Association. This ini-
tiative would be of more benefit to the “lower tier” LDCs where the
largest numbers of the so-called “absolute poverty” population is to be
found. In this sense it would add balance to our entire package of
North-South policies. But it is recommended for far more important
reasons detailed in the next section.
II. An Initiative on Basic Human Needs: Rationale
An initiative on a Basic Human Needs (BHN) approach should be-
come the centerpiece of our North-South strategy for the following
reasons:
1. The time is right. Development economists throughout the world,
North and South, are stressing the fact that older approaches to devel-
opment have failed to spread the benefits of growth. The result is that
approximately one billion people within the LDCs today are living in
what is described as “absolute poverty” (as measured by infant mor-
tality, caloric intake, longevity, health and sanitary facilities, etc.).
Many economists are turning to the concept of the fulfillment of basic
human needs by which they mean assured levels of food, health and ed-
ucational facilities, clean water, etc. Measurements and definitions
differ; all are beginning to come together.
2. The US foreign policy setting is right. Given the Administration’s
emphasis on human rights, a new and added emphasis on BHN would
not only be a natural complement but also an integral part of a global
stress on human rights. North and South have long feuded over the di-
vergent emphases in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: the
North emphasizing personal, civil and political rights; the developing
countries, basic economic rights (needs). The US can take a major step
toward closing this “values gap” by embracing jointly the concepts of
human rights and basic human needs, and by proposing a major devel-
opment program to see that the fulfillment of basic human needs is
achieved throughout the world by the end of the century.
3. A BHN focus can help the North and South to break out of the
presently deadlocked “dialogue” last noted at CIEC. It can provide a
comprehensive framework in which general North-South agreement can
