552
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
but asked that it also be held pending completion of a full package of
new steps.6 (C)
3. Iran: Diplomatic Relations. The Department of State provided six
options for possible changes we could make in our diplomatic relations
with Iran, ranging from a reduction of personnel through closure of
the Embassy and Consulates and expulsion of all Iranian diplomats.7
State argued that we should stop short of severing formal diplomatic
relations because of the problems this would create when we wish to
reestablish relations at some point in the future. The SCC agreed, and
recommended the following:
—Effectively cut Iranian representation in this country by half,
halving the number of Iranian diplomats in Washington and closing
two of the four Consulates.
—The New York Consulate will be closed, since its functions can
be taken over by the Iranian UN Mission, and a second Consulate will
be chosen after State reviews the comparative effects.
—The movements of Iranian diplomats will be restricted to cities
where they are assigned.
—Publication and distribution of Iranian propaganda materials
through the Embassy and Consulates will be prohibited.
—Constitutional provisions probably do not permit us to forbid
public or media appearances by Iranian representatives in this country.
However, we will monitor such appearances, and in those cases where
we find the performance to be obnoxious or harmful, we will be pre-
pared to declare that representative persona non grata. (C)
The Department of State and Justice will review the legal and
diplomatic implications of these moves prior to implementation. (U)
Approve in principle the restrictive steps outlined above.
As amended.8
The SCC also discussed briefly the recurring story that 112 of the
Iranian diplomats previously cut from the roster have not been located.
Justice noted that the addresses were many years old. Some may have
left much earlier, and others may simply have faded into the popula-
tion. It was agreed that greater efforts should be made to insure at a
minimum that those individuals who have been cut are not in fact
continuing to work in the Embassy or Consulates. Justice agreed to
follow up. (C)
6 Carter approved the item with a checkmark.
7 See footnote 9, Document 204.
8 Carter did not check either option but wrote in the margin: “Worse than nothing.
We should be prepared to expel them all.”
