1979  607
131.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, May 8, 1979
SUBJECT
PRC on M–X Basing (U)
A PRC meeting was held last Friday2 to review the M–X basing 
decision. The meeting opened with a summary of the underlying 
issues, a brief review of the main features of both sides’ ongoing stra-
tegic modernization programs, and the presentation of the five ICBM 
modernization options that DOD has been studying: (1) a baseline 
option with minimal modernization; (2) an option adding MPS/M–X 
to the baseline for an additional $32B thru FY 2000; (3) an option add-
ing missiles on trucks for $26B; (4) an option adding 100 M–X in STOL 
aircraft and 100 M–X in silos for $35B; and finally, (5) an option putting 
Trident II missiles in silos and submarines, and increasing the baseline 
cruise missile carrier purchase by 100 at a total cost of $37B. (S)
After a short examination of the relative cost effectiveness of each 
option (i.e., life cycle costs/surviving RV in a “bolt from the blue” 
attack) that showed Option 5 to be best, 2 second, 4 third and Option 
3 tied with 1 because truck mobiles cannot survive without strategic 
warning, the discussion turned to a comparison of the qualitative char-
acteristics of each option. The following points were made:
Option 2 is the JCS strong and unanimous choice: it solves the U.S. 
alert ICBM vulnerability problem but puts Soviet ICBMs at risk—­thus 
providing leverage for SALT III reductions. They argue that MPS can be 
expanded, or protected by ABM, if greater threats develop. (The ABM 
Treaty would have to be modified or terminated.) The JCS argue it can 
be verified using cooperative measures (e.g., on site inspection) which 
the Chiefs argue will be needed to achieve deep cuts in SALT III (S)
Others pointed out (1) that MPS could make future SALT reduc-
tions easier by making the percentage survivability of this ICBM force 
independent of the number of missiles it deploys, (2) that loss of secu-
rity, particularly if we were not aware of it, would make MPS a disaster, 
(3) that the “breakout” problem of a Soviet MPS is not unique to MPS, 
(4) that MPS should be examined against threats greater than those 
allowed under SALT II because it won’t start deployment until 1986, 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 56, SALT: Chronology: 3/79–5/23/79. Secret. Sent for information. Aaron initialed 
for Brzezinski. Carter wrote in the upper right corner: “Susan, SALT file. J.”
2 May 4. See Document 130.
