82  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
2); Assistant Secretary of State Gerard C. Smith; Assistant Secretary of 
Defense Mansfield D. Sprague; the Executive Secretary, NSC; and the 
Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
[Omitted here are agenda items 1–3.]
4. SHIPMENTS ENTERING THE UNITED STATES UNDER 
­DIPLOMATIC IMMUNITY (NSC 5802/1; NSC Action No. 1862)
General Cutler reminded the Council that at its last meeting, and 
in connection with the discussion of the continental defense policy, 
the Council had discussed internal security measures to protect the 
United States against the clandestine introduction of nuclear weapons, 
including their introduction through diplomatic pouches, baggage or 
shipments. As a result of the discussion, the State Department had 
undertaken to study and report on whether, if there were substantial 
evidence that any shipment entering the United States under diplo­
matic immunity contained radioactive material, the State Department 
would be prepared to advise the diplomatic representatives of the 
country concerned that the shipment would be opened by U.S. offi­
cials in the presence of representatives of such country, to determine 
the nature of the radioactive material. General Cutler then called on 
the Secretary of State to report on the results of this study.
Secretary Dulles said that his people had studied the matter in the 
light of international law, and he proceeded to read the procedure on 
which the State Department had agreed; noting, however, that this pro­
posed procedure had not been staffed through the Department of Justice.
After Secretary Dulles had read the proposed procedure, Mr. Allen 
Dulles asked whether under this procedure we would permit our ship­
ments to the Soviet Union under diplomatic immunity to be investi­
gated by the Soviets if they alleged something against us. He pointed 
out that we needed to get certain items into the USSR. Secretary Dulles 
replied that in this kind of situation we would be obliged to accept the 
practice of reciprocity.
The National Security Council:
Concurred in the following procedure recommended by the Secre­
tary of State, pursuant to NSC Action No. 1862-­e, relative to the use of 
devices to protect against the clandestine introduction of nuclear mate­
rials as provided in paragraph 14 of NSC 5802/1:
If a detection device indicates substantial radioactivity in a diplo­
matic shipment, the shipment will be detained and the Department of 
State will request the appropriate foreign diplomatic mission in Wash­
ington to have one of its officers appear at the port of entry to remove 
the objectional object for examination.
If the request is refused, the shipment will be removed from 
the United States forthwith. If examined, the material will either be
