1978  479
C. Major Policy Alternatives
We have developed several alternative employment policies that 
we believe, on the basis of our study, to be representative of the choices 
facing national leaders with respect to future employment policy. The 
identification and assessment of major policy alternatives is a some-
what artificial exercise. If precedent is any guide, policy is more likely 
to be determined incrementally by a series of discrete decisions about 
what to procure and when, how to phrase a given policy statement, 
what to include in an arms control proposal, etc. Thus, there are, in 
actuality, a number of choices that could be made. Nevertheless, it can 
be useful to identify and assess broad policy as a framework for mak-
ing more specific decisions. And such decisions should, if possible, be 
made with some set of overall objectives in mind.
There are several factors that are likely to dominate the choice of 
alternatives. Most important are assessments of Soviet views and objec-
tives with respect to the role of nuclear weapons; and in light of these 
Soviet views and objectives, judgments as to what actions we should 
seek to deter with nuclear forces, and how best to do so. In this connec-
tion we also need to consider: (a) what flexibility in our nuclear posture 
(i.e., how broad a range of options) is desired and what is feasible and 
how much we should spend on it; (b) how much endurance do our 
forces require and how much is possible; (c) how much damage limit-
ing capability is considered necessary and how much is possible; and 
(d) the costs of achieving these capabilities. One alternative, of course, 
is to continue current policy as described above. We offer below four 
broad alternatives to current policy.
All of the following options will meet the current objectives of 
nuclear policy to some degree. However, they differ in their relative 
emphasis on flexibility, endurance and counterforce; and as a result 
could have substantially different cost implications. However, each 
contains at a minimum, an assured destruction capability.
a. One alternative is to strengthen current policy, particularly by improv-
ing the flexibility of plans and the endurance of forces and their related com-
mand, control and intelligence. Under such a policy, an assured capability 
to destroy industrial targets of value to the Soviet Union would remain 
the backbone of deterrence, and would receive emphasis in declaratory 
policy. However, the goal of “impeding recovery” would be redefined 
to focus [2 lines not declassified] The forces and related C3I to accomplish 
this mission should be given additional endurance over time so that 
attacks on industrial targets can be withheld so long as substantial U.S. 
industrial value remains undamaged. Added emphasis would be given 
both in planning and declaratory policy to a more effective means of 
targeting Soviet conventional forces and command and control as a 
supplement to assured destruction of industry. Counterforce objectives
