Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 377 54. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, October 17, 1989, 1046Z 9045. Subject: START: The First Two Weeks of Round XII 1. Secret—Entire Text. 2. We received SNP’s first O-I Saturday.2 We found it very helpful, and hope you will be able to make it a regular event. We are particularly interested in progress on the work program. I don’t think we have any blinding insights at this end yet, but perhaps it is time for some observations. 3. It feels like the endgame here, with an absolutely frantic pace of meetings, both internal and with the Soviets, and an avalanche of papers every day. Under such conditions, it is easy to lose sight of the big picture. Both sides seem to sense that START has a higher priority than before Wyoming. Nazarkin told rick the other day that he thought the Treaty would be signed at the “second summit” (late 90–early 91?). 4. The Soviets, as usual, have expressed great disappointment at the lack of U.S. movement, especially after what they considered major moves in Wyoming on linkage and SLCMs. Nevertheless, they appear to have a lot of material for us and obviously were very active during the break. The general thrust of much of their activity seems to be directed at simplifying the Treaty—­something I have been urging us to do for quite a while. The Soviet approach has involved tabling a whole new mobiles working paper which combines and simplifies language and accepts some U.S. positions, introducing “generic” definitions to replace the patchwork that exists now and removing extraneous cross references. The State component here is inclined toward all these goals. There are suspicions in some quarters that there must be a sinister motive behind these Soviet moves, but I think it is a genuine effort to tie things together more logically and simply avoid waiting until the end to do it, which apparently happened in INF. All these new Soviet approaches have, however, tended to take us out of our game plan and require a lot of effort to analyze. The absence of our indispensable lawyer, Marshall Brown, has been a major blow in all this, though his replacement is doing well. 5. Our biggest delegation-­wide project thus far is trying to figure out how to implement the unit-­of-­account compromise. It is proving 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D890896–0321. Secret. 2 October 14. See Document 53.
