518 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV and the introduction of the M–X ICBM or a system with comparable capabilities.2 6. Chart 1 shows how Soviet and US intercontinental offensive forces compared in the past 10 years and are projected to compare in the coming 10 years, using four indexes of quantity and quality to illustrate the trends.3 —The graphs show that, over the past decade, the Soviets have moved from a position of inferiority in each of these indexes to a present position in which they lead in delivery vehicles and online equivalent megatons, but are still inferior in total numbers of online weapons and average accuracy of MIRVed ICBMs. —With respect to the future, the upper left-­hand graph shows that SALT II would require a reduction in Soviet delivery vehicles and bring about a more nearly equal situation in this index. —The lower left-­hand graph shows that the substantial Soviet lead in online equivalent megatons will increase as the USSR continues to deploy weapons with relatively large yields. —The lower right-­hand graph illustrates the effects of the anticipated Soviet deployment of MIRVed ICBMs with improved accuracies. (The accuracies of individual Soviet ICBM systems are shown in figure 2 of part B.)4 The current US defense program does not include further accuracy improvements for present types of ICBMs. —The upper right-­hand graph, comparing total online weapons in intercontinental forces, shows how Soviet MIRV deployments, which began about five years later than those of the United States, are substantially increasing total Soviet weapons for intercontinental attack. In this index, the United States remains about at its current level until Trident and especially ALCM programs are under way. This Estimate is the first in which we have forecast even temporary Soviet equality in this index at any time during the ensuing 10 years under a SALT II agreement. —The upper right-­hand graph also shows that, in the middle and late 1980s, both sides are likely to advance in total numbers of online weapons in intercontinental forces. In the mid-1980s and after, the US advance is likely to be somewhat faster than that of the USSR because of the programed large-­scale US deployment of ALCMs. 7. Chart 2 combines numbers of online weapons and the yields, accuracies, and reliabilities of weapons and their delivery vehicles into simplified measures of the total theoretical destructive potential 2 In the body of the Estimate, a variety of alternatives and options are included and the sensitivity of comparison to these and other variables is examined. Among other things, the Estimate examines the effects of adding Backfire and FB–111 aircraft, representative non-SALT projections for each side, more pessimistic assumptions about Soviet technological progress, the effects of new deployments modes for US ICBMs; and the deployment of a system such as M–X. [Footnote is in the original.] 3 Attached but not printed. 4 Part B is attached but not printed.
