Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
125
Brezhnev’s statement at Tula that detente meant a willingness to re-
solve differences and disputes by peaceful means, at conference tables.3
The President’s deep conviction, which the Secretary shared and, in his
judgment, was shared by a majority of the American people, was that
our two countries must do everything they could to reduce the danger
of war. The President, like Brezhnev, was a practical man and realized
that the overall state of our relations would be determined largely by
the specifics of the issues on our agenda. These were the “objective real-
ities” of detente which determined where we were going.
The President, like Brezhnev, had been an officer in the armed
forces of his country, and had a deep determination to do all he could to
work toward a reasonable and fair regulation of military competition.
The Secretary well knew that Brezhnev had lived through the
devastation of war, and knew the sorrow and suffering it would bring
to all of our people, the young and the old. The Secretary, too, had ex-
perienced the horrors of war, had seen his friends and comrades die,
and had lived with the responsibility for nuclear weapons for many
years. It was his fervent hope that our children and Brezhnev’s children
would be spared the incalculable horror of a nuclear holocaust. At this
point Brezhnev interrupted to tell a story in connection with alleged So-
viet intentions to attack or threaten the United States. An Oriental tale
related that at a bazaar a man had purposely started the rumor that at
the far end of that bazaar someone was giving away pillows free of
charge. As people heard him, they began running toward that part of
the bazaar, until the man was left all alone. At that moment he began to
wonder whether there might not be something to the rumor that he
himself had started, and he thought that, just in case, he, too, should
start running; who knows, maybe they were indeed giving out free
pillows. Brezhnev said he knew that Americans liked anecdotes, and
that is why he told this story by way of an analogy to those who started
rumors about Soviet-war-like intentions.
The Secretary continued by saying that recently, Brezhnev had
noted that there were objective possibilities for developing equal and
mutually advantageous cooperation in various spheres for the good of
both countries and universal peace. He heartily agreed with such a
view of the situation.
Brezhnev had further said that the question was how soon such a
development would begin. He was firmly convinced that we could
begin that process now. We had an unparalleled opportunity to set our
relations on a fresh course.
3 See footnote 3, Document 17.
