National Security Policy 377 down. He further specified that the B–58 may be able to replace the F–108. Interceptors—Secretary McElroy specified that in line with the cal­ culated rise of favoring nuclear retaliation over air defense, no pro­ grams for interceptors are being initiated in FY 1960. MACE—This missile, although an air breather, has not been dropped from the FY 1960 program because of its contributions to NATO. It has a good tactical range and carries a large warhead. Furthermore, it pro­ vides the only all-­weather capability in NATO against airfields. Mr. Quarles then made a brief reference to the relationships between the Department of Defense (ARPA) and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). In particular, he pointed out that the two agencies had joint research programs in solid propellants and in space activities. Finally, Mr. McElroy expressed his concern with the unemploy­ ment effects of program elimination. He pointed out, as an example, that the TITAN cancellation would have involved some 25, 000 people. II. At this point Mr. Stans began his discussion of the budget as pre­ sented by the Department of Defense. He began first by review of the general situation. He pointed out that in the original budget estimate the defense proportion of total national budget (of $85 billion) was $43/$85. However, the civilian budget has since been reduced from $42.0 billion to $36.5 billion under a condition of extremely tight guide­ lines, in which all low priority items have been eliminated. Mr. Stans emphasized that the most optimistic revenue picture would indicate an income of $76.0 billion; therefore, any failure to stay within this limit would result in a deficit. Accordingly, in the view of the Director of the Budget, the Department of Defense expenditures should be limited to $40.0 billion with $39.0 billion NOA. He desired, however, to congrat­ ulate the Department of Defense on the substantial reductions which had already been effected. At this point the President interposed the idea that NOA should be reduced to the level of expenditures for the reason that NOA in excess of expenditures inevitably results in a raising of the expenditure level when the obligations become due. Mr. Stans, in completing his overall view, mentioned that he had questioned some $8.0 billion worth of programs and $3 billion in expenditures in the initial Department of Defense budget, of which Department of Defense actually cut 10%. He pointed out that this effort still contains elements of a $50.0 billion budget due to the inclusion of exotic and duplicatory programs. He admitted that his own view would include some strength and structural reduction, but he feels that
