1222 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement on 7 September. The present situation is a stand-­off. A substantial number of military officers remain disgusted with the Junta and apprehensive regarding the political trend, but are manifestly reluctant to take on a united and determined civilian resistance. The Junta and the parties, on their part, fear a coup and will probably take care not to provoke one, although they will continue their efforts to improve their position vis-­a-­vis the military. If there should be a break in “national unity”, perhaps in consequence of the forthcoming election—­specifically, if the military could obtain the political support of COPEI or URD—­the disaffected officers would probably attempt to seize power and establish a more acceptable regime. Even without such political support, they might act in desperation if they were to conclude that a civil government dominated by Acción Democrática was otherwise inevitable. 42. The November Election. Great uncertainty still surrounds the manner in which the forthcoming presidential election will be conducted. The maintenance of “national unity” will require the nomination of a single candidate agreed upon by the three major parties (as was done in Colombia). Discretion would require that this candidate also be acceptable to the military. Manifestly, the selection of such a candidate will be a matter of great difficulty and delicacy. 43. It is probable that no candidate could win a free election without the acceptance and support of Acción Democrática. However, AD is also aware that no AD leader would be acceptable to the military or even to the other political parties. AD’s objective, then, is probably to employ its electoral strength to secure the nomination of a sympathetic candidate not so obviously identified with it as to provoke a military coup or to antagonize the other parties. AD’s preference for this role is Admiral Larrazábal, who is receptive to being drafted as a unity candidate, but he too is strongly distrusted by the military elements most likely to attempt a coup, as well as by some civilians. 44. The principal parties are now engaged in complex negotiations regarding the selection of a joint candidate for the presidency. COPEI, URD, and IR have combined to propose Dr. Martin Vegas, a distinguished physician and IR militant. COPEI has publicly threatened that, if AD refuses to support Vegas, it will nominate Caldera as a party candidate, which would mark the end of “national unity” AD has countered by offering three alternative proposals: (1) the joint selection of one of three persons10 as a single candidate; (2) the joint selection one of the three to run against Vegas, so that the electorate may make the choice; (3) that the executive power be vested in a council composed Larrazábal, Betancourt, Caldera, Villalba, and a representative of the business 10 Rafael Pizani, Minister of Education; José Antonio Mayobre, Minister of Finance; and Carlos Morales, a former Minister of Foreign Affairs. [Footnote is in the source text.]
