182
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
provision, in particular, should give no problem, since as early as Oc-
tober, 1956, Israel accepted the concept of compulsory ICJ jurisdiction,
(d) the concept of UN Security Council guarantee of borders. The latter,
el-Baz argued, should be in the interest of every party to the dispute.
The Secretary explained that these omissions were prompted by
our belief that if certain declarations are cited, the Israelis will wish to
add their own list of citations. We want to achieve the objectives of the
Egyptian proposal within specific reference to a series of documents.
On compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, he noted that when the Israelis signed
this agreement, they specifically excluded its applicability to Arab-
Israeli matters. The Israelis do not believe that the ICJ is unbiased. If
there were some method other than the ICJ, it might be more palatable.
On borders, the Secretary pointed out that we have covered this in
paragraph 7 of the American paper. Our language is simpler, but the
Egyptian concept is included.
El-Baz commented that Israel appears to be seeking to force Egypt
to accept only one method in resolving disputes. This method is unin-
terrupted negotiations, even if these lead to no progress. Article 33 of
the United Nations Charter, which the American paper cites, speaks of
other methods of resolving disputes. Israel regrettably thinks it can
deal with the Arabs on the basis of the de facto situation.
The Secretary suggested that the Egyptians make their suggestion
on this point. Nabil el-Araby observed that the methods of settling dis-
putes are contained in Article 33 of the United Nations Charter. The ar-
ticle leaves it to the parties to choose the method they wish to employ.
Why should the method of direct negotiations be singled out? The Sec-
retary responded that we have not singled out any method. The ICJ lan-
guage has been taken out.
El-Baz then commented that in the Egyptian paper, there had been
the proposal that all parties agree to the NPT. The Egyptians had as-
sumed this would meet with enthusiastic American approval. The (nu-
clear) issue creates a special element of tension in the area. It gives psy-
chological and physical concern to both sides. There is no need, el-Baz
argued, to accommodate the Israelis on this point.
El-Baz then said he wished to make some specific comments:
A. The Palestinian problem: This, he noted, is the crux of the issue.
The formulation and concept to resolve it must be clear. The sovereign
rights of the (Palestinian) people must be clear. He understood that the
Egyptian and American positions on this are similar. If one begins from
this assumption, one must go on to say that in principle, Israel is obli-
gated to withdraw in the West Bank/Gaza in accordance with the “in-
admissibility” language.
El-Baz stated that, in recognition of the sensitivity of this problem,
Egypt has accepted the concept of a transitional period. It did so in an
