Arms Control and Disarmament  1525
406.	 Record of Telephone Conversation Between Wadsworth and 
Herter1
January 9, 1959, 1:55 p.m.
Ambassador Wadsworth telephoned from Geneva, saying his call 
was in the nature of an S.O.S.—not a panicky one but a considered one. 
The situation there is now one where the other people came back to 
focus on duration. The Ambassador has been stalling on duration and 
in so doing has been piling up unnecessary suspicions at a time when 
we should be showing movement. He emphasized the fact that they 
really needed help.
I said we tried to get it settled this week. The President just finished 
his State of the Union Message. An appointment has been set for 9:00 
a.m. Monday morning and we would shoot word to him immediately 
after. The Ambassador did not think there was any question as to what 
the answer will be, and I said I didn’t think so either. I said we were hav­
ing a session with the Secretary and Mr. McCone this afternoon and that 
I thought McCone wanted to discuss the fall-­back position which he felt 
we are likely to be coming to. Ambassador Wadsworth felt it was import­
ant to work out something on that basis for possible later use. However, 
he said they have to have something that will show some movement to 
hold them another week or so. He added that he knew how things work 
but that he was really yelling for help; he would appreciate it if I would 
pass his request on to the people who have to make the final decisions; 
and that the whole point is we have to strengthen our own situation. 
I said we could get something to him by telephone on Monday and Wad­
sworth thought this was a wonderful idea.
I asked how things were otherwise and Wadsworth said that 
today’s session was mild and short. I said I understood that the ­Killian 
group had come up with 3 or 4 ways on what we want accomplished 
without increasing the number of posts too much. It is mostly scien­
tific data. Wadsworth said that would re-­establish us as bona fide. They 
have so much suspicion. I added that it follows pretty much their line 
that science will show the way, and Wadsworth thought there was 
something in that.
Wadsworth ended by saying that he just wanted to convey the 
sense of urgency there; that they can stall but it just does not look good 
on the record. I said we would do our best.
Christian A. Herter
1 Source: Need for decisions on U.S. position in cessation of nuclear testing talks. No 
classification marking. 1 p. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 110.12–HE/1–959.
