within the exclusive competency of the several States with which it would
be contrary to the policy of the Federal Government to interfere. I have in
mind such matters as birth, matrimony and divorce, paternity and filiation,
adoption, guardianship, emancipation and majority, property and its various
classifications, leases, annuities, partnerships, loans, bailments, contracts,
questions of evidence and rules of procedure.
You can readily appreciate that any effort by the Federal Government to
regulate such matters, except as an incident to the exercise of its powers
under the Constitution, would give rise to the charge of encroachment upon
the rights reserved to the several States. Some of the subjects such, for
example, as nationality and naturalization, matters pertaining to public
securities and commercial paper, transportation, insurance, bills of
exchange, when they concern interstate or foreign commerce, also matters
pertaining to ships and aircraft, offenses committed against the
Government, extradition, bankruptcy, etc., are, of course, well within the
purview of the powers of the Federal Government. Provisions of the project
with respect to these subjects, however, are for the most part unacceptable
to this Government because of the fact, as indicated above, that they are
based primarily on the civil law which differs widely from the system of
law to which we are accustomed.
The convention as a whole would be unacceptable to this Government. It
will probably be found to be unacceptable to other countries represented at
the conference. That there was by no means complete accord among the
delegates on the Commission of Jurists is shown by the report (Appendix
No. 5) of the American delegates,20 from which it is understood that the
project was approved provisionally in order that attempts at the codification
of Private International Law should not prove abortive and the Sixth Pan
American Conference fail to have before it for consideration any
constructive project dealing with the subject.
You should take the position that while general principles governing some
of the subjects covered by Dr. Bustamante’s project might conceivably be
evolved in subsequent conferences, in view of the magnitude and
importance of the subjects and the great divergence between the laws of the
