3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 240 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI we had specifically stipulated that US origin arms must not be transferred to Somalia by third countries. —As to the resolution of this conflict I emphasized that the African countries considered this an African problem and wanted the major powers to disengage. We support the OAU’s initiatives and it would be useful if the USSR did too. —While I was glad to hear Gromyko’s assertion that Soviet arms supply to Ethiopia was insignificant or not considerable, that assertion did not seem to match our information but I would certainly report it to Washington. —I was glad to hear that Ethiopia did not want to go beyond its borders. (Gromyko intervened to say that earlier Siad Barre had voiced his fear of an Ethiopian invasion to the Soviets who had in turn assured him on the basis of an official statement by Mengistu that he had no intention of attacking Somalia. Siad Barre knows this to be true, said Gromyko, but continues his misinformation campaign in furtherance of his own goals. —I would also report his suggestion for US and Soviet action to alleviate the Somali-Ethiopian conflict and we would be willing to listen to specific recommendations. Meanwhile it would be best for the big powers to stay out and let the OAU play a mediatory role. 4. In closing Gromyko said the USSR was not involved in the conflict. Its only desire was for a peaceful settlement which might be obstructed if “some of your friends get involved and involve you.” 5. Comment: I find Gromyko’s reference to the upcoming conventional arms talks in Washington rather intriguing. We had suspected that the Soviets might be reluctant to discuss arms transfers in the Horn (septel)3 for fear that to do so would limit their policy options in this contested area. Gromyko’s remarks may indicate otherwise. But if Sovs should be prepared to discuss the Horn, we can be sure they will also wish to discuss Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Israel. Toon. Unquote Christopher 3 Telegram 17909 from Moscow, December 12; see Document 65.
