Chapter 2, January–June 1989  259
Treaty that permitted mobiles without effective verification could not 
be ratified.
(S) If the U.S. does abandon the mobiles ban, OSD opposes tabling 
a number for allowed mobile warheads until we have agreed with the 
Soviets on an effective verification regime for mobile ICBMs.
(S) Our substantive position with regard to a limit on mobiles, if 
an effective verification regime can be worked out, would be to nest 
mobile ICBMs under the limit on heavy ICBMs thereby forcing the 
Soviets to reduce their heavy ICBM force if they deploy mobiles. If 
MIRVed mobiles are allowed, the limit should be 500–800. If they are 
not, the limit should be 300. Higher limits would assure asymmetry in 
the Soviet Union’s favor.
(S) Since the future of the U.S. mobile program is unclear, we must 
keep our options open with regard to ICBM basing modes. Thus, OSD 
supports retaining the option of MPS-­type basing regimes as part of our 
START proposal.
Mobile ICBM Verification
(S) Given that there is no significant difference in monitoring con-
fidence achievable under the road-­mobile basing mode options, OSD 
believes the decision should focus on U.S. requirements for mobile 
ICBM survivability. OSD supports the Option 2 Deployment Area 
concept for Road-Mobile ICBM Basing Modes as most consistent with 
preserving basing options for a Small ICBM force. While the current 
approach—Option 1—­is compatible with Minuteman basing, it would 
not allow unnotified random movement throughout the Southwest 
basing area. If the Deployment Areas are sufficiently large to permit 
operational dispersals, OSD can accept Option 2B.
(S) On the issue of Rail-Mobile ICBM Basing Modes, OSD supports 
the Option 1 rail garrison concept as most consistent with anticipated 
US requirements for Peacekeeper Rail Garrison. The alternatives will 
not improve verifiability but will limit flexibility and survivability. 
We do not have a random movement concept for Peacekeeper Rail 
Garrison and plan no movement at all during normal peacetime opera-
tions, except for maintenance. However, Peacekeeper Rail Garrison will 
require access to the entire US rail network in order to survive.
(S) OSD has not taken a position on the issue of Perimeter and 
Portal Monitoring (PPM), pending a decision on whether to permit 
mobile ICBMs. If the mobiles ban is rescinded, OSD would strongly 
support Option 3—­inform the Soviets that we are withdrawing our 
proposal pending a review of our position. We believe that the current 
U.S. approach to PPM would not preclude successful Soviet cheating 
and the Suspect Site Inspection (SSI) required could be as costly and far 
more intrusive than PPM.
