20
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
1. Continuation of the Present Situation.
At this moment it is essential to develop an intensified propaganda
campaign (by both overt and covert means) in support of the Shah and
Prime Minister Ala. The campaign, which should be country-wide,
would obviously include the following: increased support to the pa-
pers which would publish stories in support of Ala and the Shah, advo-
cating calmness and restraint in national crisis; appealing to Iranian pa-
triotism and Moslem pride against foreign and anti-religious ideol-
ogies; support to political parties and individuals who would work for
those same ends, including possibly an attempt, closely coordinated
with the State Department, to establish a strong coalition movement en-
listing the backing of individual political and religious leaders and
parties, elements of the army and if possible of the tribes as well; and
assistance in the form of money, personnel and technical aid to the po-
lice and security forces in Iran. It should be pointed out that this whole
program would have a vastly better chance of success if it could be
done in support of a vigorous overt US program to strengthen Iran, in-
cluding loans, increased military aid, medical and public health pro-
grams, and Point Four assistance generally.
The chief danger to the continuity of any pro-Western government—
aside from the consequences of failure to make progress with critical fi-
nancial and economic problems and the disruptive influence of the
USSR—lies in the unholy alliance of the Mossadeq2 group with Aya-
tollah Kashani.3 Their combined efforts work to impede the orderly
functioning of the legislative body and to promote a chauvinistic pro-
gram which is difficult for any cabinet to oppose without being charged
with neglecting national interests.
It may be that the new government will have a period of two or
three months of grace before it, in turn, is subjected to the destructive
criticism of the above alliance. In this period a serious effort should be
made to discredit, weaken, and split these groups. How can this be
done?
In the case of the Ayatollah Kashani group, by persuading the
leading pro-government clerics to take an open stand against the ter-
rorism and inflamatory appeals of the Kashani group as being contrary
to the principles of Islam. It is probable that leading clerics do believe
this and, in addition, they are likely to be jealous of the popularity and
conspicuousness of Kashani.
The individuals to be approached include the following:
2 In the margin after “Mossadeq” is handwritten “National Front.”
3 After the name “Kashani,” a handwritten addition reads: “leader of the fanatical
Crusaders for Islam.”
