Afghanistan
739
solution which protects Soviet interests as they see them is, there-
fore, necessary.
—A direct US initiative is likely to be rejected by the Soviet Union.
A successful initiative must not have a U.S. label.
—An accommodation between the Parchamists and at least some
of the Islamic revolutionary forces in Afghanistan cannot be ruled out.
(Intelligence suggests that Babrak may already be in touch with some
Islamic leaders.)
Elements of a Solution
1. A four power commission consisting of two non-aligned nations
which are members of the Islamic Conference, two Warsaw Pact
nations, and, as non-voting members, Pakistan and Iran. All member
nations should have diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. (One
possible composition: Hungary, Poland, Indonesia, and Sudan.) The
functions of the commission would be to:
—Bring about an immediate cease-fire
—Supervise the replacement of Soviet troops by Warsaw Pact
troops north of the Hindu Kush and non-aligned Muslim troops south
of the Kush with mixed forces in Kabul. Such replacement to be com-
pleted within six months.
—Supervise the retraining and reforming of the Afghan army and
their replacement of both Warsaw Pact and non-aligned forces; this to
be accomplished within one year.
—Supervise the return of refugees.
—Oversee the establishment of and functioning of a broadly-based
acceptable government.
—Oversee the resumption of international development aid to
Afghanistan.
2. A government under a Parchamist (Babrak or another) as Presi-
dent with a Prime Minister and at least one-half of the cabinet to
be appointed from non-Parchamist Islamic elements acceptable to the
commission. The nominees for Prime Minister, Foreign Minister,
Defense Minister, Interior Minister and Minister of Information must
be agreed to by all members of the commission.
3. Creation of an Afghanistan rehabilitation fund by the Islamic
nations.
4. Guarantee of Afghanistan’s non-alignment and neutrality by the
powers in the commission, plus the Soviet Union and the United States.
Procedure
1. The United States would float the idea with a friendly power
which would then carry it forward without a U.S. label. We could
