542 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement three officers in the entire Embassy including the Consular Officer and Charge, so they are in a bad way and I want to do what I can to help. I hope that before the next meeting there will be opportunity fully to go over the situation with Herman and the Secretary and will await my instructions with much interest. If it seems advisable, I could come back here on Sunday, but I will take some material with me to Prague so as to be able to respond from there on anything that might appear desirable. I was very disturbed to hear from Herman that you have not been feeling well. Do take care of yourself—there is a point beyond which it does not pay to try to work. My best to all. Sincerely, U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador 387. Telegram 1326 to Geneva1 Washington, November 29, 1955, 7:35 p.m. 1326. For Johnson. Chinese Communist propaganda during past week devoted some­ what more attention to subject of Taiwan and ambassadorial talks than in previous weeks. General attitude toward US continued hostile, with repetition of familiar themes that US obstructing progress of talks, quote intensifying unquote military efforts in Taiwan area, and seeking to revive Cold War. Major Chinese Communist pronouncement of week on Taiwan issue and talks was statement appearing in East German youth daily, JUNGE WELT, November 24, based on interview given by Ch’en Yi November 7 to German youth group in Peiping. Ch’en reiterated usual CCP line on Taiwan issue, noting two possible solutions, voluntary withdrawal of US forces from area, or failing that, CCP quote libera­ tion unquote of Taiwan by quote force of arms unquote. Peiping gov­ ernment, said Ch’en favored peaceful solution but quote many people unquote on mainland growing quote impatient unquote over Taiwan question. Ch’en saw no immediate need for resort to force, but China must be prepared. Hence, quote active preparations unquote being 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/11–2955. Official Use Only. Drafted by Dawson; cleared in IAD and CA.
