322 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement said this was a happy development for in the Middle East the reverse had taken place. President Lopez stated that they had very serious transportation problems. The dollar shortage had forced them to cut down drastically on imports of cars and trucks and now the absence of replacements had put the transportation situation in a highly critical position. Mr. Mann highlighted the decline on imports by stating that under Rojas Pinilla it had been $670 million and had been cut in a single year to $450 million. (President Lopez here said that the present rate of imports was only $25 million per month). The Foreign Minister then asked what the Colombian Delegation should do. The Secretary summarized as follows: The Delegation had three aspects to its problems: 1. First was its need to finance essential imports. For this they should turn to the Eximbank. 2. They had to deal with the backlog of commercial arrears. For this they should turn to the Eximbank. 3. Finally, they had a coffee stabilization problem. For this they would have to turn to Mr. Mann and Mr. Dillon. About all the Secretary felt the Colombians could expect from the United States on coffee is an attitude of benevolent neutralism. The United States does not have enough money to embark upon coffee stabilization schemes. Here the Colombians almost unanimously burst forth that they want no money for coffee stabilization. The Foreign Minister summarized their position by saying that coffee is the backing for the Colombian currency. It means everything in Colombia and yet it is beyond their power to control. The Colombians did not want to direct prices they merely want to avoid a fall and to seek stability. Here the meeting ended. CO–9. Editorial Note Vice President Richard M. Nixon visited Bogotá, May 11–12 1958, as part of a larger goodwill tour of South America during the period April 27–May 15. He met with the Colombian Foreign Minister and the Military Junta of Government on May 11, but no memoranda of those conversations were found in Department of State files. Documentation
