who has resided continuously in Tacna and Arica for two years prior to July 20, 1922 and who has continued so to reside until the date of registration, and who makes a solemn declaration in a form to be provided of his intention to continue to reside in the province and to seek naturalization under the laws of the country successful in the plebiscite should be likewise entitled to vote. And, also that for obvious reasons it would be advisable in addition to the foregoing requirements as to residence in the territory to require residence for a short but reasonable period immediately before registration in the sub-delegation in which the voter registers. Women’s suffrage does not exist either in Chile or Peru. Neither Party has requested it nor has it been suggested in any of the negotiations between the Parties. Ability to read and write is made a qualification for the exercise of the right of suffrage in both countries. But in view of the circumstances and of what is understood to be the character of a considerable portion of the population of the territory, it is believed to be just that a literacy qualification should not be required of those who own real property situated in the territory. In both countries, there are certain disqualifications by reasons of military service, and in Peru, the civil servants of the State are also excluded from the right of suffrage. It is believed that persons born in Tacna and Arica should not be deprived of a vote in this plebiscite by reason of either military or civil service. With respect to others, in view of the policy of the laws of Chile and, Peru, it is deemed to be advisable that those in the military service should not vote, and while Chile does not exclude from the franchise those engaged in the civil service, the Arbitrator sees no reason in this case for establishing a difference between the military and civil services. Accordingly, the Arbitrator holds that the following persons shall be entitled to vote in the plebiscite directed to be held under this award: A. Male persons, 21 years old, able to read and write, who qualify under one
