912 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 282. Telegram From the Embassy in the People’s Republic of China to the Department of State1 Beijing, August 16, 1979, 0844Z 5526. Literally Eyes Only for Tarnoff from Maynes for delivery COB. Subject: Statement by Ambassador Young. 1. S-entire text. 2. I do not recall Andy ever using the phrase “official version” as a preface to his account to me of his meeting with Terzi.2 3. During our conversation Andy was initially fuzzy about the circumstances of the meeting. At the beginning of the conversation he made some reference to being “set up.” When I asked him whether Bishara acted in bad faith, he replied that on reflection he did not think so. He mentioned that he was out walking with his boy and decided to drop in on Bishara. On the basis of my conversation with Andy, I concluded that he thought that Bishara might try to set up a meeting with Terzi but that Andy honestly did not know Terzi would be there in part because Andy, not Bishara, according to the account I received decided when he would visit Bishara’s apartment. Moreover, Terzi was not there when he arrived. 4. I specifically asked what was discussed. There was no mention of any discussion with Terzi about postponing the Security Council meeting.3 Andy initially told me that Terzi was largely silent during the meeting. He subsequently mentioned that Terzi when he did speak, denounced our vote on the settlements resolution and contended that the 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, [no film number]. Secret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. 2 Maynes’s message was produced in response to an August 16 request from Tarnoff, in which the latter asked Maynes to clarify Young’s account of his meeting with Terzi in his resignation press conference. Tarnoff relayed Young’s answer to a member of the press, who questioned Young on his “failure to report accurately to the Department on what you [Young] had done—in effect, lied to the Department—and then went to another government before you leveled with your own government.” Young responded: “All of those things I did deliberately, but I did not lie. I didn’t tell all of the truth. I prefaced my remark: ‘I’m going to give you an official version,’ and I gave an official version which did not in any way lie.” Tarnoff asked Maynes to give his recollection of what Young told him about the Terzi meeting and to clarify Young’s reference to an “official version” of that meeting. (Telegram 213991 to Beijing, August 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840176–0117) 3 See Document 281. Earlier on July 26, Young hosted Bishara and Syrian UN representative El-Choufi for a luncheon meeting on the Kuwaiti-sponsored resolution on Palestinian rights, which was scheduled to be considered by the Security Council on July 27. During the meeting, the Arab representatives “gave no undertakings about the probable decision of the Arabs concerning the scheduled reopening of the Palestinian debate.” (Telegram 3150 from USUN, July 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840137–2476)
