991 Paraguay: U.S. Relations with Paraguay PA–1. Letter from the Ambassador in Paraguay (Ploeser) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1  Asuncion, March 21, 1958. Dear Dick: It is generally understood that Paraguay is certainly in a transitional period. Paraguayan politics, as you know, are rarely dull. At the moment, the Colorado Party has a factional fight, and the Liberals and Fehreristas and elements of the Catholic Church are all showing activity which tends to cause unrest and uncertainty. In each of these segments of activity, we find active support of the Communist groups, even in the case of the Priest Ramón Talavera. He has had among his principal advisors a well-known Communist, Miguel Chasse Sardi. These have all been reported to the Department, and there will be more to come. All of this puts the political sagacity and astuteness of President Stroessner to the supreme test. It is our opinion here that any disorderly change in the Government might, at least for a substantial period, be an open door for Communist infiltration of the government, and that the Communists, by their infiltration technique, are in a position to act quickly. The Stroessner government believes, and so do we, that there are some Communists who have already infiltrated. While we have some suspicions as to who they may be, the Government of Paraguay is not always in a position to have documentary proof or adequate evidence to make a dismissal in the face of opposition to such dismissal. The pattern has been clear in certain instances. The action of the President in some of his very important decisions shows a total unwillingness to yield to the influences of these people. 1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, [illegible in the original]. Secret; Official-Informal. The source text is a carbon copy bearing [illegible in the original] Ploeser’s typed signature, [illegible in the original]: “[illegible in the original] sent [to] USA [?] for reply.”
