and generosity in providing relief to the sufferers from the recent
earthquake disaster in Japan would not avail to diminish the resentment
which would follow the enactment of such a measure, as this enactment
would be regarded as an insult not to be palliated by any act of charity. It is
useless to argue whether or not such a feeling would be justified; it is quite
sufficient to say that it would exist. It has already been manifested in the
discussions in Japan with respect to the pendency of this measure and no
amount of argument can avail to remove it.
The question is thus presented whether it is worth while thus to affront a
friendly nation with whom we have established most cordial relations and
what gain there would be from such action. Permit me to suggest that the
legislation would seem to be quite unnecessary even for the purpose for
which it is devised. It is to be noted that if the provision of subdivision (b)
of Section 12 were eliminated, and the quota provided in Section 10 of the
proposed measure were to be applied to Japan, there would be a total of
only 246 Japanese immigrants entitled to enter under the quota as thus
determined. That is to say, this would be the number equal to two per cent,
of the number of residents in the United States as determined by the Census
of 1890 plus 200. There would remain, of course, the non-quota
immigrants, but if it could possibly be regarded that the provisions of
Section 4 would unduly enlarge the number admitted, these provisions
could be modified without involving a statutory discrimination aimed at the
Japanese. We now have an understanding with the Japanese Government
whereby Japan undertakes to prevent the immigration of laborers from
Japan to the United States except the parents, wives and children of those
already resident here. Furthermore, the Japanese Government, incidentally
to this undertaking, now regulates immigration to territory contiguous to the
United States with the object of preventing the departure from Japan of
persons who are likely to obtain surreptitious entry into this country. If the
provision of Section 12 (b) were to be deleted and the provision in regard to
certificates for immigrants to this country were to become applicable to
Japan, we should with the present understanding with the Japanese
Government be in a position to obtain active cooperation by the Japanese
authorities in the granting of passport and immigration certificates. We
could in addition be assured that the Japanese Government would give its
assistance in scrutinizing and regulating immigration from Japan to
