1274
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
of the states welcome this. We have a large naval presence in the Indian
Ocean, to stabilize it; then we will reduce the force.
Under difficult circumstances, we departed from His Majesty’s
ideas on resolving the Israeli-Arab conflict, by taking advantage of the
opportunity to resolve the Sinai problem. We laid the groundwork for
the Palestinian people to participate in determining their own future.
This is not perfect. But we have made progress. As for the future, it is
difficult to predict. There are major problems—there is no responsible
person to negotiate for the Palestinians living in the West Bank and
Gaza. We hoped at Camp David that this would happen, but it has not
materialized. This has crippled the prospects for complete success. The
issue was to induce Israel to withdraw from the Sinai, and to withdraw
from the West Bank—keeping some outposts—as a way of helping to
resolve the problems and to permit the Palestinian people to participate
in determining their own future. Some people would be able to return
to the West Bank. It is not easy to negotiate under Prime Minister Begin;
but there has been progress. He (the President) is determined to con-
tinue. This is not incompatible with His Majesty’s ultimate goals for the
West Bank. It is an interim solution. After the Self-Governing Authority
is set up, then discussions will take place on the permanent status of the
West Bank and Gaza. We support Resolution 242. There should be a
withdrawal by Israel from the occupied territories and guarantees for
Israel’s security. He would like His Majesty’s advice on how to go
about finding a way to get the Palestinian people to be represented.
There is an obstacle: Israel will not talk with the PLO as long as it says it
wants to destroy Israel and will not accept 242 and Israel’s right to exist.
If the PLO will do this, however, we will talk with it. Maybe there is
something possible in the interim—perhaps some mayors: this would
get us over a difficult time. If Israel and Egypt go on with the talks, and
make progress, then we will continue, and resist efforts to subvert the
process. We welcome efforts that would add to the peace process, and
would not oppose the Europeans on that basis, or a Jordanian initiative,
to build on the process. However, we would resist any modification
that would cancel 242 or threaten Israel, or that tried to undo the
Egyptian-Israeli achievement. He sees and appreciates His Majesty’s
efforts to reach the same goals: the right of self-determination; a with-
drawal of Israeli West Bank forces; and the control of terrorism (where
His Majesty has done an admirable job).
He sees changes taking place in Iraq—he sees it to be more respon-
sible and moderate than before. Syria is going the other way; and it is
more allied with the Soviet Union than any other state in the area. He
would like to hear how His Majesty would approach the future—this
would be helpful to him (the President). Maybe they have a different
view of Sadat. He sees that it took an act of courage to resolve the con-
