700 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI reductions proceed at a continuous rate, with a specific “band” of maximum deviation from this rate. He urged that this arrangement should be part of the overall phased reductions approach. Nazarkin then asked: “in other words, you’re not prepared to consider our guarantees about the sustainability of the rate?” Burt responded: “not until we get assurances on your commitment to continuous reductions.” He added that if the Soviets could not accept continuous reductions, the U.S. side would have to go back to its original proposal. Nazarkin said he understood. Road-Mobile ICBM Verification — Referring to the Soviet proposals on ground mobile launcher limits which had been presented by Deputy Foreign Minister Karpov, Nazarkin said he had nothing to add. Burt reacted by concluding that the sides were at a real stalemate; the issue would have to be discussed by ministers or at the Summit. He reminded Nazarkin that the U.S. willingness to lift the ban on mobile launchers was based on finding a solution to verification problems. He recalled that a rail-­mobile launcher agreement was reached Ad Ref., and then approved by capitals. He said there was no way he or anyone could tell the President that verification provisions for mobile ICBMs were adequate without some form of notification. The Soviets had said they had two concerns with the notification provisions: that they not jeopardize the security of the mobile force; and, that they not interfere with operational flexibility by overburdening the operators. Burt said he had believed the American plan had satisfied Soviet concerns, as well as those of the United States. He urged Nazarkin to look again at the Ad Ref Agreement, noting that there had been provisions for notification under various approaches suggested by the Soviet side. If the Soviets now said “no notification,” it would become a major obstacle to agreement. Nazarkin responded that the Soviets had taken careful note of what Burt had said, but he had nothing to add to Karpov’s remarks. Reduction of Warheads — Nazarkin raised the subject of warhead reduction in START, noting that Burt had not reacted the day before to the Soviet position. Burt replied that Nazarkin’s points had not been new, and that Burt had already addressed the subject previously. He then repeated that the USG did not yet have a position on destroying warheads. Strategic Nuclear Forces on Third-Country Territory — When Nazarkin brought up the Soviet proposal for a ban on strategic nuclear forces in third countries, Burt said that he had nothing to add to previous discussions of the issue; the U.S. side did not see a problem. Throwweight Limits on ICBMs — Nazarkin commented that he saw no prospect of dealing with the ICBM throwweight issue until the sides agreed on principles for
