948 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II “can have long term humanitarian and national security benefits to the United States”. They also recommend that a strategic working group be formed with representatives from DOD, State, AID, HEW and CIA to undertake the planning for this joint project. 4. HEW supports the proposal. They suggest that a joint working group be charged with identifying the best means for conducting specific cooperative projects. They also pointed out that a new intergovernmental agreement with a new permanent technical working group may be necessary for some kinds of specific projects. For other projects amendments to existing bilateral cooperative agreements such as the current agreement on medical science and public health will provide a more advantageous mechanism.5 And finally, they suggest that some joint or trilateral projects might be best accomplished through specific agreements with multilateral organizations such as the World Health Organization. 5. The Science Advisor’s Office fully supports the proposal. They suggest that perhaps the forthcoming meeting of the U.S.–U.S.S.R. Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation scheduled for July 6–8 might be used as an opportunity to discuss the health cooperation agreement concept with Soviet representatives.6 The leader of the Soviet delegation will be academician Kirillin, a deputy premier and Chairman of the State Committee for Science and Technology. It is expected that Dr. Kirillin will meet with the President and it was suggested that this may be an avenue to present the proposal. Analysis and Conclusions The concerns of the State Department with respect to the specificity of the proposal are valid but only in the context of implementation and preplanning with respect to a joint working group. Specificity can be worked out once the proposal is found acceptable. Two different approaches have been suggested by State and OSTP in conveying the idea of medical cooperative relationships in the Third World. State suggests that the traditional diplomatic route be followed 5 American and Soviet officials concluded an agreement on health cooperation on May 23, 1972, during the Moscow Summit meetings. The agreement committed the United States and the Soviet Union to sharing scientific knowledge regarding the eradication of cancer and heart disease and collaborating with international organizations in the health field. The text of the Joint Communique´, of which the agreement is part, is printed in Department of State Bulletin, June 26, 1972, pp. 899–902. 6 The Moscow Summit also yielded an agreement on cooperation in the fields of science and technology, which authorized the creation of a U.S.–Soviet Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation. (United Nations Treaty Series, vol. 852, p. 141) At the July 1977 meeting of the Joint Commission, U.S. and Soviet officials opted to renew the agreement for an additional 5 years. (United Nations Treaty Series, vol. 1087, pp. 102–103)
