3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
593
tions were balanced, so that the agreement is in the interest of both
sides. As far as the number of nuclear weapons which might be re-
duced, the President would like to explore with Brezhnev means by
which the remaining nuclear weapons could be made less vulnerable to
possible attack from the other country.
Marshal Ustinov interrupted to note that President Carter had men-
tioned the possibility of reducing the vulnerability of the remaining nu-
clear weapons to attack from the other side; would this not require new
weapons, and would this not be inconsistent with the first part of the
President’s statement?
The President said that only in a defensive way was he talking
about making missiles less vulnerable to pre-emptive attack. One ex-
ample of what he meant would be a safe haven or sanctuary for stra-
tegic submarines in certain areas of the ocean that could be excluded
from activities involved in anti-submarine warfare. We would also like
to explore with the Soviets the possibility of prohibiting the testing of
missiles in depressed trajectory, because such launches from subma-
rines might abbreviate the time required for the flight of attacking mis-
siles. We would also like to include further constraints on the moderni-
zation of weapons systems, a process started in the SALT II Treaty.
The President said that these were proposals that should be ex-
plored privately, perhaps between our respective military leaders.
They were not designed for propaganda advantage but were designed
to open up the prospect of real weapons control for the future. He was
sure that the Soviet Union will have similar proposals to make, which
he would be eager to explore with them.
Further, the President said we would like to proceed with a com-
prehensive nuclear test ban agreement, either with or without the par-
ticipation of Great Britain. We will do everything possible to induce
other nations, France, Great Britain and China, to join in substantial re-
ductions in nuclear weapons development and deployment. Obviously
he could not speak for them and would think that the Chinese would
be difficult to persuade. But it is obvious that for several years now the
United States and the Soviet Union had such massive nuclear inven-
tories that their predominance over the other nuclear powers is ade-
quate. Moreover, the Soviet SS–20 missiles and other medium-range
systems constituted a formidable means for dealing with these nations.
But the absence of nuclear cooperation from other countries should not
be allowed to interfere with progress on a bilateral basis toward the
SALT III agreement.
The President thought that, along with SALT III negotiations, we
should join publicly in an effort aimed at non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons and agree not to make sales of nuclear fuel or technology ex-
