1979 615 fractionate enough to defeat MPS or open trench. The Soviets already have many more RVs than we think they need for target coverage. The multiple shelter concept proceeds on the assumption that aimpoints can be proliferated more easily than RVs. Stan Turner noted that the Soviets have shown a willingness to spend great amounts in trying to reduce the effectiveness of our forces. Harold Brown said that if you concede to the Soviets the ability and willingness to beat all survivability approaches, life becomes very hard for us. They can work very hard on ASW. Frank Press opened that the Soviets could not achieve much in ASW in the 1980’s or even in 1990’s. Harold Brown said he was concerned about the 1990’s but less so about the 1980’s. John White asked if MPS and open trench reacted differently to fractionation. Harold Brown said no. Dr. Perry noted that the Soviets could increase fractionation levels by a factor of 4 by putting [less than one line not declassified] But then they would need much better CEPs and we could put our shelters closer together. David Aaron noted 3 Soviet reasons to fractionation—1) they may want to keep us vulnerable, 2) match our RV numbers, or 3) increase their absolute numbers of RV’s surviving a counterforce nuclear exchange. Harold Brown observed that increasing the numbers of RV’s on silo based missiles is not a cost effective way to add surviving RV’s given very severe threats to the silos. Cy Vance asked what constraints or cooperative measure we would want in order to verify a Soviet “open trench” system. Harold Brown said we would want them to open the system for observation some of the time. Frank Press noted that we might be worried about hidden missiles deployed in such a system. We face the threat of secret silos and hidden missiles now. Further, for the Soviet offroad mobile is an attractive option because of their large land areas—­and this system poses even larger problems of verification. Stan Turner said we would want three things to verify open trench on the Soviet side—­a choke point where missiles were to be introduced into the deployment area, quick inspection, and production controls. Harold Brown said all connected trenches would have to be inspectable at once. Dr. Brzezinski asked what kind of production controls would be desired? Stan Turner observed that something like the MPS special assembly facilities near the point of system introduction might do. Harold Brown asked how do we control a system like the SS–20, or the evolution of the SS–20 into a SS–16? [less than one line not declassified] Harold Brown said this trench system is easier to verify than those Soviet systems. David Aaron said we don’t now impose controls on missile numbers. Building secret silos would seem easier
