Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977 233 We and our allies are negotiating together with the Soviet Union and their allies in the Warsaw Pact nations to reduce the level of military forces in Europe. We’ve renewed the 1972 agreement for cooperation in science and technology, and a similar agreement for cooperation in outer space.8 We’re seeking ways to cooperate in improving world health and in relieving world hunger.9 In the strategic arms limitation talks, confirming and then building on Vladivostok accords, we need to make steady progress toward our long-term goals of genuine reductions and strict limitations, while maintaining the basic strategic balance. We’ve outlined proposals incorporating significant new elements of arms control, deep reductions in the arsenals of both sides, freezing of deployment and technology, and restraining certain elements in the strategic posture of both sides that threaten to destabilize the balance which now exists. The Vladivostok negotiations of 1974 left some issues unresolved and subject to honest differences of interpretation. Meanwhile, new developments in technology have created new concerns—the cruise missile, the very large intercontinental ballistic missiles of the Soviets. The Soviets are worried about our cruise missiles, and we are concerned about the security of our own deterrent capability. Our cruise missiles are aimed at compensating for the growing threat to our deterrent, represented by the build-up of strategic Soviet offensive weapons forces. If these threats can be controlled, and I believe they can, then we are prepared to limit our own strategic programs. But if an agreement cannot be reached, there should be no doubt that the United States can and will do what it must to protect our security and to ensure the adequacy of our strategic posture. Our new proposals go beyond those that have been made before. In many areas we are in fact addressing for the first time the tough, complex core of longstanding problems. We are trying for the first time to reach agreements that will not be overturned by the next 8 American and Soviet officials signed a joint agreement for cooperation in the fields of science and technology during the May 1972 Moscow summit meeting. The agreement authorized the creation of a U.S.-Soviet Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation. (United Nations Treaty Series, volume 852, p. 141) For additional information about the Joint Commission’s duties, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XIV, Soviet Union, October 1971–May 1972, Document 227. At the July 1977 meeting of the Joint Commission, U.S. and Soviet officials opted to renew the agreement for an additional 5 years. (United Nations Treaty Series, volume 1087, pp. 102–103) 9 For additional information on U.S.-Soviet joint health initiatives, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Documents 286 and 297.
