National Security Policy  445
Africa
Western Europe
Latin America
ANNEX
MAIN TRENDS IN SOVIET CAPABILITIES 
AND POLICIES, 1957–1962
THE PROBLEM
To review significant developments affecting the USSR’s internal 
political situation, relations with Bloc states, economic situation, mil­
itary programs, and foreign policy, and to estimate probable Soviet 
courses of action through 1962.
SUMMARY ESTIMATE
1. Both the Soviet internal scene and Soviet external policy continue 
to be strongly marked by change and innovation. The ascendance of 
Khrushchev has further accentuated the flexibility and pragmatism of 
the post-Stalin leaders’ approach to their major problems. But none 
of the changes in Soviet policy suggests any alteration in basic aims or 
in the concept of an irreconcilable conflict between the Communist and 
non-Communist worlds. Indeed the Soviet leaders display a great deal 
of confidence, buttressed by their recent political and technological suc­
cesses, in the prospects for ultimate victory of their side.
Trends in Soviet Foreign Policy
2. The respect of the Soviet leaders for US nuclear power will con­
tinue and they are unlikely to initiate general war or to pursue courses 
of action which, in their judgment, gravely risk general war, over the 
next five years. At the same time, however, they are probably confi­
dent that their own growing nuclear capabilities, added to their great 
conventional strength, are increasingly deterring the US and its allies 
from courses of action gravely risking general war. As a result the USSR 
probably regards itself as progressively achieving greater freedom of 
maneuver in local situations.2 The USSR’s posture during the Suez and 
2 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not agree with the estimate 
that the Soviets are likely to feel that they are achieving greater freedom of maneuver nor 
that they will regard the US as increasingly inhibited by growing Soviet strengths.
The US has always been cautious of risking general war. This is certainly evident 
to the Soviets. But also evident to them are examples such as Berlin, Korea, Taiwan, and 
Syria which underline US firmness when a clear challenge is presented.
The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, has found no specific evidence or 
indicators from which the Soviets could derive the opinion that US caution will increase as 
Soviet nuclear capabilities grow. In fact, a convincing case could be made for increasing 
Soviet caution, based on fear that the West would feel compelled to exercise its superior 
military capabilities before the Soviets might reverse the relative military advantage.
