1448 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement else. You will note that I made the tone of my statement on missing military personnel somewhat milder than implied in the guidance tele­ gram. If our purpose is really to get information on these men I still feel it is better with them and for the record to handle it, particularly in a closed meeting such as this, in that manner rather than simply as a propaganda blast. In any event the people in MAC seem fully capable of exploiting the propaganda blast approach. I cited the case of Long as the best additional case I could find. I am somewhat confused on the now voluminous files on this subject here which Dave had well in hand. If he has the time, I would appreciate Dave dropping us a little note on any suggestions he may have based on his memory of what we have on hand here. I think you are right in issuing a passport to Wirin. The correspondents issue seems to be completely dead on all sides. I am sure that you are not, and I know that I am not, regretful that this is the case. It certainly confirms that Peiping has no interest in letting in American correspondents at this time. Incidentally, what has happened with respect to the returning American students? I have seen nothing whatever on it in recent weeks. You will have seen that I had the Tyler couple in Prague. I think your memo on Chinese in prisons is good. Ed is working on the question of an instructor for Dexter and I will let him tell you about that. I would be very glad if Dexter could arrive here by the December meeting. I entirely agree that the best thing to do is frankly to introduce him as Bob’s successor and will do so. With respect to Bob I did not receive your letter of October 8 regard­ ing his travel orders until I arrived here this trip. I think that there may be a little misunderstanding as to the problem. It is not one of giving him State orders for travel within France, but rather of just having his State orders read so that they cover travel from any place in France that he may be to Geneva rather than just from Paris. As it now stands he is just not able to collect anything for his August trip. He was at Roquebrune on leave and instead of returning to Paris and originating his trip there, he went directly from Roquebrune to Geneva which was also cheaper for the Government. While the amount is not large he should be paid. I was interested in talking to Ed and Dave Popper about the New Delhi show. I had no idea that they had gone down there. Thanks very much for Ken Young’s memo on his talk with the Pole. I found it most interesting for its other points as well as the one on China. Regards to all. Sincerely yours, U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador
