Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II will require some kind of special organizational backstopping if it is not to fall into the bureaucratic quagmire and be swallowed up thereby. (That’s what happened to many of Henry’s famous efforts in speeches!)2 I particularly call your attention to the section of the paper on U.S. assistance levels. You will note that FY 79 funds for community water programs now project a severe decline in overall funding levels. Obviously this problem must be dealt with. If you need any more information or a retailoring of the material attached, please let me know. Attachment Background Paper on Community Water Initiative by the U.S.3 Washington, undated The Problem Only about 10 percent of the population in the developing countries utilize fully protected water sources. Less than a tenth of the villages of India have access to clean drinking water. In the developing countries many large urban areas’ drinking water supplies are unsafe. There are, however, great differences between countries and particularly between urban and rural areas. World-wide, about two-thirds of the LDC population is without “reasonably adequate” water or sanitation services. However, in many urban areas and especially in rural communities organic waste is accumulating and water supplies are being increasingly contaminated. The UN Children’s Fund estimates about one billion rural people in the LDCs and 200 million in urban shanty towns must use unsafe water sources. A UN report has stated: “. . . Few could disagree that of any single activity in these urban areas, the improvement of water supply would have the greatest impact on the prevention of disease, the improvement of living conditions, the cleaning of streets, the beautification of parks and playgrounds, and the servicing of commercial, governmental and industrial operations. Similarly, if any single action were to be taken in these rural areas with the aim of reducing exposure to the most prevalent diseases, upgrading lifestyle (particularly that of women and chil- 2 Presumable reference to Kissinger. Blaney was a Policy Planning Staff member during the Nixon and Ford administrations. 3 No classification marking.
