National Security Policy  319
Conference and the Interdepartmental Committee on Internal Security 
(transmitted as Part 8 of NSC 5819), as summarized orally at the meet­
ing by the NSC Representative on Internal Security.
b. Agreed to submit to the President a recommendation that accel­
erated efforts should be made to develop, procure and utilize devices 
designed to detect attempted introductions into the United States of 
materials which are or may be characteristic of fissionable material or 
other nuclear weapons components.
NOTE: The recommendation in b above subsequently approved 
by the President and transmitted to the Secretary of the Treasury, the 
Attorney General, the Chairmen of the Atomic Energy Commission, 
the Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference and the Interdepartmen­
tal Committee on Internal Security for appropriate implementation.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.]
S. Everett Gleason
95.	
Paper for Presentation to the NSC1
Washington, September 18, 1958
U.S. Internal Security Program
In the joint report of the IIC and ICIS on the Internal Security 
Program of the United States, the Council’s Internal Security 
Committees have presented the nature of the threat involved, the sta­
tus of some 50 programs designed to meet the threat, and an assess­
ment of the overall program as measured against the requirements of 
approved national policies which relate to internal security matters.
As provided in the charter responsibilities of IIC and ICIS, the over­
all objective of the Internal Security Program is the establishment, and 
maintenance by responsible agencies, of the highest practicable state of 
internal security, including plans for a war-­related emergency. Consist­
ent with this assignment of responsibility, and with the provisions of 
specific directives, the Internal Security Program is principally directed 
toward meeting the threat of Communist subversion, espionage, and 
sabotage, including the clandestine introduction of nuclear weapons 
for use against military and other key installations in this country.
1 Source: U.S. internal security program. Secret. 8 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman 
File, NSC Records.
