1090 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II sources to promote adjustment without political upheaval and economic stagnation. —The United States should remain open to the exports of developing countries so that the developing countries may earn more of the capital required for development through trade. —OPIC’s capacity to stimulate private U.S. investment in developing countries will be enhanced, and AID’s program to increase opportunities for U.S. companies abroad will be expanded. 3. Focus Special Development Efforts on Regions and Countries of Highest Concern to the United States —A program will be prepared to accelerate the development of countries in the Caribbean Basin. —The United States will cooperate more closely with other aidproviding countries and development institutions in dealing with the extraordinarily complex development tasks facing the governments of sub-Saharan Africa. —The United States will give preference in its assistance allocations to countries that respect human rights as fundamental for achieving equitable development. 4. Design a Development Strategy to Meet the Challenges of the 1980s —The United States will participate actively and creatively in designing the global agenda for the Third Development Decade which is to be adopted in 19803 and in the UN’s consideration of a round of global negotiations on international economic issues. —With U.S. support, the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development called for the creation of a special interim fund for science and technology, to be administered by the UN Development Program (UNDP).4 Your initiative in proposing the new Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation (ISTC)5 will enable the United States to maintain its leadership in fostering research and development of knowledge and skills for peaceful and humanitarian purposes. —IDCA will review the allocation of resources for the various development assistance programs that the United States now supports in order to prepare a U.S. development assistance policy for the 1980s. 3 See footnote 5, Document 263. The UN General Assembly adopted an International Development Strategy for the Third Development Decade on December 5, 1980, in Resolution A/RES/35/56. 4 See footnote 6, Document 234. 5 Title IV of the International Development Cooperation Act of 1979 (P.L. 96–53), which the President signed into law on August 14, 1979, authorized the President to establish an Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation.
