574.D7/116: Telegram
[Document 199]
The Chargé in Switzerland (Winslow) to the Secretary of State
BERNE, September 24, 1925—3 p.m.
[Received 5:03 p.m.]
121. Department’s 80 September 19, 1 p.m. Director of Radiotelegraph requests
information on following points:
1. Should request for proposals be sent to the governments or to their
appropriate administrations, the latter procedure having been followed
similar previous conferences. He points out that first course would
necessitate intermediation of Swiss Government with consequent delay. He
assumes that in either case requests for proposals are to be sent to the
colonies, protectorates, et cetera, or their appropriate administrations (see
enclosure to my despatch 489 August 10)24 of the invited governments.
2. While appreciating inability of the United States to invite Ecuador and
Soviet Russia he inquires whether the Department intends to send invitations
to Argentine, Persia, Turkey, Iceland and Ireland whose appropriate
administrations correspond with the bureau and contribute to the expenses of
the radiotelegraph section and whether proposals should be requested from
them.
3. Should proposals be requested from certain companies and international
radiotelegraph organizations? (If desired I shall telegraph list of those
companies and organizations invited to participate and from whom proposals
were requested for the present Paris conference as well as others suggested
by the section.)
4. As all states contributing to the expenses of the bureau enjoy the right to be
furnished with all publications of the bureau he assumes that we would have
no objection to forwarding the requests for proposals to uninvited States
merely for their information.
5. He inquires whether it is desired that the proposed new international code
of signals upon its receipt should be circulated by the bureau and whether
requests for proposals relative thereto should also be sent out with a view to
their subsequent publication in document embodying all proposals.
