1956  755
488.	 Letter 30 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 30
Washington, February 13, 1956
Dear Alex:
We expect to be forehanded with your guidance for the February 18 
meeting. We had a meeting with the Secretary on your instructions at his 
home on Saturday the 11th on the eve of his departure for his vacation in 
the Bahamas. Early in the week we had a meeting with the Secretary on 
the guidance for your February 9 meeting. Judge Phleger expedited his 
return from a visit to Puerto Rico in order to participate in drafting the 
guidance for the February 9 meeting.
You have received some very fine bouquets all along the line for 
your superior handling of the meetings. Gratification has been expressed 
by all who are in on this subject at the way you have handled both 
your prepared presentations and the give and take of the impromptu 
exchanges. Your tactics have been superb and your approach precisely 
in line with the prevailing thinking here.
We believe that you have Wang on a pretty weak wicket now. He is 
close to being on the prongs of a dilemma if we hold steady. His choices 
are (1) to accept our formulation; (2) to continue the talks indefinitely 
with all the inhibitions which that places on aggressive action by them; 
or (3) assume the responsibility for breaking off the talks, which would 
be a considerable onus and one which they presumably are reluctant to 
assume. The danger which the Secretary feels that we must avoid is the 
appearance of extreme inflexibility. If we appeared to adopt an abso­
lutely rigid stance, the Communists after a break off might be able to 
transfer a good part of the onus to us arguing that our unyielding atti­
tude on phraseology was deliberately designed to provoke a break. We 
want to avoid giving any plausibility to this sort of allegation. I would 
characterize the Secretary’s attitude toward the stance you should take 
as “firmness without rigidity”. He does not feel that it is necessary or 
desirable for you to propose any amendment or transposition in our 
proposal, but you do not close the door to serious consideration of any 
amendments proposed by Wang which do not do violence to the basic 
principles on which we stand.
You will be interested in a view which was expressed in the 
­Saturday meeting and which did not encounter any challenge. This 
was to the effect that a renunciation of force declaration by the Chinese 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal.
