Haiti 769 Ambassador Drew as very close and warm and said this applies also to relations between their respective subordinates and associates such as Foreign Minister Mars and the President’s “special assistant Barbot” on the one hand and Mr. Yoe and Col. Heinl on the other. Mr. Rubottom expressed gratification over the President’s recovery and the good working relations we have in Port-­au-Prince. Mr. Rubottom mentioned that we have heard rumors of impending Cabinet changes. Ambassador Bonhomme said he thinks a few changes may be made but that there will not be a general “shake-­up”. He thinks that Finance Minister Theard and Foreign Minister Mars will be retained. He remarked that Theard is under very heavy pressure because of the financial and fiscal stringency which he must impose. Referring to recent differences between the Senate and the Cabinet, Ambassador Bonhomme commented that some criticism is necessary and that he thinks is a healthy sign of vitality. HA–18. Memorandum of a Conversation, the White House, Washington1 August 4, 1959 SUBJECT Call on President Eisenhower by the Ambassador of Haiti, Ernest Bonhomme. PARTICIPANTS The President Ambassador of Haiti, Ernest Bonhomme R. R. Rubottom Jr., Assistant Secretary of state for Inter-American Affairs After being greeted by the President, the Ambassador handed him a note (in French only)2 in which President Duvalier expressed ­appreciation for the President’s efforts on behalf of world peace and offered military cooperation from Haiti in the form of military bases as well as such other 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.38/8–459. Official Use Only. Drafted by Rubottom. 2 In this letter dated July 13, President Duvalier offered allow the United States to establish submarine bases and training camps on Haitian territory. The white House sent Duvalier’s letter to the Department of State with a request for a translation. The letter and a copy of the translation as sent to the White House are in Presidential Correspondence, Lot 64 D 174.
