430  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
that a no force declaration would give to the status quo, and the GRC 
as a government which claims sovereignty over all of China and is rec­
ognized by most free world countries, would greatly weaken the PRC 
claim as the only government of China and the government entitled to 
occupy China’s seat in the UN.
b) The renunciation of force declaration by the PRC would virtu­
ally eliminate the possibility of its obtaining even the offshore islands in 
the foreseeable future. PRC estimates that there is a good possibility it 
could attack those islands without too serious risk of U.S. intervention 
and without serious political loss. It also estimates that if the U.S. were 
to intervene to prevent capture of the offshore islands and any consid­
erable hostilities should develop therefrom, the PRC would have con­
siderable political support in Asia as well as elsewhere, while the U.S. 
would tend to become politically isolated on this issue.
c) The renunciation of force declaration would be interpreted in Tai­
wan and by the overseas Chinese as an acceptance of the status quo by 
the PRC and would, therefore, greatly increase the difficulties of PRC sub­
version of Taiwan and decrease PRC influence among overseas Chinese.
d) Such a bilateral declaration would not bind the GRC or bring 
about any cessation of GRC harassment of the mainland and shipping 
destined for the PRC.
The only factors that I perceive that might move them toward mak­
ing such a declaration are the following:
a) It would contribute to their current diplomatic peace offensive.
b) It would increase pressure on U.S. to agree to a higher level 
meeting and, in turn, speed up relaxation of trade controls, member­
ship in the UN, etc.
c) If they genuinely fear that the U.S. intends to put Chiang back 
on the mainland, they would enter into the declaration in the hope that 
it would tie our hands.
d) They could use such declaration to bring pressure on us to 
restrain GRC from its harassing tactics.
None of the foregoing points seems very persuasive to me from 
their standpoint, and I doubt if they outweigh what they consider to be 
the disadvantages. My estimate of the situation at present is that I see 
little or no possibility of their entering into such a declaration unless 
it were accompanied by the withdrawal of our forces from Taiwan or, 
much less likely, a firm commitment to a Foreign Ministers’ meeting. 
I would not even be sure that they would enter into it even if both 
things were done. I am also not sure where Quemoy and Matsu might 
fit in. I certainly thus far have not perceived any support for the oft 
repeated thesis that a ceasefire could be obtained in the Formosa Strait 
if Matsu and Quemoy were turned over to them. However, by stretch­
ing things a bit, one might be able to read into Wang’s remarks thus far
