September 18–December 16, 1978 291 would be for you to explore where we can go from here on the West Bank/Gaza with Dayan and Boutros Ghali separately to begin with. It would be a waste of time to try to set up a working group on West Bank/Gaza issues as part of Peace Treaty negotiations structure unless some progress can first be made at the ministerial level. In effect we would use the presence of the delegations here to get the negotiations started informally on the West Bank/Gaza, our objective being to build, through successive increments of understanding between Egypt and Israel, on the basis of agreement achieved at Camp David. These talks would go in parallel with the Egypt-Israel talks on bilateral issues, would have no terminal date, and would be open at any stage for Jordan and West Bank/Gazans to join. Our strategy would be to combine as much progress as we can make on West Bank/ Gaza issues with the growing reality of an Egypt-Israel peace treaty to increase the incentive for Jordan to join, or at least to encourage Palestinians to cooperate with allowing transitional arrangements to go forward. A paper3 is attached suggesting a sequence of further stages of agreement on the West Bank/Gaza that we might seek. 3 Attached but not printed. 81. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Crawford) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Sterner), the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Draper), and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders)1 Washington, October 6, 1978 At 1:00 p.m. Friday2 I accompanied Mr. Christopher to Brzezinski’s meeting on the coming Egypt-Israel negotiation. The meeting 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 6, Post Camp David Papers. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Korn and Staff Assistants. 2 October 6.
