708
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
food problem, and indeed broader than basic human needs. It needs to
lay out the President’s global approach, particularly focusing on the
type of world we envisage in coming decades. In so doing, however, it
should communicate clearly the necessity of addressing the world food
problem. The view was that an early October speech would be prema-
ture and that the President should await development of specific pol-
icies first.
—An expanded role for the Department of Agriculture. This newly ex-
panded role should be developed in close collaboration with State,
AID, NSC, OMB, and the White House, also with adequate involve-
ment of the private sector as well as Congress.
—U.S.D.A.’s approach to commercial food sales, food reserves, trade, and
food aid. However, what is required is the balancing of interests in this
area with other interests including ensuring more equitable distribu-
tion of food to the poor, the relationship of our present U.S. and foreign
agricultural production policies to nutrition (both at home and abroad),
and the institutional linkages required to bring about a coordinated
policy in these areas.
—Foreign Food Assistance. Provided, however, that the emphasis is
on the poor nations.
—Scientific and technical collaboration. Provided, however, that the
emphasis is on useful technology in support of the poor producers. In-
vestment in basic agricultural research both here and abroad will be
necessary in order to enhance the world’s productive capacity for the
intermediate and longer term. This is essential both to provide ade-
quate food supply abroad as well as to keep food costs down
domestically.
—International trade arrangements.
III. Specific Negative Attributes of the Report
—The report, though well conceived, was developed in somewhat of a
policy vacuum. To the best of our knowledge, many of the principals in
and out of government did not officially engage in collaborative con-
sultation with Agriculture in developing the report. This can easily be
rectified by convening a steering group made up of the principal
agencies, to develop a set of governmentwide recommendations for the
President to consider.
—The report lacks a budget impact analysis.
—The report lacks a specific set of measurable goals which identify
what it is that all these policy initiatives will accomplish.
—Downplays the conflicting, competing, and overlapping policies now
in place among the many agencies (26 agencies involved) and does not
suggest how these problems will be worked out beyond consultation.
