Panama 903 expressed concern about the proposed location for the new passenger terminal and has asked my Government, not as a treaty obligation but as a measure of cooperation, to reconsider this matter. Your Excellency’s Government is informed that the passenger terminal will not be located on the site originally intended. Current plans contemplate its location on a site considerably closer to the new freight terminal now in course of construction. Your Excellency may be assured that my Government will continue to have an active interest in the economic and general well-­being of the Government and people of Panama. Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my most distinguished consideration. PM–14. Memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Snow) to the Acting Secretary of State1  Washington, May 1, 1959. SUBJECT Resume of Panamanian Situation. A group of some 80 armed revolutionaries, mostly Cubans, landed on the north coast of Panama in the Mandinga Bay area on April 25. The invaders thereafter moved west and captured the village of Nombre de Dios. Prior to the invasion, the Panamanian Ambassador in Washington had been receiving reports of invasion threats through his and our sources and had been keeping the Organization of American States informed of developments on an informal basis. On April 27 he appeared before the OAS, apprised the member states of the situation, pointed out that this action posed a threat to hemispheric peace and asked for invocation of the Rio Treaty.2 On April 28 the OAS passed a resolution in which it recognized the immediate threat to Panama 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 719.00/5–159. Confidential. Drafted by Price. 2 The Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance was signed at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on September 2, 1947, by the representatives of the United States and eighteen countries of Latin America. It was ratified on December 12, 1947, and entered into force on December 3, 1948. For the text of the Rio Treaty, see 62 Stat. 1681.
