126  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
measure of relative force build-­ups and is of limited value for predict-
ing which force would prevail in actual combat.
e. The study did not call for the formulation of national objectives, 
and the response did not attempt to do so.
f. A wide range of significant military issues was not addressed, 
including: theater nuclear forces; strategic defensive and mobility 
forces; US–USSR industrial capacity/mobilization potential; and access 
to raw materials and energy resources.
g. Neither this study nor the Net Assessment dealt in any depth 
with the specific nature of the current and expected challenges from 
the Soviet Union. They were unable to deal, moreover, with the many 
uncertainties which the future competition will pose for both the US 
and the Soviet Union.
(S) Follow-­on Work
Your guidance on the military strategy issues will provide the 
framework for my review of specific defense policies in the coming 
months. I will have begun within DOD a hard look ahead at the FY 1979 
budget and will soon turn to formulate basic guidance for the 1980 bud-
get. I am also looking at ways to strengthen DOD longer range plan-
ning. I believe we should try to add a true long-­range planning function 
in the Defense Department. As things stand now, our horizon is limited 
to no more—­and often less—­than the service life of the major pieces of 
equipment we buy. We have a good idea of the next five years; things 
are less certain after that, and, for instance, even though the ships we 
buy may last for 20–30 years, we have no real plan approaching that 
duration. Doing so would give us the chance to be a bit less reactive 
to what happens in the world around us, and instead to think about 
where we would like to lead the world, and develop strategies to do 
this. We can do a better job of thinking through how we can adapt as 
the uncertainty of the future unfolds.
In a similar vein, just as the business world plans strategies for 
product markets, I think we may be able to plan strategies for the “busi-
nesses” of the Department of Defense. We will begin to look in the large 
for areas where we are (or could be) in a position—­as the economists 
put it—­of comparative advantage, and then try to build upon what we 
have today to move the competition in that direction.
In addition to initiating follow-­on efforts to address the problems 
identified above as limitations, and developing a long-­range planning 
function, I will also initiate study efforts to address specific topics 
including:
