1957  1427
832.	 Telegram 366 to Geneva1
Washington, October 8, 1957, 4:04 p.m.
366. For Johnson.
Guidance for October 10 meeting:
1. Take Wang to task for increasingly evident Chinese Communist 
responsibility for preventing progress in talks. On September 10, 1955 
they declared all Americans entitled expeditiously exercise right return. 
Instead of carrying out promptly this public commitment, they adopted 
specious argument that term QUOTE expeditiously UNQUOTE must 
be interpreted in light length sentence, behavior of prisoners. At last two 
meetings Wang even argued that Agreed Announcement applied only 
to QUOTE ordinary UNQUOTE not QUOTE offending UNQUOTE 
Americans. Plain words of announcement do not support this view and 
Wang well knows that at time announcement issued, U.S. concerned 
only about prisoners, hence announcement must have referred to them 
or been meaningless.
2. Communist responsibility for lack progress also apparent from 
refusal renounce use force. Reciprocal renunciation force applicable to 
Taiwan area merits full attention for whatever time necessary attain 
goal of terminating military threat to peace that area. Interests of two 
countries and world not served by introduction of subsidiary issues.
3. If Wang raises question newsmen’s travel and his draft agreed 
announcement of September 12, reaffirm U.S. position applications 
individual newsmen for visas will be considered on individual case 
basis. If Communist China wishes approve or deny newsmen visas on 
group or blanket basis, that matter its choice. U.S. will act in accordance 
its own laws, subjecting applications individually to criteria specified 
in law.
4. If Wang presses for yes or no answer on principle reciprocity and 
equality or for assurance one or several Chinese Communist newsmen 
would be admitted, remind him U.S. newsmen applied individually 
for visas, that he himself stated these applications would be considered 
individually and we are only asking that Chinese Communist news­
men do the same. U.S. cannot approve visas in advance on blanket or 
hypothetical basis.
5. Your 190 considered in formulating above.
Dulles
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–457. Confidential; Limit 
Distribution. Drafted by Osborn and Clough; cleared by Robertson and Jones and in S/S.
