718  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
This broad objective of our foreign economic policy has three 
major components. First, to promote the economic strength of the US, 
second, to promote the economic strength of the rest of the free world, 
and third, to build and maintain cohesion in the free world.
To achieve these objectives we have followed three basic economic 
policies: The expansion of trade; the promotion of private investment; 
and provision of mutual assistance.
During the past 6 years, by building on existing programs and, 
even more important, by developing new programs designed to meet 
new needs and changing conditions, there has been created a complex 
pattern of interrelated programs. Some of them we carry out on our 
own and others in cooperation with friendly nations. These programs 
are well suited to the promotion of our basic objectives.
At the present time, however, the achievement of these objectives 
is endangered from within by the growth of protectionist sentiment 
and from the outside by the Soviet economic offensive. My purpose 
this morning is to suggest some of the ways in which protectionism 
adversely affects our domestic economy, our political-economic rela­
tions with our allies and therefore our national security.
I would like to deal first with the general aspects of the problem 
and then turn to specific illustrations.
Protectionism has certain recognizable benefits. It can assure 
the survival of a sensitive industry which might otherwise succumb 
because of its competitive disadvantages. It can provide a blanket for 
an infant industry during its formative years. It can prevent economic 
and social disruption in a community dependent on a single industry 
and without the resources to develop alternative industries.
In spite of these recognizable advantages, however, there are rel­
atively few people who would contend that protectionism provides a 
basis for a dynamic expanding economy. The reasons are obvious.
Protection discourages the development of new products, new 
methods of production and distribution, and cost-­saving techniques.
Protection reduces our ability to compete with other industrialized 
economies.
Protection contributes to inflation by raising the costs of the prod­
ucts we buy abroad.
It imperils our export markets by making it more difficult for other 
countries to earn the dollars they need in order to buy from us. It also 
endangers those markets by inviting retaliation on the part of other 
countries.
Protectionist measures inevitably reduce total US output by pre­
venting the shift of domestic resources from less efficient to more effi­
cient industries. By lowering our total national product, such measures
