National Security Policy  1187
include pre-­attack planning for the full utilization of local resources and 
for support by available Federal resources, including military forces.
MAJORITY
BUDGET
23. Civil defense will continue 
to include local planning for 
the emergency dispersal of 
populations, not as a substitute 
for shelter, but as a possible 
supplement thereto under cer­
tain circumstances.
23. Civil defense policy for 
protection of the civilian popu­
lation in case of nuclear attack, 
while continuing to include local 
planning for the emergency dis­
persal of urban populations on 
attack warning, incorporates the 
concept of fallout shelter. Specific 
guidance is contained in a sepa­
rate NSC policy document.
24. Guidance and leadership should be provided to industry 
essential to [initial]15 recovery from nuclear attack in the development 
of plans and programs designed to ensure the continuity of essential 
production and services.
25. Civilian items essential to survival and [initial]16 recovery 
from nuclear attack should be identified, minimum requirements 
determined,
MAJORITY
TREASURY-­DEFENSE-­
BUDGET
and 
measures 
developed 
to meet minimum require­
ments. Where necessary to 
this end stockpiling should be 
undertaken.
and industrial inventories located 
and related to Government and 
State stocks. Where total avail­
abilities 
appear 
inadequate, 
measures should be developed 
to 
meet 
minimum 
require­
ments with the least disruption 
of the economy, the least cost 
to the Government, and maxi­
mum encouragement of private 
participation.
26. The United States should continue its present policy of sup­
porting activities which will:
a. Warn the people of impending attack and make possible essen­
tial communication before, during and after attack.
b. Give emphasis to the protection (including dispersal where nec­
essary) of essential civilian survival supplies, equipment and facilities.
15 Treasury-­Budget proposal. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
16 Treasury-­Defense-­Budget proposal. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
