acknowledged leader of the bandits in the East. For some time he has been,
apparently, quiet.” The Legation added: “It is a very difficult matter to deal
with this present condition of bandit revolution. Every sugar estate has
amongst its own employees emissaries of the bandits, who are working
peacefully during the day and in connection with the bandits at night. The
bandits are bold and with absolutely no respect for life.”
The Navy Department advised this Department November 21, 1921,53 that
during the month following the attack upon Mr. McPhail 223 bandits were
captured by the United States military forces in the Dominican Republic, of
whom, at the date of the letter, 105 had already been tried, convicted and
sentenced by Provost Court.
In your Embassy’s note of December 21, 1921,54 the Embassy submitted
statements by Messrs. Steele and McPhail of the incident in question, and in
Mr. Steele’s statement he referred to the “successful efforts of the United
States troops” as against the bandits, and stated that because of the
information he had given the troops it would be necessary for him to leave
the country, and therefore requested the British Government to support his
claim for $120,000 against the Dominican Government. However, in
neither of the statements is it alleged that the troops of the United States
failed to afford proper protection to the plantation on which Messrs. Steele
and McPhail were employed, or to the officers or employees of that
plantation.
As you were advised in the Department’s note of May 10, 1924,53 the claim
of Mr. McPhail was referred to the appropriate authority of this
Government. That authority has now replied at length to the statements
contained in the memorial, and I beg to set forth below a synopsis of certain
portions of that reply: The forces of the United States did not proceed to the
Dominican Republic in 1915, and it was only on May 15, 1916, that they
were landed in the Republic.
Mr. McPhail’s veiled assertion that banditry did not exist in the Dominican
Republic before the military government was constituted is not only
unfounded but preposterous. Ample evidence exists in the possession of
authorities of the United States to demonstrate that banditry was rife in the
