294  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
range. Nuclear warheads would almost certainly be used in both these 
missiles, although we do not exclude the possibility of CW use in the 
700 n.m. missile.
6. Intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). Since August 1957, the 
USSR has test fired at least four and possibly six missiles to a distance 
of approximately 3,500 nautical miles. We believe this represents the 
development of an ICBM system which, when first operational, will 
probably be capable of delivering a nuclear payload to a maximum 
range of about 5,500 n.m., with an accuracy (CEP) of 5 n.m. and a sys­
tem reliability of about 50 percent. By the early 1960’s reliability will 
probably be considerably improved. At the beginning of the period 
1962–1966, the CEP could be about 3 n.m., and could be reduced to 
about 2 n.m. later in the period.
7. Available evidence is inconclusive as to the designed payload-­
carrying capacity of the Soviet ICBM, which we have previously esti­
mated as about 2,000 pounds. Recent evidence and re-­analysis may 
indicate that the USSR is developing an ICBM with a 5,000 pound 
payload. Serious logistical and operational problems are associated 
with missiles of the sizes necessary to deliver 2,000 or 5,000 pounds to 
a range of 5,500 n.m.; these problems would be greater in the case of 
the heavier payload. In the light of this consideration, we estimate that 
the Soviet ICBM is designed to carry a nuclear payload of about 2,000 
pounds, although there is a possibility that it is designed to carry about 
5,000 pounds.
8. The USSR will probably have a first operational capability with 
ten prototype ICBMs at some time during calendar 1959; the possibility 
should not be disregarded, however, that in the latter part of 1958 the 
USSR may establish an ICBM capability with missiles comparatively 
unproven as to accuracy and reliability.
9. We believe that Soviet planners intend to achieve a sizeable 
ICBM operational capability at the earliest practicable date, although 
we have no direct evidence on Soviet preparations for ICBM produc­
tion and deployment. We estimate that the USSR has the technical and 
industrial capability to produce ICBMs, complete launching facilities, 
establish logistic lines and train troops at a rate sufficient to have an 
operational capability with 100 ICBMs6 about one year after its first oper­
ational capability date (i.e. some time in 1960), and with 500 ICBMs7 
two or at most three years after first operational capability date (i.e. 
6 These numbers are selected arbitrarily in order to provide some measure of the 
Soviet capacity to produce and deploy ICBMs; they do not represent an estimate of prob­
able Soviet requirements or stockpiles. [Footnote is in the original.]
7 These numbers are selected arbitrarily in order to provide some measure of the 
Soviet capacity to produce and deploy ICBMs; they do not represent an estimate of prob­
able Soviet requirements or stockpiles. [Footnote is in the original.]
