192 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II audiences. Mr. Lowenstein received extensive and favorable media coverage in each of the capitals he visited. Special information kits and background papers have been provided to all posts. The kits highlight press treatment of the Administration’s emphasis on human rights and provide texts of the UN Charter relevant to human rights as well as copies of human rights covenants and conventions. The background papers present information and guidance on human rights provisions of U.S. security assistance legislation and the role of human rights in U.S. foreign policy. 61. Telegram From the Department of State to All American Republic Diplomatic Posts1 Washington, June 16, 1977, 2228Z 140421. For Ambassador from Luers. Subject: Human Rights Evaluation Reports. 1. The Department is undertaking a broad scale effort to implement the administration’s human rights policy as effectively as possible. One of the principal components of this effort will be the development of specific proposed courses of action with respect to each individual country. It is not repeat not the Department’s intention to compile a country “hit list,” but these human rights evaluation reports (earlier called human rights country action plans) will enable us to determine where we should concentrate our attention. The Bureau has been requested to submit these reports to D/HA not later than July 1, except those for Brazil, Colombia and Peru, which should be submitted by June 15 if possible. 2. D/HA originally intended to prepare a cable for worldwide distribution setting forth the background for the effort and providing an outline of the required report format.2 On June 8 however the decision 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770215–0996. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Lister; cleared in draft by Schneider and Devine; approved by Luers. Repeated to USCINCSO. 2 In a June 2 memorandum to Christopher, Oxman noted that D/HA had prepared a draft cable on human rights reporting mechanisms and country action plans, adding that Derian and Schneider hoped that the cable could be dispatched immediately. Oxman commented that the first 4 pages of the cable required “drastic revision” and indicated that in his suggested version he had deleted references to country reports and tried to reshape the cable in an attempt to make it “consistent with the substance of the Law Day speech.” Although Schneider asserted that none of the regional bureaus expressed any
