482 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I These are impressive statistics, but they are hard to relate to our everyday lives. It perhaps comes closer to home if we address the importance of the North-South relationship in terms of questions like: • Will your gas tank be full? • How much will it cost to fill it up? • How much more would you need to pay for a chocolate bar, for coffee, for copper wire, if the developing countries should seek to emulate the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and restrict supplies or raise prices? • How many workers would be laid off in your community if developing countries shifted their purchases from the United States to other suppliers? Each issue has implications for our daily lives as well as for our relationship with two-thirds of the peoples of the world. The developing nations have addressed themselves to several key issues. Each one presents us with problems, particularly in a time of economic difficulties. Approval of new departures for any one of them could face strong opposition in the Congress. Yet each one is a key to whether we shall be partners or adversaries in our relations with the developing world. Let me take briefly each one in turn. Economic Issues Trade. The first is trade. The developing countries want improved access to our markets for their exports. They want special and preferential treatment for their manufactured products. We believe improved market access is desirable and in our own interest. In the event of injury to domestic industry, of course, we must take temporary measures to protect jobs and producers, preferably through adjustment assistance or, if necessary, through restrictions at the borders. There has been hard bargaining with many developing countries in the multilateral trade negotiations which have just wound up work in Geneva. These extended and complex negotiations have offered the developing countries an opportunity to gain benefits. Unfortunately, we feel they have not fully availed themselves of these opportunities. Foreign Aid. The developing countries also seek an increase in the transfer of resources which they need for economic development. They wish a level of economic assistance from developed countries which would represent seven-tenths of 1% of such countries’ gross national product. The implications of this demand are illustrated by two simple facts. • The enthusiasm for foreign aid in the United States is declining. In 1970 we ranked seventh among the developed countries in the per-
