624 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II recognized human rights” unless the assistance is directed specifically to programs which serve basic human needs. The Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance To provide a thorough high level assessment of possible human rights policy actions, the Administration established in 1977 the Interagency Group on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance. This group, frequently termed the “Christopher Group” since it is chaired by the Deputy Secretary of State, includes representatives of the Departments of State, Treasury, Defense, and Agriculture, the National Security Council, the Agency for International Development, the Export-Import Bank, and other agencies when appropriate. The Interagency Group reviews all proposed MDB, AID, OPIC, Exim, etc., projects and programs. It examines the human rights situation and trends in a recipient country, previous U.S. efforts to improve the situation (including actions in the bilateral assistance relationship if one exists), the likely effectiveness of various possible actions in improving human rights situation and the nature of the assistance under review (e.g., to what extent it meets basic human needs). The Group then recommends a U.S. voting position to Treasury given our responsibility for instructing the U.S. Executive Directors to the MDBs. Treasury’s Role in the Interagency Group The Interagency Group relies primarily on the State Department’s judgment as to whether or not the government of an MDB recipient is engaged in a consistent pattern of gross violation of human rights. The Treasury Department has three major goals in the subsequent Interagency deliberations: —to insure that the MDB vote is not used as an “easy option” and in isolation of a broader USG approach to a given human rights situation. (Treasury would, for example, resist using the MDB vote if comparable actions were not being taken in our bilateral relationship with the affected country.) —to insure that the criteria and considerations used for determining whether or not a project meets “basic human needs” (BHN) are economically sound. (In general USAID and the Human Rights Bureau at State advocate a rather narrow BHN definition, while Treasury and the Economic Bureau at State advocate a more flexible approach which takes into account each country’s unique economic, cultural and social circumstances. At the present time, the Interagency Group is operating on unofficial BHN criteria which are very close to the Treasury approach.) —to maintain to the maximum extent possible the integrity of the MDBs as effective social and economic development institutions, and
