476 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement maintained, they enhance Soviet ability to use the latent threat of mili­ tary action as an instrument of political warfare.10 95. An additional objective of Soviet military policy, which has assumed increased importance since the Hungarian revolt and Polish crisis, is to ensure essential Soviet control over the European satellites. Whatever plans the USSR might have had to withdraw forces from the Satellites prior to these developments, we believe that they must now contemplate an indefinite retention of Soviet forces in Eastern Europe. 96. In assessing the size and types of forces essential to meet the above requirements the Soviets have apparently concluded that they must keep a large and diversified force structure designed to meet a wide variety of contingencies. While they will place further stress on maintaining strong strategic nuclear attack capabilities and air defenses, the evidence indicates that they also are continuing to modernize and strengthen their forces in other fields. In view of their growing appre­ ciation of the devastation inherent in all-out nuclear conflict, they must regard the growth of nuclear capabilities on both sides as making each side increasingly reluctant to use such weapons, and logically would not wish to deprive themselves of other military capabilities. In our view their continued maintenance of strong ground, naval, and tactical air forces, indicates their belief that such forces, equipped with con­ ventional and nuclear weapons, would be of great importance in both general war and limited conflicts. 97. Since an important technological break-­through by either side could greatly affect the present balance of military power, the USSR will continue to devote the highest priority to weapons research and development. It will produce advanced weapon systems in opera­ tional quantities using such weapons to enlarge its existing military 10 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army, believes that paragraphs 92–94, unless balanced by other considerations, represent an overemphasis on one segment of Soviet strategic thinking which is not necessarily the most significant in the Soviet view. In the Soviet view the objectives of any military action would have to include defi­ nite gains for the Soviet state. In view of the devastation which could result to both sides in an all-­out nuclear exchange it is almost certain that they see no advantage to any one in initiating such an exchange. Rather, they probably judge that as the nuclear delivery capabilities of both sides increase, the range of issues over which either the Bloc or the West would launch all-­out nuclear war decreases. Consequently, since both sides are developing effective forces to deter all-­out nuclear war, the Soviet leaders probably believe that their strong ground, naval, and tac­ tical air forces would permit resort to local military action, with substantial prospects of success, in any area where the US and its allies could not rapidly react on a comparable scale or where the issues or circumstances were such that the US and its allies chose not to broaden the conflict. The real threat of Soviet military action therefore lies in the type of situation in which the Soviets estimate the West while opposing the Bloc would not risk the devastation of all-­out nuclear war. [Footnote is in the original.]
