and the consolidation of the unsecured debts as these questions relate to the
general Chinese plan of raising more money from Customs duties. Colonel
Peel wished particularly to know the aggregate amount of the debts to be
consolidated, how the debts would be consolidated, what security there
would be and whether any special treatment would be given for railways,
and whether the debt of the Ministry of Communications would be taken
care of in the general consolidation or in some other plan. He called
attention to the fact that expenditure for constructive purposes would
depend upon how these questions were solved. This was true he said also of
administrative expenses. He discussed rather in detail various phases of the
financial difficulties of the Chinese Government and said, in conclusion,
that, in his opinion, it would be premature to pass the resolution until a
clearer idea could be had of the Chinese program with reference to likin,
debts, constructive plans and various other correlated subjects. Mr.
MacMurray concurred in Colonel Peel’s view and recalled that the work of
the Conference was, after all, to authorize the levying of a surtax on
dutiable imports as from such date, for such purposes and subject to such
conditions as the Conference may determine. The amount of surtaxes to be
levied and the conditions had been the subject of their whole deliberation
which during the past month had been carried on with a surprising degree of
success as seen in the very gratifying progress made in the informal
conversations which had done much to clear up misunderstandings and
harmonize divergent views. For the purpose of these conversations, it was
necessary to adopt certain hypotheses, one of which related to the amount
of money that it was expected would be raised from the surtaxes over and
beyond those authorized by the Washington Treaty. The informal
conversations had brought out fairly definitely that probably between ninety
and one hundred millions of dollars would be necessary and could be
raised, but Mr. MacMurray, in his discussion of the subject, made it plain
that this was simply a tentative hypothesis on which to work out the terms
and conditions upon which the surtaxes would be granted. It appeared to
him that the effect of the passing of the resolution as proposed in Yin 703
would be an acceptance of the hypothesis as a fact, which would vastly
complicate matters and retard the work of the Conference. Mr. MacMurray
said that, for his part, he was quite unable to accept the proposal that they
should, prior to the working out of the conditions, agree to a definite
amount of money to be raised by the surtaxes. He spoke of the ambiguity of
