162 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV whose analyses and recommendations resulted in the specific policy stated in NSDM–242. The NSSM–169 group’s rationale is presented to permit a better understanding of the current doctrine and why it was adopted. A critical analysis of this rationale has not been attempted. Such an analysis is appropriate as part of PRM–10 follow-­on activities. II. US Nuclear War Planning—Background (1962–74) (S) Since 1962, employment planning for virtually all US strategic nuclear forces has been contained in the Single Integrated Operational Plan (SIOP). Until 1976, the SIOP was prepared in accordance with the National Strategic Targeting and Attack Policy (NSTAP), developed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The NSTAP was a JCS guidance document for military planners. There was, however, no single coherent statement or document that could be regarded as a national strategic nuclear employment policy. There was essentially no publicly stated US employment policy at all for theater nuclear forces (although US and its Allies in the Nuclear Planning Group had developed a classified body of nuclear employment guidelines for use in the NATO theater, and SACEUR had long had plans for employment of theater forces in conjunction with the SIOP). Actual theater nuclear force employment planning for the most part was limited to definition of procedures to be used by field commanders for requesting authority to selectively employ their tactical nuclear weapons prior to SIOP execution. (TS) The fundamental planning concept of the NSTAP was to maximize US power in a nuclear exchange so as to maintain strategic superiority and thereby lead to early termination of the war on terms favorable to the US and its allies. Under the NSTAP, the basic SIOP objectives were: —“To destroy or neutralize, on a selective basis, nuclear offensive capabilities of the enemy that threaten the United States and its allies, in order to limit damage to the United States and its allies to the extent practicable.” —“To destroy or neutralize, on a selective basis, a comprehensive enemy military target system in order to assist in the destruction of the enemy’s overall military capability.” —“To destroy, on a selective basis and under all conditions of war initiation, the war-­supporting and urban-­industrial resources of the enemy.” The NSTAP organized the SIOP into several attack options to provide a degree of flexibility to the National Command Authorities (NCA). Some additional flexibility was afforded by a built-­in execution capability that permitted [2 lines not declassified]. Nevertheless, the SIOP execution options available under the NSTAP were massive by any standard with approximately [less than 1 line not declassified] being involved in even the smallest SIOP retaliatory option.
