194
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Union “is prepared, acting together with the US, to play a positive role
in the settlement in the Middle East and in securing at last a durable
peace there. We both had a good ‘asset’ here—last year’s joint Soviet-
American statement. And the line of action charted therein is some-
thing that we should go back to. Any other steps, including the ones
being taken most recently, do nothing but make the Middle East con-
flict still more deeply seated without solving its main issues. The fact
that the USSR and the US are now practically following different roads
in Middle East affairs cannot but have a negative effect both on the situ-
ation in that area and on our relations.” An unofficial translation of the
Brezhnev’s letter and a Russian-language original version are in the
Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Out-
side the System File, Box 69, USSR: Brezhnev-Carter Correspondence:
1–12/78.
Rather than provide a specific reply to Brezhnev’s letter, Carter in-
stead dispatched a general message to Brezhnev at the conclusion of
the Camp David summit, informing him of the outcome of the summit
and the substance of the two documents agreed by the participants, “A
Framework for Peace in the Middle East” and “A Framework for the
Conclusion of a Peace Treaty Between Egypt and Israel.” The text of
Carter’s letter is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet
Union, Document 149.
50.
Draft Memorandum of Conversation1
Camp David, September 15, 1978, 1:30 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
US Vice President Mondale
US Secretary of State Vance
US National Security Adviser Brzezinski
Israeli Foreign Minister Dayan
Israeli Defense Minister Weizman
Israeli Legal Adviser Barak
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 5, Middle East Talks—Pre May 1979. Secret;
Nodis. Drafted by Vance. The meeting took place in Holly Lodge. According to an un-
dated chronological summary of the Camp David meetings prepared for the NSC, this
meeting took place from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m., September 15. The summary also stated that
Brown attended the meeting. See footnote 65, Document 28.
