400 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement will necessarily begin with an atomic exchange; if it did, 42 divisions would not be very useful. It was wise to try to provide a base which would fit various contingencies. The President applauded the effort had been expended on this difficult problem. Mr. McGuire said he was glad someone applauded. Mr. Gray said the Planning Board, when it heard the presentation, had been impressed by the progress made in Defense. The six-­months’ concept we still being examined. Defense had been frank in saying that its plans might be subject to great changes in case a satisfactory answer were found to the bomb damage problem. Mr. Gray hoped a later pre­ sentation would shed some light on this latter problem. Mr. McCone recalled that 30 days ago the Council had heard a pre­ sentation indicating the war would be over in 30 hours. The President said mobilization plans were affected by the amount of warning of attack received. If the 30-­hour war occurred, little could be done unless strategic warning were received during the six-­months period. Only in the pre-World-War-II period had any preplanning whatever been accomplished, and even this had been on a very austere basis. In 1941 many units drilled with dummy guns. Before the Korean War, the Chiefs of Staff warned of our weakness; despite these warn­ ings we were unprepared when war broke out in Korea. The President believed the need for mobilization planning was absolute. Mr. Dulles cautioned that six-­months warning of attack would probably not come from intelligence sources. An intermediate possi­ bility was that our mobilization activities during a period of increasing international crisis would serve as a deterrent. Mr. McGuire hoped an assessment of probable bomb damage would eliminate the assumption that nothing useful could be done in the mobilization field. The President observed that he had asserted many times that if we assumed too much damage there would be little point in planning, since everything would be ashes. An earlier presen­ tation had estimated that some areas would not be useable for 30 years after an attack; of course planning on that basis is impossible. While we won’t get off scot free in case of attack, we should make assumptions which describe a realm in which humans can operate. Mr. McCone felt a distinction between limited and general war was necessary. In general war maximum emphasis would be on readiness to respond on D-Day. Mobilization activities preparatory to a small war, however, would be possible. Mr. Quarles said the concept was that the mobilization base could handle a limited war without unacceptably impairing the general war base. Mr. Quarles then raised the question of “packaged plants”. He said Defense had analyzed about half of these plants and considered
