1955 37 34. Telegram 391 to Geneva1 Washington, August 5, 1955 391. For Johnson. 1. Department concurs in general approach you have proposed for fourth meeting Aug 8 and commends your clear analysis existing situa­ tion and your resourcefulness in devising tactics to meet it. 2. U.S. has already met Chinese Communists on points two and three. With respect to point one we have already advised as to status of Chinese nationals, which is that they are free to depart if they wish. 3. U.S. will not supply a name list of all Chinese nationals in U.S. For your discretionary use (a) this could not be done without subjecting many who hold allegiance to Republic of China and their relatives in China to harassment, (b) it is not our policy to give any other govern­ ment a list of all of their nationals in U.S. and (c) we recognize Republic of China as government of China. 4. Whenever CPR takes the same position with respect to U.S. nationals in China that the U.S. has taken, namely, that they are free to return and will be given exit visas on request, U.S. will take further step of authorizing Indian Embassy in U.S. to facilitate travel of Chinese here who desire to return to mainland and to transmit funds for this purpose. Indian Embassy may publicly make known that it is prepared to facilitate travel to mainland of any Chinese nationals who desire to return. 5. U.S. would expect on its side to avail of the services of U.K. in Communist China to facilitate return of U.S. citizens who desire to return. 6. Dept prefers that agreement if reached on return of civilians be announced by you and by Wang in Geneva. Announcement should be identic. Announcement in Washington and Peiping would not RPT not be considered desirable. Dept will be prepared to give you advice on wording of statement when agreement is in prospect. Dulles 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–555. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Dulles; cleared by McConaughy. The time of transmission is illegible.
