38 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Ours would be a chilled and lonely world without the other democracies of Europe, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Israel and this hemisphere with whom we share great common purposes. There is a special relationship among us based not necessarily on a common heritage but on our partnership in great enterprises. Our present limits are not those of natural resources but of ideas and inspirations. Our first great need is to restore the morale and spirit of the American people. It is time once again for the world to feel the forward movement and the effervescence of a dynamic and confident United States of America. 7. Editorial Note On July 15, 1976, former Governor of Georgia Jimmy Carter accepted the Democratic nomination for President and addressed delegates at the Democratic National Convention in Madison Square Garden in New York. In his acceptance speech, Carter referenced the relationship between security and peace and discussed the American character as it related to U.S. interactions with the world: “The foremost responsibility of any President, above all else, is to guarantee the security of our nation—a guarantee of freedom from the threat of successful attack or blackmail, and the ability with our allies to maintain peace. “But peace is not the mere absence of war. Peace is action to stamp out international terrorism. Peace is the unceasing effort to preserve human rights. Peace is a combined demonstration of strength and good will. We will pray for peace and we will work for peace, until we have removed from all nations for all time the threat of nuclear destruction. “America’s birth opened a new chapter in mankind’s history. Ours was the first nation to dedicate itself clearly to the basic moral and philosophical principles: that all people are created equal and endowed with inalienable rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, and that the power of government is derived from the consent of the governed. “This national commitment was a singular act of wisdom and courage, and it brought the best and bravest from other nations to our shores. It was a revolutionary development that captured the imagination of mankind. It created a basis for a unique role of America—that of
