Chapter 2, January–June 1989  263
their maximum payload capacity. For example, U.S. B–52s might be 
“equipped for” 10 ALCMs, but potentially could be converted rapidly 
to carry 20 ALCMs. A similar Soviet capability could cause us major 
verification headaches. However, counting B–52s at 20 ALCMs would 
drastically reduce the cruise missile force we could deploy under 
START and is not envisioned by any of the options.
Eliminating all limits on ALCMs (Option 5) would remove the ver-
ification difficulty, but would be seen by the Soviets and publicly as a 
major step backward in the negotiations, which could lead, if we per-
sisted, to an unraveling of the counting rule for bombs and short-­range 
air-­to-­surface missiles and the basic numerical limits.
Option 1.  Accept the Soviet demand to count the number of ALCMs 
each heavy bomber is equipped to carry. (favored by JCS)
Option 2.  Retain the existing U.S. position to attribute ten ALCMs for 
each heavy bomber equipped for ALCMs, regardless of how 
many ALCMs it can carry, but add a limit on the maximum 
ALCM carrying capability of individual bombers. (favored 
by State, DCI fallback)
Option 3.  Make no change to the U.S. position on counting rules; retain 
the existing ALCM attribution rule of ten per heavy bomber. 
(favored by ACDA and Ambassador Rowny, DCI fallback)
Option 4.  Return to the earlier U.S. position that each heavy bomber 
equipped for ALCMs should count as six warheads, regard-
less of the number actually carried (favored by OSD).
Option 5.  Eliminate all limits on ALCMs, retaining only an overall 
limit on heavy bombers. (favored by the DCI)
Decision25
START—Mobile ICBMs
Allowing Mobile ICBMs. You have proposed to Congress that we 
deploy two mobile missiles. Our current START position, however, 
would ban all mobile ICBMs. The issue is whether and when to drop 
our proposed START ban on mobile missiles. If we do alter the ban, 
a second decision is needed on what constraints, if any, to impose on 
mobile ICBMs. Your decision on this issue could be affected by possible 
new initiatives you might propose in START.
Discussion
Several arguments have been advanced to support a shift in 
our proposed ban on mobiles in START. One, is the fundamental 
25 Bush indicated his approval of Option 3.
