52 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement to work this morning, so I should have more time to devote to your mission now. There is a pronounced feeling of satisfaction here with the way you have handled the first week of the negotiations. The Secretary him­ self is following every development closely. He has drafted some of the telegrams to you himself and ordered last Tuesday that henceforth all messages to you which conveyed anything in the nature of instruc­ tions was to be personally approved by him. Mr. Robertson of course is following everything. There is a rule now that even the factual and background messages must be approved either by Mr. Robertson or by me. So we will have a look henceforth even at the DRF intelligence messages before they go out. I am sure you will want to get the general feel of the reaction here to the tactics you are using regardless of whether it is laudatory or not. The only question at all which has arisen, and it is not a criticism, is as to why you withheld the four names (Mrs. Huizer, Mrs. Bradshaw and the Romanovs) from your first list. I have explained that these names had already been given to the Chinese Communists and that the Commu­ nists had denied as to three of them that any exit application had been filed and as to the fourth that she was an American citizen. However there was a feeling that it was a tactical mistake not to press these cases continuously by including them in every list. It has been remarked that we have nothing to lose by putting the names in and perhaps some­ thing to gain. This was the reason for the follow up instructions to you suggesting that you add the names by means of a supplementary list. The belief that perhaps harm was done was reinforced by the unfortu­ nate Scripps-Howard article by Denny which stated that the names had been omitted because we knew our case was weak on these four. There has been something of a feeling that you might press harder the point that the great preponderance of the Chinese students in this country maintain their allegiance to the GRC and emphatically repudi­ ate the Communist regime. It is recognized that Wang Ping-nan would be very allergic to this point but it is felt that you do not have to be estopped on that account. We wired you the full text of the Chinese Embassy’s statement which makes this point quite cogently. You may find a peg on which you can hang an additional remark along this line when the representation discussion waxes warm. The only other even half way critical statement I have heard was relative to your decision not to hold a backgrounder for the American press as you were authorized to do last week. We are all profoundly aware of the difficult position you are in with the American press. We have had echos of your press relations problem back here and we have all been casting about for some means of taking the pressure off you. Part of the Secretary’s press conference of August 2 was an effort in that
