March–August 1953 689 serve the people and in the meantime prays for the independence and safety of the country and that all true patriots will never allow their country to fall under the control of the illegal identity D.” Finally Shah might usefully give public expression to his view that Mossadeq thinks that he can form a partnership with Tudeh Party and then outwit it, but in so doing Mossadeq will become the Doctor Benes of the country. 4. All cables this subject should be sent by Ambassador [less than 1 line not declassified] bearing above indicator. This matter of utmost sensitivity and should be handled by [less than 1 line not declassified] Ambassador accordingly. End of message. 278. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency to the Station in Iran1 Washington, August 18, 1953. DIR 16224. Ref TEHE 717.2 1. In view Ambassador Henderson’s return and in light of indications contained in ref, State Dept and ourselves most anxious receive benefit your views after full discussion which we assume already taking place between you and Ambassador Henderson. 2. State Dept has indicated following tentative stand: This view on basis evidence available to it is that operation has been tried and failed and we should not participate in any operation against Mossadegh which could be traced back to US and further compromise future relations with him which may become only course of action left open to US.3 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency. Secret. Transcribed specifically for the Foreign Relations series from microfilm in the Central Intelligence Agency that no longer exists. See “Sources” chapter. 2 Document 273. 3 In a telegram from Washington to the Foreign Office, August 17, British Ambassador Sir Roger Makins wrote that “Bedell Smith told me today that latest developments made it necessary for the Administration to take a new look at policy towards Persia. He thought it would be necessary to cultivate good relations with Mussaddiq. Perhaps American technicians might be sent. Whatever his faults Mussaddiq had no love for the Russians and timely aid might enable him to keep Communism in check.” (British National Archives, Prime Minister’s Files, PREM 11/514)
