214 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 32. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Bush1 Washington, June 14, 1989 MEETING WITH THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL DATE: June 15, 1989 LOCATION: Cabinet Room TIME: 3:00 p.m.–4:00 p.m. I. PURPOSE For your advisors to review major issues in START in preparation for the resumption of negotiations on June 19, 1989. A background paper (Tab A) has been prepared to assist in preparing for this meeting. II. BACKGROUND You have previously held NSC meetings that focused on our positions in the Defense and Space negotiations and the objectives underlying our approach in START. I recommend that we use this meeting to briefly review our past NSC discussion on START and address the principal areas where you need to consider alternatives now: mobile ICBMs, nondeployed missiles and ALCMs. Objectives. In START we are pursuing an arms control agreement that supports our overarching security objective of maintaining a stable, effective nuclear deterrent. Our goal in START should be stability and reduced risk of war, not reductions, per se. Verification affects every limit in START and will prove to be the most controversial issue in the ratification debate. The fundamental issue is whether a START treaty is in our interest even though we can not detect all cheating. Our current verification approach is heavily weighted toward a standard that no undetected cheating is acceptable. 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security Council, H-Files, NSC Meeting Files, OA/ID 90001–007, NSC0022—June 15, 1989— Strategic Arms Reduction Talks, Arms Control. Secret. Drafted by Davis. Copied to Quayle and Sununu. Gates initialed for Scowcroft. A stamped notation indicates Bush saw the memorandum. Bush wrote at the top of the memorandum: “PATTY—A must: weekend reading for 6–16. GB.” Bush drew two slashes and wrote below it: “GB 6–30.” Gates sent the memorandum to Bush under cover of a June 14 note: “Attached is your briefing paper for the NSC on START issues on Thursday afternoon. Attached to it is a 17 page single space analysis of the issues. You should consider this long paper your equivalent of Dick Cheney’s 100 hour short course on strategic arms control. Brent assures you that you need not feel compelled to read the long paper before the meeting.” Bush initialed Gates’s note. (Ibid.) (no classification marking) According the President’s Daily Diary on June 15, Bush convened a meeting of the National Security Council from 3:05– 4:09 p.m. in the Oval Office. No minutes were found.
