1956  833
will be interested in the enclosed article by Chalmers Roberts which 
appeared in today’s Washington Post.)
Your good letters Nos. 22 and 23 of February 19 and 22 came 
together on February 27. They have been read with great interest by the 
usual inner circle. I am sorry that I was so guarded in my reference to 
the off-­shore islands in my letter No. 30 of February 13, that you missed 
my meaning. Of course I had something more in mind than the obvious 
truism that the off-shore islands are in the Taiwan area and would be 
included in our renunciation of force draft. What I was trying to get 
over was an intimation that Public Law No. 4 would be more likely to 
come into the picture in the event of Communist action limited to the 
off-­shores after a renunciation of force declaration.
Enclosed is a copy of Ralph Clough’s conversation with Munsiff 
of the Indian Embassy on February 28. What Clough said is now some­
what outdated, since we have subsequently decided to send copies 
of the Agreed Announcement by registered mail, with return receipt 
requested, to each of the Chinese named by Wang at Geneva whom we 
can identify and locate. We will be prepared to exhibit to the ­Indians 
as appropriate and desirable the signature of the Chinese on the return 
receipt. But we will be careful not to let the Indians see the U.S. address 
of the individuals concerned. It will be a matter of principle with us 
to protect these Chinese from possible Communist pressure, by not 
divulging their whereabouts.
Also enclosed is a copy of a telegram from Mort Rosse, the ­American 
Asiatic Underwriters’ representative here, to their representative in Hong 
Kong regarding the Charles Miner case. It now looks as if Miner may be 
able to get out fairly soon after a payment of an additional $6,000 of extor­
tion money. We anticipate that Treasury will probably license this added 
sum. We have informed the British Embassy and they will ask O’Neill to 
hold off on any additional representation in Miner’s behalf for the time 
being in view of the more favorable prospect.
It looks as if we may be heading for a turning point of some kind 
in the talks. Our intuition to this effect is confirmed by your 1574 of 
March 1, which unfortunately was not distributed in the Department 
until after we met with the Secretary yesterday afternoon. But it has 
been called to his attention since then.
I hope the flying weather between Geneva and Prague is better 
than it has been. Good luck, and be assured that we are all with you.
Sincerely,
Walter P. McConaughy
