982 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Enclosure Draft Recommendations Prepared for the NSC Washington, undated RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE ROLE OF MATS 1. That MATS be equipped and operated in peacetime to insure its capability to meet approved military hard-core2 requirements in a gen­ eral war and in situations short of general war, and such other military requirements as cannot be met adequately by commercial carriers3 on an effective and timely basis. (It is understood that our hard-­core and other military requirements are currently under study in connection with the review of the mobilization base.) 2. That the modernization of MATS hard-­core military airlift capa­ bility be undertaken in an orderly manner consistent with other mili­ tary requirements and in keeping with the objectives of par. 1 above. 3. That MATS [routine channel traffic (regularly scheduled, fixed routes) operations]4 be reduced on an orderly basis, consistent with assured commercial airlift capability at reasonable cost,5 and consistent with economical6 and efficient7 use, including realistic training, of the MATS capacity resulting from the provisions of par. 1 above. 4. That as commercial carriers make available modern, economical long-­range cargo aircraft and as further orientation of MATS to the hard-­ core function is effected, increased use should be made of the services of such commercial carriers. (It is understood that, for the present, types of aircraft such as the DC–­7F and the L–­1049H qualify under this paragraph.) 2 Airlift requirements which must move in military aircraft, manned and operated by military crews because of special military considerations, security, or because of lim­ iting physical characteristics such as size or dangerous properties. Included in this cate­ gory are special military deployments involving nuclear retaliatory forces, the SAC post strike recovery mission, tactical deployments, movement of missiles, special munitions, etc. [Footnote is in the original.] 3 Wherever used in these recommendations, ”commercial carriers” means U.S.-­ owned commercial carriers. [Footnote is in the original.] 4 Budget, Commerce, FAA, and CAB propose deletion. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.] 5 The Department of Defense has stated that its criteria for determining comparative costs are on the basis of Bureau of the Budget Bulletin 60–­2, September 21, 1959. [Footnote is in the original.] 6 Defense proposal. [Footnote is in the original.] 7 Budget, Commerce, FAA proposal. [Footnote is in the original.]
