September 1953–December 1954
825
to receive as high a proportionate revenue from its petroleum as would
the other oil-producing countries. Pointing out that Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, and Iraq had all increased their production of oil in recent
years, the Ambassador suggested that such a most-favored-nation
clause would permit Iran to increase her revenue from oil at the same
pace as her sister nations. Were such a provision to go into effect, it was
likely that both the AIOC and Iran itself might lose much of their in-
terest in the question of compensation.
Underlining the extreme urgency of the situation, the Ambassador
stated that either foreign economic aid such as now proffered by the
United States or sizable oil revenues were absolutely essential to the
Iranian economy if it was to avoid complete bankruptcy. The emer-
gency aid program now under way had five more months to run; at the
end of that time Iran must find some other source of revenue.8 Al-
though personally willing if necessary to ask his Government for addi-
tional aid for Iran, the Ambassador felt very sure that, unless important
steps had been taken in the direction of an oil settlement, the United
States Congress would refuse to extend further assistance. Rightly or
wrongly, the American people would feel that a country which appar-
ently did nothing to utilize its own resources did not deserve support
from abroad.9
At the close of the Ambassador’s presentation, Dr. Baqai said that
he thanked the Ambassador for his frankness and agreed in substance
with his estimate of the situation. However, he felt it necessary to point
out that the people of Iran must be psychologically prepared for an oil
agreement with Great Britain and that the real economic and political
reasons for such an agreement would have to be sugar-coated in order
to make them palatable to an uninformed public. He suggested that
when the United States decided for reasons of political or military ne-
cessity to intervene in Korea it had had to profess high-sounding and
possibly fictitious reasons for its action; in the same manner, the Iranian
Government could not be completely frank with its people as to the ne-
cessity for and the reasons behind an oil settlement.10
The Ambassador took sharp issue with Baqai’s comments re-
garding the Korean intervention and emphasized that the United States
had acted solely in order to resist Communist aggression and to keep
its word to the free world. Baqai then modified his statement some-
8 Richards underlined the phrase “at the end of that time Iran must find some other
source of revenue.”
9 The preceding four paragraphs are highlighted and the comment “Lovely” was
written in an unidentified hand in the margin.
10 The last sentence in this paragraph was highlighted with a comment in the
margin: “What an S.O.B.”
