946
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
in present value terms there is no net loss to the creditor. (See Annex E
on bisque clauses.)
As a further initiative for the UNCTAD Ministerial, the U.S. might
propose that donor countries agree in principle to adding bisque
clauses to aid loans. However, there has been little discussion of this
possibility and it is unlikely that the other members of Group B would
be prepared to support this on such short notice. Since this device is
closely related to aid terms, it lends itself to examination at the tech-
nical level.
In general, the pros and cons of adding bisque clauses to aid loans
are the following:
PROS:
—The addition of bisque clauses to F.A.A., P.L. 480, and SSA loans
would not require legislation. However, prior consultations with key
congressional committees should be undertaken.
—A bisque clause is not a debt-relief device if it is written into the
original loan contract.
CONS:
—The financial benefit derived from adding bisque clauses to aid
loans would be very small, which means that an initiative of this nature
would get Group B little mileage in the dialog on debt.
—If introduced in the context of negotiations on debt relief, this
limited initiative would compromise the U.S. position on generalized
debt relief, making it more difficult to resist other LDC proposals.
—The G–77 would not view this initiative as being responsive to
their current debt problems.
B. AID CONSORTIA VS CREDITOR CLUBS
The U.S. has participated in negotiations to reschedule official and
officially-guaranteed external debts of a dozen developing countries on
more than twenty separate occasions since 1956. Except for India and
Pakistan—where extraordinary conditions pertained—these negotia-
tions took place in ad hoc creditor clubs convened when a debt crisis
clearly existed.
At UNCTAD IV in 1976, the U.S. announced that it would re-
schedule debt only in creditor clubs. This policy statement was a conse-
quence of an early decision to stop providing debt relief to India in the
Indian aid consortium. However, because of the precedents of India
and Pakistan, a question has arisen as to whether any exceptions to the
basic policy of rescheduling in creditor clubs should be allowed in the
future. The question is particularly relevant because Pakistan has for-
