Preface  VII
organizations, and policy recommendations and analyses sent by U.S. 
missions abroad to the Department of State.
Because the focus of the print volume and the microfiche supple-
ment is on major diplomatic aspects of U.S. policies toward the region, 
the editors did not document the U.S. military assistance program, intel-
ligence activities, or detailed aspects of economic and cultural relations. 
They did not, therefore, seek expanded access to foreign affairs records 
of agencies outside of the Department of State, the White House, and 
the National Security Council.
The editors had complete access to the records of the Department 
of State including all the central indexed decimal files and the vari-
ous special decentralized files (lot files) relevant to the volume. At the 
Eisenhower Library, the editors gave particular attention to the Ann 
Whitman file, with its master collection of National Security Council 
records, Cabinet papers, and other important Presidential records. 
The editors reviewed other pertinent records at the Eisenhower 
Library, including papers of Secretaries of State John Foster Dulles and 
Christian A. Herter, and records of the President’s Special Assistant for 
National Security Affairs. The editors believe that no documentation at 
the Eisenhower Library relevant to the subject matter was overlooked 
or withheld. A complete list of the files consulted in preparing both the 
print volume and the microfiche supplement is on pages XIII–XIX.
The editors of the volume are confident that the documents 
included in the print volume and in the microfiche supplement taken 
together provide a comprehensive and accurate record of U.S. diplo-
matic policies toward the Caribbean, Central America, and South 
America region. The declassification review process for the documents 
originally selected for this volume, outlined in more detail below, 
resulted in withholding from publication approximately 3 percent of 
the manuscript of the print volume and 4 percent of the microfiche 
supplement.
Editorial Methodology
The documents in the microfiche supplement are reproduced 
directly from copies of the original documents. Headings, footnotes, 
and editorial notes have been added by the editors in a format similar 
to that of the printed volume. Documents with excisions due to contin-
ued classification appear in the supplement with the excised portions 
shaded in black. Documents that were denied in the declassification 
review process have been noted by inserting a page containing the doc-
ument number, its date, and the repository in which it was found.
The documents are presented chronologically according to 
Washington time. Incoming telegrams from U.S. missions are placed 
according to time of receipt in the Department of State or other receiving
