274 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX For commercial agreements (recognized as the principal “carrot”), a set order of priority was prescribed: Romania, then Hungary, then Czechoslovakia, and then Bulgaria. (Settlement of the claims of American bondholders was also called for, and was the only specific prerequisite for MFN and Export-Import Bank loans.) Similarly, cultural and scientific exchange agreements (where not already established) were required to reflect the same rank order: Hungary, then Czechoslovakia, and only then Bulgaria. NSC Presidential Directive 21, or PD–21, (September 13, 1977) under the present Administration, established “a new order” for our relations with countries of Eastern Europe. Rather than explicitly linking progress in bilateral economic and good relations to “satisfactory political conduct on international issues,” the new approach was keyed to the twin aims of enhancing international independence and increasing internal liberalization. “To that end,” the Directive read, “the United States will demonstrably (sic) show its preference for Eastern European countries that are either relatively liberal internally or relatively independent internationally.” In addition, a new order of priorities was set: The first group comprised Poland and Romania, with Hungary to be raised to that same level; as the second group: “Relations with Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and the GDR will remain limited until there is demonstrated progress along one of the two dimensions mentioned above.” No “initiatives” would be taken toward these three, and any steps to improve relations with any of them “must tangibly and demonstrably advance specific US interests.” Also, finally, there were to be no “indications of willingness to grant MFN.” The objectives of encouraging greater external independence and greater internal liberalization were newly articulated as basic policy, although they had for years underlain our policy toward the area. On theotherhand,whilenolongerlistingindividualcountriesinsetpriority order, a distinction between the three for whom we would “demonstrably” show a “preference,” and the other three, was sharply drawn. A quite different note was struck by Secretary Vance on January 7, 1978,4 when publicly asked: “Is there any difference between the policy of this Administration and the policy of the previous Administration towards the nations of Eastern Europe? And if there is a difference, would you care to elucidate it?” The Secretary replied: “The current Administration is seeking to improve its relationships with the countries of Eastern Europe. Each of us will have to approach this with our own national interests involved. I think that the best way to deal with 4 Vance was in Budapest on January 7 to attend the ceremonies organized for the official return of the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary.
