Human Rights
241
them. In the rare cases where we might resort to curtailment, our action
could have a significant impact on the government in question.
C. Initiatives in International Financial Institutions.
U.S. concern with promoting human rights through the interna-
tional financial institutions (IFI’s) became explicit last spring with the
passage of the Harkin Amendment to the authorizing legislation for the
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and the African Develop-
ment Fund (ADF). That amendment requires that the U.S. vote “no” on
loans or assistance to a country that “engages in a consistent pattern of
gross violations of internationally recognized human rights . . . unless
such assistance will directly benefit the needy people in such country.”
The Harkin Amendment will in all likelihood soon be replaced by
language on this year’s IFI authorizing legislation. As it emerged from
conference, the legislation instructs the USG through its Executive Di-
rectors to seek to channel assistance away from countries whose gov-
ernments engage in a consistent pattern of gross violations of human
rights or provide refuge to airplane hijackers; to use our “voice and
vote” in seeking to channel assistance towards projects which address
basic human needs; and to consider a number of factors related to
human rights concerns e.g. specific actions taken on bilateral assistance
on human rights grounds, extent to which the assistance benefits needy
people, status of a country regarding nuclear proliferation, and respon-
siveness of governments in providing better accounting of MIAs.
Where other means have proven ineffective, the legislation re-
quires us to oppose loans (i.e., vote “present,” abstain, or vote “no”) to
countries which engage in a consistent pattern of gross violations of in-
ternationally recognized human rights unless such assistance is di-
rected specifically to programs which serve the basic human needs of
the citizens of such countries or unless the President certifies that the
cause of international human rights would be more effectively served
by actions other than voting against such assistance.
This legislation is fully compatible with our policy to use our mem-
bership in the IFIs to promote human rights.
The new IFI legislation also specifies “the Secretary of State and
the Secretary of the Treasury shall initiate a wide consultation designed
to develop a viable standard for the meeting of basic human needs and
the protection of human rights and a mechanism for acting together to
insure that the rewards of international economic cooperation are espe-
cially available to those who subscribe to such standards and are seen
to be moving toward making them effective in their own systems of
governance.” We will need to develop a strategy for implementing this
requirement.
