450 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI (2) the time of boost-­stage separations and RV separations; (3) demonstrated throw-­weight; (4) demonstrated range; (5) identification of specific telemetry channels that transmit data on RV release commands, actual RV separations, and booster stage separations. (S) d. START provisions on data denial would not apply to a category of missiles, “Strategic R&D Boosters”, which includes any launch vehicle that uses the accountable stage of a type of ICBM or SLBM no longer deployed. START provisions on data denial also would not apply to cruise missiles. (S) e. For a specified number of years, two flight-­tests per year of the Minuteman II and SS–13 would be excluded from the ban on encapsulation. (S) f. In addition to the exemption of Minuteman II and SS–13, the U.S. may offer to permit the encapsulation of RV data made during the plasma phase of reentry on flights, as follows: (1) no more than three flights of each future type of ICBM or SLBM, to be conducted prior to initial accountability of the type in START as a deployed missile; (2) no more than three flights of a single existing type of ICBM or SLBM; (3) telemetry would be broadcast from the same RV in which data is being encapsulated, including all measurements made prior to and subsequent to the plasma phase, and measurements made and recorded during the plasma phase; (4) copies of tapes of encapsulated data would be exchanged for all flights conducted under this provision. (S) 4. SLCMs a. The U.S. may offer, on a reciprocal basis, a “declaration of policy” that would state the maximum size of our SLCM inventory in each of the next three years. These mutual declarations would encompass all nuclear SLCMs, regardless of mission or range. Such declarations would be updated annually, on a reciprocal basis. The U.S. may additionally offer that declarations of the maximum size of the SLCM inventory for a given year not be increased in subsequent declarations. (S) b. The U.S. also may offer to exchange information, on a reciprocal basis, about plans related to the size of its nuclear SLCM inventory for two years beyond those included in the “declaration of policy.” Such plans could be changed at any time. Information concerning changes in plans would be provided as part of the annual update. (S) c. The U.S. may agree to informal discussions about SLCM verification for the purpose of explaining to the Soviets the reasons why we are convinced that all of the proposed approaches to SLCM verification are ineffective, unworkable, or both. (S)
