314
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
and left the security field entirely to him. I watched this from Moscow.2
NATO diplomats in Moscow refused to believe that this was a crisis.
Neutral attaches blamed the U.S. for making it into a crisis. During the
first days of the Egyptian offensive, Soviet generals told me that if the
U.S. and USSR stick together, we can overcome any other state that
troubles us. (This “condominium” preference was voiced most recently
at Belgrade by Vorontsov when he suggested that the U.S. and the
USSR work out a draft alone; then all other attendees would have to ac-
cept it!)3 After the Israeli counter-offensive, and our strategic alert,
these same generals lectured me on the dangers of war!
The lesson was clear. Neither SALT nor trade nor credits had bas-
ically altered the competitive character of the East-West relationship.
The OPEC embargo forced Henry to consider the North-South axis
however much he had previously tried to ignore it. The Vietnam “end
game” was additional evidence, for those who cared to understand,
that his East-West scheme was based on dubious assumptions.
I repeat this, although you know it well, because it refutes those
who argue, as Rosenfeld, Kraft, and others do, that the outlines of our
present foreign policy (“priorities,” if you will) are a legacy from Kiss-
inger. Our legacy today is Henry’s failure, not his outline of a new di-
rection. His efforts failed: (a) to stabilize the strategic balance; (b) to
moderate Soviet competitive behavior in the Middle East, Africa, and
Southeast Asia; (c) to produce significant U.S.-Soviet economic interac-
tion; (d) to address the North-South economic and political issues. At
the same time, his East-West policy exacerbated tensions in our own al-
liance system while facilitating Soviet management of the Warsaw
Pact.
Detente has not only produced mixed results from our viewpoint;
it has also failed to meet key Soviet objectives. The crux of the policy for
Moscow is taken from two sources: “Two Tactics of Social Democracy”4
and the “law of primitive socialist accumulation.”5 In 1905 and in the
mid 1920s, the question was the same: could a weak “working class”
(or socialist sector) politically lead (economically exploit) the stronger
peasant (capitalist) class? The Leninist answer was yes, with correct
party leadership. Soviet policy toward the West in the 1970s is de-
signed for a similar correlation of political and economic forces, but
2 Odom served as a military attache´ at the Embassy in Moscow from 1972 to 1974.
3 Presumably Vorontsov made the statement at the Belgrade CSCE Review Confer-
ence. See footnote 6, Document 16.
4 Reference is to Lenin’s Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution,
published in 1905.
5 Credited to Soviet economist Yevgeni Preobrazhenski, who employed the law in
his writings during the 1920s.
