Human Rights Since our meeting several weeks ago,3 Jessica Tuchman has consulted with a large number of outside experts in the human rights field, as we agreed at that time. These include: John Richardson of Freedom House, Bill Korey of B’nai Brith, Leo Cherne of the International Rescue Committee, Leonard Marks, former head of USIA, Jan Nowak, and representatives of the American Council of Voluntary Agencies for Foreign Service, the Church World Service, and others. All were unreservedly enthusiastic about the idea, and were vigorous in pleading the need for such an institution on many different grounds. I have incorporated many of their ideas into this new version of the proposal. Jody Powell has seen the proposal and after some initial questions now recommends that the President approve it. OMB has some objections which are, in my view, minor and bureaucratic rather than substantive.4 They are addressed in the addendum to the memorandum. In that addendum I have also tried to address the reservations you raised to the earlier draft.5 Nearly every day we get more indications of Congressional interest in this idea. Moynihan is apparently getting ready to introduce it on the Senate side, and there are also signs of movement from Zablocki, Fraser, Fascell and perhaps others in the House.6 My concern is that if this idea comes out as a Congressional initiative, it will be reported in the press as another example of the Administration’s negative and passive role on human rights, and the Congress’ active and imaginative stance. Given the number of contentious human rights issues we face in the coming session, this would be a particularly unfortunate outcome. I believe we must make a prompt decision on this, one way or the other, or face the risk of being pre-empted. Regarding the PD, this draft has been refined with a particular view to the consequences of a possible leak. The language has been worked over and tightened, so that there should be no problem if the entire document were to leak, or if any sentence is taken out of context. I believe it is much improved. 3 See Document 107.
