Chapter 6, June–December 1990 809 attribution annex appears to be the last major organizational controversy which needs to be resolved. We also need to stop injecting complicated new proposals which send out tentacles all through the text and create many new brackets. An example is the new accountability/­ prototype proposal which we introduced last week, with treaty language to be tabled this week. 4. The greatest activity continues to be in the ambassadors’ afternoon meetings and the treaty text working group. Jim Medas left the del July 16, and I am now in charge of the TTWG. We are close to ad ref deals on several important problems, which are noted below. Road-Mobile ICBMs 5. On July 20, the Soviets accepted in a non-­paper our proposal for a call-­back OSI regime. Within the quota of short-­notice inspections, a side could require all road-­mobiles in a deployment area to return to their restricted areas within 24 hours. The inspection team would be transported to the relevant base before the end of this period. They would then designate a specific RA and be transported there within 3 hours. They would then inspect all the returned systems at the RA plus the associated maintenance facility. We think we can also get a provision to inspect in the field any launchers which do not return on time due to force majeure. RAs would be limited to 5 km2 and DAs to 125,000 km2 as before. 6. This is a good provision—­in some ways better than what we originally sought. I am disappointed that we are empty-­handed on notifications for routine movements, especially when compared to our ingoing position, but this appears to be the best we can get. We will, of course, have a good notification regime for relocations, transits and dispersals. We will also continue to push vigorously for tagging of mobile ICBM launchers. Phasing of Reductions 7. This problem appears to be finally resolved and I still do not understand why the detailed shape of the reduction curves was allowed to become such a hot issue. In any case, the winning numbers are as follows for the ends of the 3 phases: Delivery vehicles — 2100, 1900, 1600 Warheads — 9150, 7950, 6000 Warheads on ballistic missiles — 8050, 6750, 4900. These are close to straight-­line reductions and should please everyone. For heavy ICBMs, we can get a binding declaration (probably a joint statement) which certifies that the Soviets will reduce no fewer than 22 per year. This is an excellent outcome, with 7 straight-­line points rather than 3. This is all essentially what I recommended from the outset—­just put a ruler on the beginning and end points, draw a line and call out 2 or 3
