926
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
367.
Information Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
CS–40139
Washington, June 14, 1954.
SUBJECT
Corruption in the Zahedi Government
SOURCE
Paragraphs 1–3: [2 lines not declassified]
Paragraph 4: [1 line not declassified]
Appraisal of Content: [less than 1 line not declassified]
1. The Shah believes that the popularity and power of the Zahedi
Government is at a low ebb as the result of widespread corruption. This
situation is further aggravated by activities of the Tudeh Party, which
has exaggerated the extent of the corruption, thus contributing greatly
to the growing storm of popular dissatisfaction with the present Gov-
ernment. The Shah stated that this situation must be stopped and ex-
pressed the opinion that the Government can be held in office only so
long as he lends it his strongest support.2
2. Despite the conviction that the swelling flood of rumors con-
cerning corruption in the Zahedi Government is strengthening the
communist hand in Iran and weakening the Shah’s own position, the
Shah decided to continue giving “strong” support to the present Gov-
ernment. His decision was based on the fear that any show of friction
between the Shah and the Government might have an adverse effect on
the oil negotiations.3
3. After reaching this decision, the Shah called in the entire Cabinet
on 2 June and administered a firm rebuke, calling for immediate re-
forms and stern action to control corruption at all levels.
4. The Shah received Ardeshir Zahedi in audience on 3 June, fol-
lowing the latter’s return from Europe on 2 June. When Ardeshir
emerged from the audience, he was in tears and remarked bitterly,
1 Source Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 80–00810A, Box 43, Folder 53,
CS Information Reports 40130–40139. Secret
2 Field Comment: It is likely that, unless Zahedi launches his own effective anti-
corruption campaign, the chances of survival of his Government following conclusion of
the oil negotiations are practically nil. [Footnote is in the original.]
3 Field Comment: The Shah’s decision to continue to support the Zahedi Government
was confirmed by an Iranian source in close personal contact with the Royal Court for the
past 21 years. However, unconfirmed reports indicate that the Shah is intriguing within
and actively penetrating the civil bureaucracy which traditionally has been the Prime
Minister’s province. [Footnote is in the original.]
