980 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI In more than twenty hours of meetings3 so far this week, we have entertained ourselves with replowing lots of old ground, concentrating on those issues that were “settled” as part of the Houston package and were declared by Shevardnadze to have been “definitively agreed.” — B–2: The Soviets (led by their bomber general) want to ensure that after a B–2 is flight-­tested with a non-­nuclear ALCM, it could not be covertly deployed with nuclear ALCMs. They have all kinds of bad ideas about how to do this. We have offered them a couple of statements of fact: (a) we would not deploy nuclear ALCMs on a B–2 until such nuclear ALCMs have been flight-­tested on a B–2; and (b) once a B–2 has been flight-­tested with nuclear ALCMs, it counts as an ALCM-­carrier under START. They haven’t said yes yet to the proffered face-­savers. — B–1: The Soviets (again led by their bomber general) argue that despite all of the measures we have offered to take, the B–1 could quickly and easily be converted to carry nuclear ALCMs. They want a commitment (or treaty obligation) that the B–1 would instead be modified in ways that would require it to take a trip back to the factory before it could carry ALCMs. As above, we have offered them some statements of fact related to how long it would take to convert B–1s into ALCM carriers. As above, they have not seized the opportunity. — PPCM: The Soviets want to be able to PPCM Midgetman from the outset, despite the fact that it will not qualify as a mobile ICBM under START for several years, if ever. We have told them that we will PPCM Midgetman if and when it is declared to be a “mobile missile” and that meanwhile, we will agree to have two PPCM sites in the US in the interests of numerical reciprocity. The Soviets are thinking this one over. — new types: The Soviets (led by the military-­industrial complex guy) want to make it easy for variants of existing missiles to be treated as “new types” by making changes in throw-­weight a criterion. Since we want to make it hard for a missile to be treated as a new type (so that this doesn’t become an easy circumvention route around a restrictive approach to downloading), we have flatly rejected adding throw-­weight to the list of criteria. We are simply at an impasse on this issue. — downloading: With grudging acquiescence from the Navy, we gave the Soviets our relatively tough line on downloading (i.e., ban downloading except for MM III and SS–N–18). Their military-­ industrial complex guys literally came out of their chairs. Obukov 3 No memoranda of conversation for these meetings were found.
