XLIV  Summary of Print Volume
In January and February 1960, the administration moved to reeval-
uate its Latin American policy in the wake of the Cuban Revolution 
and the intensification of Soviet and communist propaganda and polit-
ical activities in the region. Accordingly, the National Security Council 
discussed the need to discourage Latin American governments from 
pursuing relations with the Soviet bloc (13) and to provide them with 
increased economic support (14).
The nature of U.S. military policy toward Latin America was 
actively discussed during the period 1958–1960. In July 1958, officials 
within the Department of State’s Bureau of Inter-American Affairs rec-
ognized the need to reevaluate and rationalize this relationship (17).
On July 18, 1958, the Congress passed Public Law 85–532 provid-
ing for the lease of U.S. naval vessels to certain Latin American nations 
on the basis of a series of 5-­year renewable loans. The receiving nations 
were to pay the cost of modernizing and activating the ships. The mea-
sure, policymakers believed, would promote Latin American participa-
tion in hemispheric defense and in training exercises with U.S. naval 
forces (20). By April 1959, it had become apparent that the financially 
troubled Latin American nations could not afford the cost of operating 
the vessels. On April 19, Acting Secretary of State for Inter-American 
Affairs William P. Snow wrote to Senate Armed Services Committee 
chairman Richard B. Russell requesting that the loan of the ships be 
continued on a “non-­reimburseable” basis (23). Russell reproached 
the Department for not having foreseen the inability of the receiving 
nations to maintain the vessels but agreed to the request (24).
In January 1960, the Department of State turned its attention to the 
formulation of a “new concept” of U.S.-Latin American military rela-
tions according to which the United States was to assume the primary 
burden for hemispheric and continental defense. The armed forces of 
the Latin American nations were to be used almost exclusively to main-
tain their own internal security and intra-­hemispheric peace (30).
The Department of Defense rejected the “new concept” stating 
bluntly that “at this time there is no justification from a military point 
of view for a major reorientation of U.S. military policy toward Latin 
America or for a change in the U.S. strategic concept of the Western 
Hemisphere” (31). Ultimately, the two departments agreed to explore 
the matter further together (32).
The volume turns next to the trip of Vice President Richard Nixon 
to South America in April and May 1958. Secretary of State John Foster 
Dulles raised the possibility of such a trip with the Vice President in a 
letter dated March 6 of that year (42) suggesting an itinerary which was 
later expanded considerably.
The trip itself was marked by violent demonstrations in Lima, Peru 
and Caracas, Venezuela against Nixon’s presence and U.S. policies in
