174 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX E. Q: Would a move make it difficult to maintain the necessary RFE/RL skeleton equipment and personnel, including transmitters, in the FRG? A: Yes (with emphasis). The FRG receives some benefits (payroll, etc.) from the employment of Radio personnel in the FRG, principally Munich. The transfer of these employees to the U.S. removes some of the immediate benefits that the presence of the Radios in the FRG brings to the FRG. At the same time, if we leave transmitters and a skeleton staff in the FRG, the Germans remain politically liable for the Radios. We have recently upgraded the transmitting we do from the FRG through the importation of ten new 100 KW transmitters for Biblis and Lambertheim. We may further upgrade our transmitting facilities at Holzkirchen. We have received full cooperation and support from the FRG, including customs exemptions for the transmitters in this endeavor. If we wish to continue these operations from German territory, we must recognize that we will have more than a skeleton operation in the FRG, even with the transfer of the bulk of Radio personnel from Munich. 3. Comment: There are people in the FRG who support the Radios and there are people who do not. Generally speaking, the spectrum of opinion is about the same as in the U.S., with the important exception that a much larger percentage of the German population is aware of and has strong opinions about the operation of the Radios. There are undoubtedly pressures on the German Government to reduce its support for the Radios. Some of these pressures are from the Communist nations. Others are from factions within the FRG, most notably the left wing of the SPD. There are high ranking officials in the FRG Government who would be much more comfortable if the Radios were located somewhere else. However, it is noteworthy that, during the past few years when the FRG has dramatically improved its relations with the USSR and Eastern Europe, official German support for the Radios has never slackened. Since we should expect the Communist nations to continue to attack the radios and their presence in the FRG, no matter how small that presence is, we should resign ourselves to the expectation that Eastern European attacks on the Radios in the FRG will not lessen if major portions of their activities are moved to the U.S. German resolution to defend the Radios may. 4. Quite aside from questions deriving from their presence in the FRG, the Embassy would like to express its agreement with observa-
