676  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
DISCUSSION OF RENUNCIATION OF FORCE
After this Agreed Announcement was made, the two sides pro­
ceeded to discuss “other practical matters at issue between them”.
The Communists suggested the topics of the termination of the 
trade embargo against Communist China and the holding of a meeting 
by the Foreign Ministers of both sides.
Ambassador Johnson at the October 8, 1955 meeting, pointed out 
that progress in further discussions could not be expected in the face 
of continuing Communist threats to take Taiwan by military force, and 
suggested that both sides agree to announce that they renounced the 
use of force generally and particularly in the Taiwan Area and agree 
to settle their differences by peaceful means. The United States repre­
sentative made clear that this renunciation of the use of force was not 
designed to commit the Communists to renounce pursuit of their poli­
cies by peaceful means with respect to Taiwan. These proposals were in 
the terms shown as Annex B.
Three weeks after the United States proposal to renounce the use 
of force, the Communists on October 27 proposed a draft, a copy of 
which is shown on Annex C. In this proposal, the Communists point­
edly omitted any reference to the Taiwan Area, or to the recognition 
of the right of self-­defense, and inserted a provision for an immediate 
meeting of Foreign Ministers.
This proposal was unacceptable because it would have made it pos­
sible for the Communists to claim that the proposal did not apply to the 
­Taiwan Area, which is the very place against which the Communist threats 
are directed, and to claim further that the United States had renounced the 
right to use force in self-­defense. Ambassador Johnson further pointed 
out that consideration of higher level meetings was neither appropriate 
nor acceptable under existing circumstances.
On November 10, 1955, Ambassador Johnson, in an attempt to 
reach an acceptable form of declaration, submitted a new draft decla­
ration (Annex D). This made clear that the renunciation of the use of 
force was without prejudice to the peaceful pursuit of its policies by 
either side; that it had general application, but applied particularly to 
the Taiwan Area; and that it did not deprive either side of the right of 
self-­defense.
The United States proposal was rejected by the Communists, 
who, on December 1, 1955, made a counter-­proposal (Annex E). 
This represented an advance over their previous proposal in that it 
dropped the provision for talks on the Foreign Minister level in favor 
of the continuance of Ambassadorial talks, but still pointedly omitted 
any reference to the Taiwan area and to recognition of the right of 
self-­defense.
